Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code by Mayor and Council
[Adopted 4-25-2005 by Ord. No. 05-09]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Borough of Chatham of
a general and permanent nature adopted by the Borough Council of the
Borough of Chatham, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters
and sections by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters
1 through 267, together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted,
ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Borough of Chatham," hereinafter
known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede the 1975 Code and all general
and permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code,
except such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1-3. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Borough Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the public
until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance shall
be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the Borough of
Chatham by impressing thereon the Seal of the Borough, as provided by
law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk of
the Borough, to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Borough of Chatham" shall
be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code, as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:3
§ 1-6. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Borough of Chatham, pursuant to law, shall this Adopting
Ordinance to be published, in the manner required, in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Borough. Sufficient copies of the Code shall be
maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection by the public at all times
during regular office hours. The enactment and publication of this Adopting
Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of the Code for inspection
by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal
publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk or someone authorized and directed by
the Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the
Code required to be filed in his or her office for the use of the public. All
changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-8. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of a fee to
be set by the Borough Council. The Clerk may also arrange for procedures
for the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-9. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Borough of
Chatham to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or any
part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to one or more of
the following: a fine of not more than $1,250 or imprisonment for not more
than 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, in the
discretion of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-10. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-6 CHATHAM CODE § 1-11
1:4
§ 1-11. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-12. Repeal of ordinances.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance which
are inconsistent with the any provision in the Code are hereby repealed to
the extent of such inconsistency as of the effective date of this Adopting
Ordinance.
§ 1-13. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-12 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 8-9-2004.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of the Borough's
indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:5
§ 1-14. General penalty. [Amended 3-27-2006 by Ord. No. 06-04;
2-23-2015 by Ord. No. 15-02]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute or
otherwise provided for in the Borough Code or unless the penalty is
expressly set forth in the Local Supplemental Violations Bureau Schedule of
the Borough of Chatham, the violator shall, upon conviction, be punishable
by one or more of the following: a fine of not more than $2,000, a term
of imprisonment of not more than 90 days and/or a period of community
service of not more than 90 days.
§ 1-15. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges or the approval
of the municipal budget.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
L. Any ordinance adopting or amending the Zoning Map.
M. Any legislation relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension
fund for municipal employees.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the Borough Council that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed
had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. Nomenclature changes: Throughout the Code the following
nomenclature changes have been made:
(1) Finance Officer to Chief Financial Officer.
(2) Treasurer to Chief Financial Officer.
(3) Building Inspector to Construction Official.
C. Throughout the Code, statutory references have been updated or
revised to the current citation. Consolidated (N.J.S.A.) references have
been added to unconsolidated (P.L.) where appropriate.
D. In the following sections, the specific penalty has been amended to
delete the penalty and make reference instead to the general penalty in
Chapter 1, § 1-14 or a penalty section has been added referring to the
General Penalty in Chapter 1: §§ 15-13; 99-2; 71-11; 75-11; 83-8; 90-5;
133-5; 144-3; 148-6; 154-11; 165-173A(1); 169-7; 180-13; 188-7;
195-22; 204-6; 221-10; 228-6A; 233-10; 240-4; 250-6; 267-19.
§ 1-13 CHATHAM CODE § 1-15
1:6
E. In addition, the changes, amendments or revisions as set forth in
Schedule A1 attached hereto and made a part hereof are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance.
(Chapter and section number references are to the ordinances as they
have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-15E, the chapters, articles and sections which were
amended, added or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code by
footnotes or chapter histories referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During
routine supplementation, footnotes and histories indicating amendments, additions,
deletions or adoptions will be replaced with the following history: "Amended (added,
deleted) 4-25-2005 by Ord. No. 05-09." Schedule A, which contains a complete description
of all changes, is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:7

ARTICLE II
Ordinances Adopted During Codification
[During the process of codification, certain complete new
ordinances were approved by the Mayor and Council for inclusion
in the Code of the Borough of Chatham. Such new ordinances are
noted in the histories of individual chapters as "Adopted ... during
codification (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)" In accordance
with recognized codification procedures, these new ordinances will
be adopted separately and are presently proposed before the Mayor
and Council of the Borough of Chatham for that purpose. Upon
final adoption of such ordinances, a complete enumeration of all
chapters and articles in the Code included in such ordinances will
be printed in this article along with specific dates of adoption.]
Chapter and Article Ord. No. Adoption Date
Ch. 19, Art. I: Sidewalk Trust Fund 05-13 4-25-2005
Ch. 39, Art. VI: Municipal Attorney 05-17 4-25-2005
Ch. 39, Art. VII: Municipal Engineer 05-16 4-25-2005
Ch. 129, Art. III: Public Records
and Documents
05-12 4-25-2005
Ch. 208, Public Health Nuisances 05-14 4-25-2005
Ch. 263, Vehicles, Motorized 05-15 4-25-2005
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:9
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Appointed persons registry — See Ch. 3.
§ 1-15 CHATHAM CODE § 1-15
1:10
ARTICLE I
General
§ 2-1. Form of government.
The Borough of Chatham operates under the Borough form of government
as provided in N.J.S.A. 40A:60-1 et seq.
§ 2-2. Governing body.
The Mayor and six Council members elected at large in the Borough in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:60-2b(1) (the "Council") shall constitute the
governing body of the Borough of Chatham, which governing body shall be
known as the "governing body" or "Mayor and Council."
§ 2-3. Borough offices.
Borough offices are located at Borough Hall, 54 Fairmount Avenue,
Chatham, New Jersey 07928.
§ 2-4. Seal.
The seal of the Borough shall be circular in form and shall contain the
following: "The Borough of Chatham, Incorporated 1897." The seal shall
be in the custody of the Clerk and shall be impressed on all appropriate
documents or papers.
§ 2-5. Organizational chart.
The Council may adopt an organizational chart representing the
organizational structure of Borough government by resolution.
§ 2-6. Mission statement.
The Council may adopt, modify or reaffirm a mission statement by
resolution.
§ 2-7. Personnel Manual.
The Council shall, by resolution, adopt and amend from time to time a
Personnel Policies and Practices Handbook.
§ 2-8. Form agendas and resolutions.
The Borough Administrator, in consultation with the Borough Clerk, shall
establish policies and procedures to govern the format, preparation and
publication of meeting agendas and resolutions. All such documents shall
be kept on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 2-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-8
1:11

ARTICLE II
Meetings
§ 2-9. Annual reorganization meeting.
The Mayor and Council shall meet and organize annually at a meeting held
within the first seven days of the year in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:60-3.
§ 2-10. Regular meetings.
§ 2-11. Special meetings.
The Mayor shall, when necessary, call special meetings of the Council, and
in case of his/her neglect or refusal, any four Council members may call a
special meeting. In all cases of special meetings, the Borough Clerk shall
provide reasonable advance notice, considered to be 48 hours except in
case of emergency, and shall be given in writing to all Council members or
left at their main place of residence. Notice of any special meeting shall
state the time and place of such meeting and the purpose thereof. The
request for a special meeting shall specify the purpose of the meeting and
no business shall be transacted at any special meeting other than that
specified in accordance with the New Jersey Open Public Meetings Act, P.L.
1975, Chapter 231 (N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.), and any amendments thereto
(the Open Public Meetings Act).
§ 2-12. Emergency meetings.
The Mayor may call an emergency meeting by use of any available means of
communication, in accordance with the Open Public Meetings Act.
§ 2-13. Place of meeting.
Meetings shall be held at the Council Chambers at Borough Hall, 54
Fairmount Avenue, Chatham, New Jersey, except that the Mayor or Council
President may, in writing, call a meeting to be held in any other suitable
public place.
A. The Council shall fix the time and place for regular meetings of the
Council during the ensuing year by resolution at the annual
reorganization meeting. Regular meetings shall be the second and
fourth Monday of each month at 7:30 p.m., unless otherwise specified.
Whenever the day fixed for any regular meeting falls upon a legal or
national holiday, the meeting shall be held at the same hour on the next
succeeding day which is not a legal or national holiday, unless
otherwise specified.
B. All meetings shall conclude no later than 11:00 p.m. except that the
Mayor may extend the meeting for the purpose of conducting official
business. No new business shall be started after 10:30 p.m.
§ 2-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-14
1:13
§ 2-14. Notice.
Adequate notice of all meetings shall be given in accordance with the Open
Public Meetings Act.
§ 2-15. Quorum.
At the opening of each meeting, the Borough Clerk shall call the roll and
the names of those present shall be recorded in the minutes. Three Council
members and the Mayor, and in the absence of the Mayor, four Council
members shall constitute a quorum for transacting business.
§ 2-16. Rules of order.
Except as otherwise provided herein or otherwise required by law, the
Council, as well as all Borough boards, committees, and commissions, may
be guided by the most current edition of Robert's Rules of Order in
questions of order, organization and conduct of business.
§ 2-17. Agendas.
§ 2-18. Conduct of meetings.
A. The Borough Clerk shall prepare an agenda for all meetings under the
supervision of the Mayor and the Borough Administrator.
B. All reports, communications, resolutions, contract documents, or other
matters to be submitted to the Mayor and Council shall, to the extent
possible, be delivered to the Borough Clerk by 12:00 noon on the Friday
preceding each meeting. The Borough Clerk shall furnish each member
of the Council with a copy of the agenda prior to the meeting as far in
advance of the meeting as time for preparation will permit.
A. All public meetings shall be conducted in accordance with the
provisions of the Open Public Meetings Act.2
B. In order to provide the public with an opportunity to address the
Council, and in compliance with state law, a public comment period will
be included during all meetings. Unless the Mayor directs otherwise,
the public comment period shall be held near the beginning of the
meeting, and shall not exceed 30 minutes in duration. Individuals must
give their name, address, and the subject on which they intend to
speak. Individuals representing an organization must identify that
organization. Speakers during public comment period shall be subject
to reasonable time limits.
C. Any person may address the Mayor and Council on ordinances at the
public hearing on the ordinance.
2. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 2-14 CHATHAM CODE § 2-18
1:14
§ 2-19. Participation by telephone or other communication
equipment permitted; requirements.
Except as otherwise prohibited by law, members of the Mayor and Council
who are unavailable to be physically present at any meeting may attend and
participate in such meeting by means of telephone or other communication
equipment, to the same extent as if said member were physically present at
such meeting, provided the member who is not physically present is on a
speakerphone or similar device so that the absent member may participate
fully and can hear everything said in the meeting room and everyone in
the room, including the public, can hear everything the absent member
says. Provided this criteria is satisfied, the absent member shall be deemed
present at the meeting, such presence counting for purposes of establishing
quorum.
§ 2-20. Roll call vote.
Upon the demand of one member of Council, or when ordered by the Mayor,
or when required by law, a vote on any item pending before the Council
shall be taken by roll call and the yays and nays shall be entered upon the
meeting minutes which shall be signed by the Mayor at such meeting and
by the Borough Clerk. The roll call shall be taken in order of seniority of the
Council members with the Mayor voting last and only in case of a tie.
§ 2-21. Action by majority vote.
Except as otherwise required by law or Borough ordinance, all actions of
the Council shall be by a majority vote of those present and eligible to vote,
provided that a quorum of the Mayor and Council has been established.
D. Individuals will be ruled out of order if they attempt to make any
remarks of a personal nature regarding any other individual, whether
or not that person is present. Individuals will also be ruled out of order
and asked to leave the meeting if they use any vulgar or profane
language, shout or become intimidating or physically disruptive. No
remarks may be addressed directly to any Council member or the
Mayor.
E. Closed session shall be held only under circumstances and conditions
specified in the Open Public Meetings Act.3 Prior to going into executive
session, the Council shall adopt a resolution stating the general nature
of the subject(s) to be discussed and, if executive session occurs at the
end of the meeting, whether or not the Council will reconvene in public
session following executive session. The public will be informed that
any action taken will be done in public session immediately following
the executive session.
3. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 2-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-22
1:15
§ 2-22. Order of business.
The Council may, by resolution, adopt and amend from time to time a
standard order of business for all public meetings.
§ 2-23. Consent agenda.
To improve meeting efficiency, those items listed on the agenda which are
considered routine shall be listed under the consent agenda. There may
be more than one consent agenda per meeting. Prior to voting upon the
consent agenda, the Mayor shall entertain requests from the Council for
removal of an item from the consent agenda. All resolutions listed on the
consent agenda shall be adopted by a single vote. There shall be no separate
discussion of items on the consent agenda unless a Council member so
requests, in which event the item shall be removed from the consent agenda
and considered in its normal sequence on the agenda. Any Council member,
for any reason whatsoever, may remove any items listed for consent at any
time prior to the adoption of the consent agenda.
§ 2-22 CHATHAM CODE § 2-23
1:16
ARTICLE III
Mayor
§ 2-24. Presiding officer.
The Mayor shall serve as the presiding officer and preside over the
deliberations of Council and shall conduct the meetings thereof. He or she
shall participate in the discussion of Borough affairs to the extent permitted
by law and may vote only in the case of a tie.
§ 2-25. Powers and duties.
The Mayor shall have all those powers designated by general law. In
addition:
A. The Mayor shall on all occasions preserve the strictest order and
decorum, and he or she shall cause the removal of all persons who
interrupt the orderly proceedings of the Council.
B. When two or more Council members arise or attempt to speak at the
same time, the Mayor shall name the one entitled to the floor and
recognition.
C. The Mayor shall decide all questions of order without debate, and he or
she may call upon the Borough Clerk or the Borough Attorney for an
opinion on any question of order.
D. The Mayor shall see to it that the laws of the state and the ordinances of
the Borough are faithfully executed. The Mayor shall recommend to the
Council such measures as he or she may deem necessary or expedient
for the welfare of the Borough.
E. The Mayor shall maintain peace and good order and have the power to
suppress all riots and tumultuous assemblies in the Borough.
F. The Mayor shall have the authority to execute contracts on behalf of the
Borough, approved by the Council, and to sign checks and warrants or
payments approved by the Council.
G. The Mayor may issue proclamations for a variety of purposes.
H. The Mayor shall be an ex-officio member of all committees and shall be
informed in advance of all meetings of such committees.
§ 2-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-25
1:17

ARTICLE IV
Council
§ 2-26. Powers and duties.
The Council shall be the legislative body of the Borough. The Council may,
subject to general law:
§ 2-27. Council President.
A. Pass, adopt, amend and repeal any ordinance or, where permitted, any
resolution for any purposes required for the governance of the Borough
or for the accomplishment of any public purpose for which the
municipality is authorized to act under general law.
B. Control and regulate the finances of the Borough and raise money for
taxation.
C. Create such offices and positions as it may deem necessary, subject to
N.J.S.A. 40A:60-6b(3).
D. Investigate any activity of the Borough.
E. Remove any officer of the municipality, other than those officers
excepted by law, for cause.
F. Override a veto of the Mayor by a two-thirds majority of all Council
members.
G. Exercise all executive responsibilities of the Borough not placed with
the Mayor.
A. At the annual reorganization meeting, the Council by majority vote shall
elect one of its members as Council President to serve for the calendar
year. If the Council fails to elect a president, the Mayor shall appoint the
president from the Council, and in that case, no confirmation by the
Council shall be required.
B. The Council President shall preside at all Council meetings in the
absence of the Mayor. He or she shall have the right to debate and vote
on all questions before the Council.
C. The Council President shall perform the duties of the Mayor during any
period in which the Mayor is absent from the Borough for three or more
days or is unable to perform the duties of his/her office. Where such
absence is intended, the Mayor shall notify the Council President in
writing, with a copy to the Borough Clerk, of the intended absence,
whereupon the Council President shall become the acting Mayor from
receipt of the notice until the Mayor's return.
D. In the case of the temporary inability of the Council President to so act,
the Council member with the longest term of service may act
temporarily for the Council President.
§ 2-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-27
1:19

ARTICLE V
Appointments
§ 2-28. Mayoral appointments.
Unless the specific terms of general law require a different procedure, the
Mayor shall nominate and, with the advice and consent of the Council,
appoint all subordinate officers of the Borough. The Mayor shall make his/
her nomination to any such office within 30 days of that office becoming
vacant. Whenever the Council fails to confirm the nomination of the Mayor
within 30 days of being presented such nomination, the Council may make
the appointment to that office, provided that at least three affirmative votes
shall be required for such purpose, the Mayor to have no vote thereon
except in the case of a tie.
§ 2-29. Council appointments.
With respect to appointments to be made by the Council, any member
of the Council may nominate as many candidates as there are offices to
be filled. Where there is a single office to be filled, the first nominee to
receive a majority vote shall be deemed appointed. Where there is more
than one office to be filled, such as on a board or commission, the same
procedure shall be followed with respect to each office separately until
the total number of appointments to be made has been completed. In the
discretion of the Mayor, multiple appointments may be considered as a
single motion where there is no apparent division among Council members
as to the action to be taken with respect to the nominees in question.
§ 2-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-29
1:21

ARTICLE VI
Council Committees; Advisory Committees; Liaisons
§ 2-30. Council committees.
§ 2-31. Special committees.
The Mayor shall have the discretion to establish such special committees for
purposes other than those included in the duties of the Council committees
as he or she deems necessary and advisable. The membership, purpose and
responsibilities of any such committee shall be set forth by resolution.
§ 2-32. Advisory committees.
The Council shall have the discretion to establish by resolution such
advisory committees as it deems necessary and advisable to assist in those
aspects of government that require community involvement. The Council
shall appoint at least one Council member to serve as a liaison to each
advisory committee. The membership, purpose and responsibilities of any
such committee shall be set forth by resolution.
§ 2-33. Liaisons.
The Council shall appoint by resolution Council representatives to serve
as liaisons to such commissions, agencies, authorities and/or organizations
as it deems necessary and advisable. The liaison shall attend and observe
the meetings of such boards, commissions, agencies, authorities or
organizations to which the liaison has been assigned and report back to the
Council with regular updates on the principal activities and achievements
of same.
A. At the annual reorganization meeting, the Mayor and Council shall, by
resolution, establish such Council committees as it deems necessary
and advisable. The membership, purpose and responsibilities of each
Council committee shall be set forth in the resolution. Each Council
committee shall consist of at least two Council members, but in no
event sufficient number to constitute a quorum. The Mayor and Council
may, by resolution, modify and/or abolish any Council committee.
B. The Council committees are appointed to expedite and facilitate the
work of the Council, within the limits prescribed by law. To that end, a
Council committee shall review any matter or question referred to it by
the Council and report to the Council for its consideration on any such
matter or questions with or without recommendations. Council
committees shall perform such other duties as may be necessary in the
exercise of their responsibilities as the Council may direct. Council
committees should hold regular meetings to ensure effective Council
communication.
§ 2-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-33
1:23

ARTICLE VII
Borough Departments, Boards, Commissions and Offices
§ 2-34. Organization.
In addition to the department, divisions, bureaus, boards, commissions and
offices established pursuant to this Code, the administration of Borough
government shall, by resolution, be organized into such other departments,
divisions, bureaus, boards, commissions and offices as the Mayor and
Council deem necessary and proper consistent with the general law.
§ 2-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-34
1:25

ARTICLE VIII
Borough Officers
§ 2-35. Generally.
There shall be appointed the following Borough officers. They shall perform
the duties required by law and Borough ordinance. Residency in the
Borough shall not be required for any officer unless otherwise provided.
Unless sooner removed, they shall hold office for the time period provided
herein. Where no time period is provided, they shall hold office for one year
and until their successor shall have been qualified.
§ 2-36. Borough Administrator.
A. Establishment. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-136 et seq., there shall be in
the Borough the position of Municipal Administrator, referred to as the
Borough Administrator.
B. Appointment. The Borough Administrator shall be appointed by the
Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council, and shall serve at
the pleasure of the Mayor and Council.
C. Residency requirement. The Borough Administrator shall be a resident
of the Borough. In the event that on the date of the initial appointment
the Borough Administrator is not a resident of the Borough, he or she
shall become one within one year of such appointment and shall
continue his or her residency throughout his or her term of office. If
circumstances so warrant, this residency requirement may be waived
by a majority vote of the Council.
D. Removal. The Borough Administrator may be removed from office in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:9-138.
E. Qualifications for appointment. The Borough Administrator shall be
appointed on the basis of executive and administrative abilities and
qualifications with special regard to education, training and experience
in government affairs.
F. General duties and responsibilities. The Borough Administrator shall be
the chief administrative officer of the Borough and shall be responsible
to the Mayor and Council for the proper and efficient administration of
Borough affairs.
G. Powers and duties. The Borough Administrator shall have the following
duties and responsibilities to the extent not prohibited by law:
(1) The Borough Administrator shall be responsible for the operation
of all departments and offices within the Borough, and all
department heads and officers of the Borough shall report to him or
her.
§ 2-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-36
1:27
(2) The Borough Administrator shall be responsible for the preparation
of the annual Borough capital and operating budgets and shall
submit the same to the Mayor and Council for approval. He or she
shall be responsible to see that each department, office, board or
other agency adheres to the budget approved by the Mayor and
Council.
(3) The Borough Administrator shall be responsible for Borough
purchasing procedures, administrative procedures and
organizational structure, and shall make recommendations for
change to the Mayor and Council relating thereto as he or she shall
deem necessary from time to time.
(4) The Borough Administrator shall maintain sound personnel
practices and shall maintain appropriate records of all employees.
He or she shall have the authority to recommend to the Mayor and
Council the hiring of all Borough employees.
(5) The Borough Administrator shall delegate to any department head
or other Borough employee such of his or her powers as he or she
may deem necessary for efficient administration.
(6) The Borough Administrator shall make studies and surveys of such
municipal problems of the Borough as shall be assigned to him or
her, from time to time, by the Mayor and Council and shall prepare
and submit written reports of his or her findings and
determinations to the Mayor and Council for their consideration
and action.
(7) The Borough Administrator shall attend all meetings with the right
to participate in discussions but without the right to vote.
(8) The Borough Administrator shall implement and enforce the policy
of the Council with respect to the compiling and release of public
information.
(9) The Borough Administrator shall investigate complaints
concerning municipal operations, cause corrective action to be
taken when indicated and keep records of complaints received and
actions taken.
(10) The Borough Administrator shall have the authority to refer
charges and recommend employee disciplinary action to a
designated hearing officer.
(11) The Borough Administrator shall be responsible for the day-to-day
operations and efficiency of the Police Department.
(12) The Borough Administrator shall perform such additional duties as
may be assigned to him or her from time to time by the Mayor and
Council.
§ 2-36 CHATHAM CODE § 2-36
1:28
§ 2-37. Municipal Clerk.
§ 2-38. Deputy Municipal Clerk.
H. Compensation. The Borough Administrator shall receive such
compensation as may from time to time be provided by resolution.
A. Establishment. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133, there is hereby
established the position of Municipal Clerk, referred to as the Borough
Clerk.
B. Appointment; term. The Borough Clerk shall be appointed by the
Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council, and shall serve a
three-year term from the date of appointment.
C. Duties. The Borough Clerk shall:
(1) Act as secretary of the municipal corporation and custodian of the
municipal seal and of all minutes, books, deeds, bonds, contracts,
and archival records of the municipal corporation;
(2) Act as secretary to the Mayor and Council, prepare meeting
agendas at the discretion of the Mayor and Borough Administrator,
be present at all meetings of the Mayor and Council, keep minutes
of the proceedings of every meeting, retain the original copies of all
ordinances and resolutions;
(3) Serve as the chief administrative officer of all elections held in the
Borough, subject to the requirements of Title 19 of the Revised
Statutes;
(4) Serve as the chief registrar of voters in the Borough, subject to the
requirements of Title 19 of the Revised Statutes;
(5) Serve as the administrative officer responsible for the acceptance
of applications for licenses and permits, and the issuance of
licenses and permits;
(6) Serve as coordinator and records manager responsible for
implementing local archives and records retention programs as
mandated pursuant to Title 47 of the Revised Statutes; and
(7) Perform such other duties as are now or hereafter imposed by
statute of regulation or Borough ordinance or regulation; and
(8) Perform such other duties as the Mayor or Council may direct.
D. Compensation. The Borough Clerk shall receive such compensation as
may from time to time be provided by resolution.
A. Establishment. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-135, the position of Deputy
Borough Clerk is hereby created.
§ 2-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-38
1:29
§ 2-39. Chief Financial Officer.
§ 2-40. Municipal Attorney.
B. Appointment; term. The Deputy Borough Clerk shall be appointed by
the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council, and shall serve a
one-year term from January 1 to December 31 or until his or her
successor has been appointed and qualified.
C. Duties. The duties of the Deputy Borough Clerk shall be to assist the
Borough Clerk in all the duties of his or her office, and the Deputy
Borough Clerk shall have all the powers and perform all the duties of
the Borough Clerk during such times and for such specific periods as
the Borough Clerk shall be absent.
D. Compensation. The Deputy Borough Clerk shall receive such
compensation as may from time to time be provided by resolution.
A. Establishment. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.10, there is hereby
created the position of Chief Financial Officer for the Borough of
Chatham.
B. Appointment; term. The Chief Financial Officer shall be appointed by
the Mayor, with the advice and consent of Council, and shall serve a
four-year term from January 1 in the year in which the Chief Financial
Officer is appointed.
C. Powers and duties. The Chief Financial Officer shall be responsible for
the supervision, administration and operation of the Finance Office,
which shall include budget preparation and audit functions, financial
electronic data processing, maintenance of investments, bank
statement reconciliation, encumbrance system, fixed assets, general
ledger, payroll and other duties which may be assigned by the Mayor
and Council from time to time.
D. Compensation. The Chief Financial Officer shall receive such
compensation as may from time to time be provided by resolution.
A. Establishment. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-139, there is hereby created
the position of Municipal Attorney, referred to as the Borough Attorney.
B. Appointment; term. The Borough Attorney shall be appointed by the
Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council, and shall serve a
term of one year commencing January 1 and terminating December 31
in each year. The Borough Attorney shall be licensed to practice law in
the State of New Jersey.
C. Powers and duties. The Borough Attorney shall serve as legal advisor to
the Mayor and Council; represent the Borough in all legal matters;
advise and assist the Mayor, Council, Borough Administrator and
department heads as required in the administration of the Borough
government; represent the Borough in all litigation, arbitration,
§ 2-38 CHATHAM CODE § 2-40
1:30
§ 2-41. Tax Collector.
administrative hearings and appeals and other such proceedings;
attend Council meetings; draft ordinances and resolutions and such
other legal instruments as relate to the business of the Borough; give
opinions and rulings on questions of law and render such other
professional legal services as may be required by statute or as
requested by the Mayor and Council from time to time, whether by
ordinance, resolution or otherwise.
D. Compensation. The compensation to be paid the Borough Attorney shall
be by contract on an hourly basis. In addition, the Borough Attorney
shall be paid such reasonable fees and costs for litigation,
administrative proceedings, legal services related to labor matters,
extraordinary proceedings and/or unforeseeable matters or services as
may be necessary and required in accordance with his or her
professional services contract.
A. Establishment. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-141, there is hereby
established the position of Tax Collector.
B. Appointment; term. The Tax Collector shall be appointed by the Mayor,
with the advice and consent of the Council, and shall serve a four-year
term from January 1 next following the appointment.
C. Powers and duties. The Tax Collector shall:
(1) Receive and collect all current and delinquent real and personal
property taxes, and charge and receive penalties and interest as
provided by general law.
(2) Maintain an up-to-date record of municipal taxes, charges, liens
and payments with reference to the tax map and lot and block
numbers, recording thereon all changes in ownership, address or
character of property.
(3) Prepare and mail tax bills.
(4) Keep accounts of all tax collections in such form and manner as
may be prescribed or approved by the Chief Financial Officer and
the Borough Auditor.
(5) Transfer daily to the Chief Financial Officer, for deposit, all funds
received in payment of Borough taxes, interest, penalties or fees.
(6) Make and certify searches for tax and other liens on real property
in the Borough, and charge and collect fees therefor.
(7) Make such periodic reports and accounts of revenues and
delinquent taxes as the Chief Financial Officer may require. Such
reports and accountings shall be filed as a public record with the
Borough Clerk.
§ 2-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-41
1:31
§ 2-42. Tax Assessor.
§ 2-43. Municipal Engineer.
(8) Enforce collection of delinquent taxes by conducting timely sale of
properties in accordance with statutes governing foreclosure of
municipal tax liens and the holding of municipal tax sales.
(9) Perform other functions and duties of a collector of taxes as
provided by general law and as directed by the Mayor and Council.
D. Compensation. The Tax Collector shall receive such compensation as
may from time to time be provided by resolution.
A. Establishment. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-148, there is hereby
established the position of Tax Assessor.
B. Appointment; term. The Tax Assessor shall be appointed by the Mayor,
with the advice and consent of the Council, and shall serve a four-year
term from July 1 next following the appointment.
C. Powers and duties. The Tax Assessor shall:
(1) Value all real and personal property in the Borough for purposes of
assessment and taxation in accordance with general law and
ordinances.
(2) Value and assess real and personal property for the purpose of ad
valorem taxation.
(3) Prepare the tax list and duplicate list required by law and keep
assessment records of each and every parcel of real property
assessed or exempted.
(4) Assist the Borough Engineer in the preparation and maintenance of
the Borough Tax Map.
(5) Make appraisals of property for any Borough purpose upon the
direction of the Council.
(6) Have such other powers, functions and duties given to municipal
assessors by general law and as directed by the Mayor and Council.
D. Compensation. The Tax Assessor shall receive such compensation as
may from time to time be provided by resolution.
A. Establishment. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140, there is hereby created
the office of Municipal Engineer, referred to as the Borough Engineer.
B. Appointment; term. The Borough Engineer shall be a licensed engineer
in the State of New Jersey, appointed by a majority vote of the Council.
The Borough Engineer shall serve a three-year term from the date of
appointment in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.
§ 2-41 CHATHAM CODE § 2-43
1:32
§ 2-44. Purchasing Agent.
C. Powers and duties. The Borough Engineer shall keep accurate maps,
plats and records of all public works, lands or property owned by the
Borough. The Borough Engineer shall further advise the Council and
Borough officials on all engineering matters referred to him or her, and
shall perform such duties as are provided by law or ordinance, and in
addition thereto, such other duties as from time to time may be imposed
upon him or her by the Council or by the Borough Administrator. He or
she shall, from time to time as required by the Council, make reports
regarding public improvements, repairs of streets, bridges and
sidewalks, or such other work as the Council may request, and shall
make such suggestions to the Council, regarding the same, as shall in
his or her judgment seem best and proper.
D. Compensation. The Borough Engineer shall be compensated as
provided by law, either in an annual salary or fixed-fee basis or at an
hourly rate and based upon actual time and expenses agreed on prior to
the rendering of the services.
E. Consulting engineers. Nothing in this article shall be deemed to
prohibit the Council from entering into a contract with any consulting
engineer or consulting engineers, in the manner provided by state law
and Borough ordinance, for any engineering work.
A. There is hereby created the position of Purchasing Agent for the
Borough of Chatham.
B. The Purchasing Agent shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice
and consent of the Council, by resolution.
C. The Purchasing Agent is required to possess a valid qualified
purchasing agent certificate, as issued by the New Jersey Division of
Local Government Services, Department of Community Affairs.
D. The Purchasing Agent shall have, on behalf of the Mayor and Council,
the authority, responsibility and accountability for the purchasing
activity of the Borough pursuant to the Local Public Contracts Law,
N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq. The Purchasing Agent shall be authorized to
prepare advertisements, to advertise for and receive bids and requests
for proposals for the provision or performance of goods, services and
construction contracts, to make awards for the Borough as permitted
by the Local Public Contracts Law, and to conduct any activities as may
be necessary or appropriate to the purchasing function of the Borough.
E. In accordance with the Local Public Contracts Law, the Purchasing
Agent shall be authorized to award contracts as follows:
(1) Under 15% of the threshold amount; or
(2) Over 15% up to the threshold amount after soliciting at least two
competitive quotations.
§ 2-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-44
1:33
Chapter 3
APPOINTED POSITIONS REGISTRY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative Code — See Ch. 2.
§ 3-1. Intent and purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to foster the openness of government and
provide citizens with information concerning the various appointed
municipal positions which exist within the Borough of Chatham. The
chapter further provides for a procedure whereby a citizen can indicate
his/her desire to serve in a particular appointed municipal position. The
chapter also provides for a notification process so that those citizens who
have indicated a desire to hold an appointed municipal position will be
notified when that position is under consideration for appointment and will
be notified as to the action that was taken with respect to such position.
§ 3-2. Definitions.
The following terms as used in this chapter shall have the meanings set
forth below unless the context within which the term is used clearly
provides for a different meaning:
APPOINTED MUNICIPAL POSITION — Any appointed position within the
Borough of Chatham, which is created by statutory law, or by Borough
ordinance or resolution, excluding positions required to be filled by
municipal employees (such as Borough Engineer). Examples of such
positions are members of any board, commission, agency, or committee of
the Borough.
APPOINTING AUTHORITY — The official or body which by virtue of
statutory law or by ordinance or resolution is given the authority to appoint
a person to hold a particular appointed municipal position.
§ 3-3. Registry of appointed municipal positions.
The Borough Clerk shall cause a register of appointed municipal positions
to be prepared and maintained in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:9-9.2a. Such
register shall be made available in the Clerk's office and on the Borough
website.
§ 3-4. Vacancies.
The Borough Clerk shall maintain a current listing of existing vacancies for
all appointed municipal positions. Such list shall be made available free of
charge at the Borough Clerk's office and shall, in addition, be posted on a
§ 2-44 CHATHAM CODE § 3-4
1:34
bulletin board maintained for public announcements in Borough Hall and on
the Borough website.
§ 3-5. Applications.
The Municipal Clerk shall maintain an application form to be completed
by any person interested in serving in an appointed municipal position in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:9-9.2b(2).
§ 3-6. Filing applications.
§ 3-7. Maintaining applications.
The Borough Clerk shall maintain all filed applications in a file or binder,
segregated for each authority, board or commission. Applications shall be
considered void after two years unless renewed by the applicant.
§ 3-8. Filling appointed positions.
A. Any person interested in serving in an appointed municipal position
shall file an application for such position with the Borough Clerk. Such
application(s) may be filed at any time, whether or not the appointed
municipal position sought is vacant. A person may withdraw his or her
application at any time.
B. The Borough Clerk shall be responsible to reply and acknowledge
receipt of the completed application form. An electronic signature is
acceptable for the purpose of deeming the application complete.
A. Whenever a vacancy in any appointed municipal position shall occur or
exist, the Borough Clerk shall notify each person having submitted an
application for the appointed municipal position of said vacancy. Prior
to filling any appointed municipal position, the appropriate appointing
authority shall review each application filed for that position. The
appointing authority shall conduct such review, investigation and/or
interviews as the appointing authority deems necessary or advisable in
its discretion. Where an appointment must be approved by the Borough
Council, a copy of the selected individual's application should be sent to
the Council at least one week prior to the meeting at which the
appointment is to be made. After a decision is reached to fill a vacant
appointed municipal position, all those who had submitted an
application for that position shall be notified of the appointing decision.
B. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, the
appointing authority may appoint an alternate member on such
authority, board or commission a full or regular member without
considering other applicants.
§ 3-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-9
1:35
§ 3-9. Reappointments.
On or before October 1 of each year, the Borough Clerk shall send a
letter to all persons serving in appointed municipal positions whose terms
are expiring at the end of the year to ask whether he/she wishes to be
reappointed. The failure to respond to the Borough Clerk's letter by October
31 may be interpreted to mean that the person does not wish to be
reappointed to an appointed municipal position.
§ 3-10. Vacancies; filling unexpired term.
Chapter 6
COURT
§ 6-1. Court established. [Amended 11-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-20]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq., a single Joint
Municipal Court is hereby established for the Borough of Chatham,
Township of Chatham, Borough of Madison, Township of Harding and
Township of Morris. The jurisdiction of the Joint Municipal Court shall
be coextensive with the territories of the Borough of Chatham, Township
of Chatham, Borough of Madison, Township of Harding and Township of
Morris.
§ 6-2. Name.
The name of the Joint Municipal Court shall be "Joint Municipal Court."
§ 6-3. Powers and duties.
The Joint Municipal Court shall possess and exercise all of the functions,
powers, duties and jurisdiction conferred upon it by the statutes of the State
of New Jersey.
A. Whenever a vacancy shall be deemed to have occurred pursuant to the
reasons set forth under N.J.S.A. 40A:9-12.1 the appointing authority
shall forthwith fill the office for the unexpired term in the manner
prescribed by law, ordinance or resolution.
B. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:9-12.1g, an appointed municipal
position shall be deemed vacant whenever a member of a board,
commission, agency, or committee of the Borough, without being
excused by a majority of the authorized members of such body, fails to
attend and participate at meetings of the body for a period of eight
consecutive weeks, or for four consecutive regular meetings, whichever
shall be of longer duration, provided that such body shall notify the
appointing authority in writing of such determination and that such
body may refuse to excuse only with respect to those failures to attend
and participate which are not due to legitimate illness.
§ 3-9 CHATHAM CODE § 6-4
1:36
§ 6-4. Joint Court Committee. [Amended 11-11-2013 by Ord. No.
13-20]
A Joint Court Committee shall be formed consisting of two representatives
appointed by the respective governing bodies of the Borough of Chatham,
Township of Chatham, Borough of Madison, Township of Harding and
Township of Morris. The Joint Court Committee shall operate as set forth
in the Agreement for the Creation and Operation of a Joint Municipal
Court Pursuant to the Uniform Shared Services and Consolidation Act dated
January 10, 2011, as may be amended from time to time.
§ 6-5. Appointment of Judge.
The Judge of the Joint Municipal Court shall be nominated and appointed
by the Governor of the State of New Jersey, upon the advice and consent of
the Senate of the State of New Jersey in accordance with N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et
seq. and the Agreement for the Creation and Operation of a Joint Municipal
Court Pursuant to the Uniform Shared Services and Consolidation Act dated
January 10, 2011, as may be amended from time to time. The Judge of the
Joint Municipal Court shall have and possess the qualifications and shall
have, possess and exercise all the functions, duties, powers and jurisdiction
conferred by law or ordinance.
§ 6-6. Municipal Prosecutor.
The position of Municipal Prosecutor of the Joint Municipal Court is hereby
established in accordance with N.J.S.A. 2B:25-1 et seq. and the Agreement
for the Creation and Operation of a Joint Municipal Court Pursuant to the
Uniform Shared Services and Consolidation Act dated January 10, 2011, as
may be amended from time to time.
§ 6-7. Municipal Public Defender.
The position of Municipal Public Defender of the Joint Municipal Court
is hereby established in accordance with N.J.S.A. 2B:24-1 et seq. and the
Agreement for the Creation and Operation of a Joint Municipal Court
Pursuant to the Uniform Shared Services and Consolidation Act dated
January 10, 2011, as may be amended from time to time.
§ 6-8. Municipal Joint Court Administrator.
The position of Municipal Court Administrator of the Joint Municipal Court
is hereby established in accordance with N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq. and the
Agreement for the Creation and Operation of a Joint Municipal Court
Pursuant to the Uniform Shared Services and Consolidation Act dated
January 10, 2011, as may be amended from time to time. The Municipal
Court Administrator shall perform the functions and duties prescribed by
law, by rules applicable to municipal courts and by the Judge of the Joint
Municipal Court. The Municipal Court Administrator shall be considered an
employee of the Borough of Madison.
§ 6-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-9
1:37
§ 6-9. Deputy Municipal Joint Court Administrator.
The Joint Court Committee may appoint one or more Deputy Municipal
Court Administrators of the Joint Municipal Court as necessary to efficiently
operate the Joint Municipal Court in accordance with N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et
seq. and the Agreement for the Creation and Operation of a Joint Municipal
Court Pursuant to the Uniform Shared Services and Consolidation Act dated
January 10, 2011, as may be amended from time to time.
§ 6-10. Employees.
The Joint Court Committee shall provide for such other necessary clerical
and other personnel as shall be required to efficiently operate the Joint
Municipal Court and for their compensation in accordance with N.J.S.A.
2B:12-1 et seq. and the Agreement for the Creation and Operation of
a Joint Municipal Court Pursuant to the Uniform Shared Services and
Consolidation Act dated January 10, 2011, as may be amended from time to
time.
§ 6-11. Revenue distribution.
All fines, costs, fees, penalties and forfeitures, including forfeitures of bail,
imposed by the Joint Municipal Court, and any other funds which are
distributable to a local municipality, shall be distributed to the municipality
in which the complaint, charge, events, acts or violation arose and which
produce the particular fine, costs, fee, penalty, forfeiture or other funds in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq. and the Agreement for the Creation
and Operation of a Joint Municipal Court Pursuant to the Uniform Shared
Services and Consolidation Act dated January 10, 2011, as may be amended
from time to time.
§ 6-12. Agreement. [Amended 11-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-20]
The Agreement for the Creation and Operation of a Joint Municipal Court
Pursuant to the Uniform Shared Services and Consolidation Act, dated
January 10, 2011 (as it may be amended and supplemented from time to
time), is hereby ratified and approved. Said agreement is on file in the office
of the Borough Clerk, Municipal Building, 54 Fairmount Avenue, Chatham,
New Jersey, and is available for public inspection during normal business
hours.
§ 6-13. Effective date. [Amended 11-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-20]
A. The Joint Municipal Court shall be effective and commence on February
1, 2011, and shall remain in effect until December 31, 2013, unless
subsequently extended, renewed or terminated by one or more of the
participating municipalities pursuant to the Agreement for the Creation
and Operation of a Joint Municipal Court Pursuant to the Uniform
Shared Services and Consolidation Act dated January 10, 2011, as may
be amended from time to time.
§ 6-9 CHATHAM CODE § 6-13
1:38
§ 6-14. Withdrawal of Joint Municipal Court members. [Added
11-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-20]
A municipality may withdraw from participation in the Joint Municipal
Court by delivering written notice to the Joint Municipal Court and all
participating municipalities of its intentions to withdraw in accordance with
the agreement authorized by this chapter.
§ 6-15. Additional Joint Municipal Court members. [Added
11-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-20]
Additional municipalities may join the Joint Municipal Court. Any
amendment to include an additional municipality shall require approval
by all participating municipalities as required by law and the agreement
authorized by this chapter.
Chapter 8
DEFINED CONTRIBUTION RETIREMENT PROGRAM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 39.
§ 8-1. Eligible positions required to participate.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2, the following positions are deemed to be
eligible for and shall participate in the Defined Contribution Retirement
Program:
B. On February 1, 2011, the Borough of Chatham Municipal Court shall be
abolished and its functions, powers and duties, records and pending
cases shall be transferred to the Joint Municipal Court established
pursuant to the ordinances adopted by the respective governing bodies
of the Borough of Chatham, Township of Chatham, Borough of Madison,
Township of Harding and Township of Morris and the Agreement for the
Creation and Operation of a Joint Municipal Court Pursuant to the
Uniform Shared Services and Consolidation Act dated January 10,
2011, as may be amended from time to time.
A. Business Administrator;
B. Department heads;
C. Municipal Attorney;
D. Municipal Engineer;
E. Municipal Prosecutor;
§ 6-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-1
1:39
§ 8-2. Exempt positions.
Individuals serving in the following positions are exempt from Defined
Contribution Retirement Program membership, pursuant N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2:
§ 8-3. Individual exceptions.
If an individual is appointed to one of the positions listed in § 8-1 and
the individual is not serving in a position as described in § 8-2 above,
the Pension Certifying Officer of the municipality may determine that the
individual is not required to join the Defined Contribution Program if that
individual:
§ 8-4. Applicability.
This chapter shall be implemented, construed and subject to the aforesaid
Chapter 92 of the Laws of 2007 (N.J.S.A. 43:15C-1 et seq.), as amended from
time to time, and any regulations or guidance documents from the Local
Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
F. Municipal Court Judge;
G. Members of Board of Commissioners.
A. Certified Health Officer;
B. Tax Collector;
C. Chief Financial Officer;
D. Construction Code Official;
E. Tax Assessor;
F. Municipal Planner;
G. Registered Municipal Clerk;
H. Licensed Uniform Subcode Inspector;
I. Principal Public Works Manager.
A. Was an active participant in the Public Employee Retirement System on
July 1, 2007, and continuously since that time;
B. Has been appointed pursuant to a valid promotional process; or
C. Is appointed on a temporary, interim, or acting basis to a position
requiring state certification, as set forth in § 8-2 herein, and is in
pursuit of the required certification; or
D. Meets such other exceptions that may be approved by the Local
Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
§ 8-1 CHATHAM CODE § 8-5
1:40
§ 8-5. Filing with state.
A copy of this chapter shall be filed with the Director of the Division of
Pensions and Benefits of the New Jersey Department of the Treasury.
Chapter 11
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land development — See Ch. 165.
§ 11-1. Establishment.
Pursuant to Chapter 245 of the Laws of New Jersey for the year 1968
(N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 et seq.), there is hereby established in and for the
Borough of Chatham an Environmental Commission, to be known as the
"Borough of Chatham Environmental Commission."
§ 11-2. Appointment of members; terms; compensation; alternates.
[Amended 5-10-1993 by Ord. No. 9-93]
§ 11-3. Powers and duties. [Amended 4-25-2005 by Ord. No. 05-09]
A. The Environmental Commission shall consist of seven members to be
appointed by the Mayor. One member shall also be a member of the
Borough Planning Board and all members shall be residents of the
Borough of Chatham. The terms of the appointments of the Commission
members shall be for three years beginning the first day of January of
the first year of the term. Appointments shall be made so that
approximately 1/3 of the appointments to the Commission shall expire
each year. Members of said Commission shall serve without
compensation. [Amended 6-12-2017 by Ord. No. 17-06]
B. The Mayor may also appoint, with the advice and consent of the
Council, two alternate members who shall be residents, and they shall
be designated as "Alternate 1" and "Alternate 2" at the time of
appointment. The term of each alternate member shall be for two years
computed from January 1 of the year of their appointment. An alternate
member may participate in discussions of the proceedings but not vote
except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member. In the
event that a choice must be made as to which alternate member is to
vote, Alternate 1 shall vote.
A. The Environmental Commission shall have the power to study and make
recommendations concerning open space preservation, water
resources management, air pollution control, solid waste management,
noise control, soil and landscape protection, environmental
§ 8-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-3
1:41
§ 11-4. Acquisition of property.
The Environmental Commission may, subject to the approval of the Borough
Council, acquire property, both real and personal, in the name of the
Borough, by gift, purchase, grant, bequest, devise or lease, for any of its
purposes, and shall administer the same for such purposes, subject to the
terms of the conveyance or gift. Such an acquisition may be to acquire
the fee or any lesser interest, development right, easement (including
conservation easement), covenant or other contractual right (including a
conveyance on conditions or with limitations or reversions), as may be
necessary to acquire, maintain, improve, protect, limit the future use of or
otherwise conserve and properly utilize open spaces and other land and
water areas in the Borough.
§ 11-5. Records and annual reports required.
The Environmental Commission shall keep records of its meetings and
activities and shall make an annual report to the Borough Council.
Chapter 15
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 56.
Uniform Fire Code — See Ch. 136.
Fire-related offenses — See Ch. 144.
Fire zones — See Ch. 148.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 204.
§ 15-1. Establishment and continuation.
The Fire Department of the Borough of Chatham, referred to herein as the
"Fire Department," as heretofore established, is hereby continued.
appearance, marine resources, protection of flora and fauna and the
environmental impacts of proposed activities in or affecting the
Borough. It may coordinate such activities with unofficial bodies
organized for similar purposes, and, subject to availability of funds,
it may advertise, prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts,
plans and pamphlets which in its judgment it deems necessary for its
purposes.
B. It shall keep an index of all open areas, public or privately owned,
including open marshlands, swamps and other wetlands, in order to
obtain information on the proper use of such areas, and may from time
to time recommend to the Chatham Borough Planning Board plans and
programs for inclusion in a Master Plan of the Borough and the
development and use of such areas.
§ 11-3 CHATHAM CODE § 15-2
1:42
§ 15-2. Control and oversight by Council; appropriations.
§ 15-3. Composition of Fire Department; additional companies.
§ 15-4. Fire Chief.
A. The Fire Department shall be subject to the direct control and oversight
of the Borough Council. The Borough Council shall exercise its control
and supervision over the Fire Department through the Borough
Administrator or his designee.
B. The Borough Council may appropriate such sums of money as
authorized by law to fund the operations and capital expenses of the
Fire Department.
A. The Fire Department shall consist of the following officers: one Fire
Chief; no more than two Deputy Fire Chiefs; one Battalion Fire Chief;
no more than two Fire Captains; and no more than six Fire Company
Lieutenants, all of whom shall constitute the line officers of the Fire
Department. The Fire Department shall also be served by one Fire
Department Coordinator and as many staff officers and members in
such titles as the Fire Chief may recommend to the Borough Council for
appointment.
B. The following companies, as heretofore established, are hereby
continued:
(1) Engine Company 1.
(2) Engine Company 2.
(3) Hose Company.
(4) Hook and Ladder.
(5) Rescue Company.
(6) Wardens Company.
C. The Fire Chief may organize such additional companies and other
sections as he shall determine necessary for the efficient operation of
the Fire Department. Upon the recommendation of the Fire Chief, the
Borough Council may, by resolution, abolish, consolidate or reorganize
any company.
A. There shall be established the position of Fire Chief. The Fire Chief
shall be the highest ranking fire officer and shall report to the Borough
Administrator or his designee. The Fire Chief shall be paid an annual
salary as established by resolution of the Borough Council. The Fire
Chief shall be in command of all Fire Department operations, including
the actual response to fires and other emergencies and such meetings,
drills, inspections, maintenance details and other nonemergency events
as the Fire Chief may determine, as well as perform such other duties
§ 15-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-4
1:43
§ 15-5. Fire Chief qualifications.
No member shall be eligible for appointment as Fire Chief unless he shall at
the time of his appointment:
as established in the Fire Department rules and regulations
promulgated pursuant to this chapter. In addition, the Fire Chief shall
issue such general and special orders, standard operating procedures
or guidelines and preincident plans as he shall deem necessary to
govern Fire Department operations and the conduct of officers and
members under his command.
B. Upon the recommendation of the members of the Fire Department, the
Mayor shall appoint, with the advice and consent of the Borough
Council, the Fire Chief to a four-year term, effective January 1 of the
year of appointment. The Fire Chief shall serve until his successor shall
be appointed and qualified. Any vacancy in the position of Fire Chief
shall be filled by the Mayor and Borough Council in the same manner as
heretofore provided, but for the remainder of the unexpired term only.
C. In appointing the Fire Chief, the Mayor and Borough Council shall give
due consideration to any recommendation for said appointment in the
form of an election held by Fire Department members in accordance
with the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to this chapter.
Prior to any election for the position of Fire Chief, the Borough
Administrator or his designee shall first certify that all members so
nominated shall have satisfied the minimum qualifications for
appointment as set forth in § 15-5.
D. The Fire Chief shall be subject to removal by the Borough Council for
just cause and upon written charges brought by the Borough
Administrator or his designee. The Fire Chief may request a hearing
within 10 days of receiving the charges. The Borough Council shall
designate a hearing officer who shall consider the sworn testimony of
all witnesses and other evidence presented. Hearings may be
conducted informally, and the formal rules of evidence need not apply.
At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall make his
written report and recommendations to the Borough Council. The
decision of the Borough Council shall be final.
A. Be a resident of the Borough or resident in a municipality whose
boundary is contiguous with the Borough and be a citizen of the United
States.
B. Have received a Firefighter II certificate issued by the New Jersey
Division of Fire Safety.
C. Hold an exempt firemen's certificate pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-55 et
seq.
D. Have previously served a minimum of four years as Fire Chief, Deputy
Chief or Battalion Chief in the Fire Department.
§ 15-4 CHATHAM CODE § 15-5
1:44
§ 15-6. Deputy Fire Chiefs.
§ 15-7. Deputy Fire Chief qualifications.
No member shall be eligible for appointment as Deputy Fire Chief unless he
shall at the time of his appointment:
E. Have obtained a valid Incident Management Level 3 certificate issued
by the New Jersey Division of Fire Safety pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:73-6.1.
F. Be physically fit to perform the duties of Fire Chief, as evidenced by a
certificate to that effect by the Fire Department medical officer or the
member's own physician after physical examination.
G. Have satisfied any other requirements for appointment in accordance
with the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to this chapter.
A. There shall be established no more than two Deputy Fire Chief
positions. The Deputy Fire Chiefs shall rank below the Fire Chief. Each
Deputy Fire Chief shall have such duties as established in the rules and
regulations promulgated pursuant to this chapter.
B. Upon the recommendation of the members of the Fire Department,
each Deputy Fire Chief shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice
and consent of the Borough Council, for a one-year term, effective
January 1 of the year of appointment. Each Deputy Fire Chief shall
serve until his successor shall be appointed and qualified. Any vacancy
in the position of Deputy Fire Chief shall be filled by the Mayor and
Borough Council in the same manner as heretofore provided, but for
the remainder of the unexpired term only.
C. In appointing the Deputy Fire Chief, the Mayor and Borough Council
shall give due consideration to any recommendation for said
appointment in the form of an election held by Fire Department
members in accordance with the rules and regulations promulgated
pursuant to this chapter. Prior to any election for the position of Deputy
Fire Chief, the Fire Chief shall first certify that all members so
nominated shall have satisfied the minimum qualifications for
appointment as set forth in § 15-7.
A. Be a resident of the Borough or reside within a contiguous municipality
and be a citizen of the United States.
B. Have received a Firefighter I certificate issued by the New Jersey
Division of Fire Safety.
C. Hold an exempt firemen's certificate pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-55 et
seq.
D. Have previously served a minimum of two years as Fire Chief, Deputy
Chief, or Battalion Chief in the Fire Department.
§ 15-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-7
1:45
§ 15-8. Battalion Fire Chief.
§ 15-9. Battalion Fire Chief qualifications.
No member shall be eligible for appointment as Battalion Fire Chief unless
he shall at the time of his appointment:
E. Have obtained or within six months of appointment shall have obtained
a valid Incident Management Level 3 certificate issued by the New
Jersey Division of Fire Safety pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:73-6.1.
F. Have satisfied any other requirements for appointment in accordance
with the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to this chapter.
A. There shall be established the position of Battalion Fire Chief. The
Battalion Fire Chief shall rank below the Deputy Fire Chiefs. The
Battalion Fire Chief shall have such duties as established in the rules
and regulations promulgated pursuant to this chapter.
B. Upon the recommendation of the members of the Fire Department, the
Battalion Fire Chief shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice
and consent of the Borough Council, for a one-year term, effective
January 1 of the year of appointment. The Battalion Fire Chief shall
serve until his successor shall be appointed and qualified. Any vacancy
in the position of Battalion Fire Chief shall be filled by the Mayor and
Borough Council in the same manner as heretofore provided, but for
the remainder of the unexpired term only.
C. In appointing the Battalion Fire Chief, the Mayor and Borough Council
shall give due consideration to any recommendation for said
appointment in the form of an election held by Fire Department
members in accordance with the rules and regulations promulgated
pursuant to this chapter. Prior to any election for the position of
Battalion Fire Chief, the Fire Chief shall first certify that all members so
nominated shall have satisfied the minimum qualifications for
appointment as set forth in § 15-9.
A. Be a resident of the Borough or reside within a contiguous municipality
and be a citizen of the United States.
B. Have received a Firefighter I certificate issued by the New Jersey
Division of Fire Safety.
C. Hold an exempt firemen's certificate pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-55 et
seq.
D. Have previously served a minimum of two years as Fire Chief, Deputy
Chief, Battalion Chief or Captain in the Fire Department.
E. Have obtained or within six months of appointment shall have obtained
a valid Incident Management Level 2 certificate issued by the New
Jersey Division of Fire Safety pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:73-6.1.
§ 15-7 CHATHAM CODE § 15-9
1:46
§ 15-10. Fire Captain.
§ 15-11. Fire Captain qualifications.
No member shall be eligible for appointment as Fire Captain unless he shall
at the time of his appointment:
§ 15-12. Company Lieutenant.
F. Have satisfied any other requirements for appointment in accordance
with the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to this chapter.
A. There shall be established no more than two Fire Captain positions. The
Fire Captain shall rank below the Battalion Fire Chief. The Fire Captain
shall have such duties as established in the rules and regulations
promulgated pursuant to this chapter.
B. Upon the recommendation of the members of the Fire Department, the
Fire Captain shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and
consent of the Borough Council, for a one-year term, effective January 1
of the year of appointment. The Fire Captain shall serve until his
successor shall be appointed and qualified. Any vacancy in the position
of Fire Captain shall be filled by the Mayor and Borough Council in the
same manner as heretofore provided, but for the remainder of the
unexpired term only.
C. In appointing the Fire Captain, the Mayor and Borough Council shall
give due consideration to any recommendation for said appointment in
the form of an election held by Fire Department members in
accordance with the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to this
chapter. Prior to any election for the position of Fire Captain, the Fire
Chief shall first certify that all members so nominated shall have
satisfied the minimum qualifications for appointment as set forth in
§ 15-11.
A. Be a resident of the Borough or reside within a contiguous municipality
and be a citizen of the United States.
B. Have received a Firefighter I certificate issued by the New Jersey
Division of Fire Safety.
C. Have previously served as Fire Chief, Deputy Chief, Battalion Chief,
Captain or a Company Lieutenant in the Fire Department.
D. Have obtained a valid Incident Management Level 1 certificate issued
by the New Jersey Division of Fire Safety pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5.73-6.1.
E. Have satisfied any other requirements for appointment in accordance
with the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to this chapter.
A. There shall be established no more than six Company Lieutenant
positions. The Company Lieutenant shall rank below the Fire Captain.
§ 15-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-12
1:47
§ 15-13. Company Lieutenant qualifications.
No member shall be eligible for appointment as Company Lieutenant unless
he shall at the time of his appointment:
§ 15-14. Removal of line officers.
Any line officer, other than the Fire Chief, shall be subject to removal from
office for just cause upon charges brought by the Fire Chief or his designee.
The line officer charged may request a hearing within 10 days of receiving
the charges. The Borough Council shall designate a hearing officer who
shall consider the sworn testimony of all witnesses and other evidence
presented. Hearings may be conducted informally and the formal rules of
evidence need not apply. At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing
officer shall make his written report and recommendations to the Borough
Council. The decision of the Borough Council shall be final.
§ 15-15. Fire Department Coordinator.
Each company shall have one Company Lieutenant. The Company
Lieutenant shall have such duties as established in the rules and
regulations promulgated pursuant to this chapter.
B. Upon the recommendation of the members of each Fire Company, the
Company Lieutenant shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice
and consent of the Borough Council, for a one-year term, effective
January 1 of the year of appointment. The Company Lieutenant shall
serve until his successor shall be appointed and qualified. Any vacancy
in the position of Company Lieutenant shall be filled by the Mayor and
Borough Council in the same manner as heretofore provided, but for
the remainder of the unexpired term only.
C. In appointing the Company Lieutenant, the Mayor and Borough Council
shall give due consideration to any recommendation for said
appointment in the form of an election held by the members of the Fire
Company in accordance with the rules and regulations promulgated
pursuant to this chapter. Prior to any election for the position of
Company Lieutenant, the Fire Chief shall first certify that all members
so nominated shall have satisfied the minimum qualifications for
appointment as set forth in § 15-13.
A. Be a resident of the Borough or reside within a contiguous municipality
and be a citizen of the United States.
B. Have received a Firefighter I certificate issued by the New Jersey
Division of Fire Safety.
C. Have obtained a valid Incident Management Level 1 certificate issued
by the New Jersey Division of Fire Safety pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5.73-6.1.
D. Have satisfied any other requirements for appointment in accordance
with the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to this chapter.
§ 15-12 CHATHAM CODE § 15-15
1:48
§ 15-16. Medical officers; chaplains; staff officers.
Upon the recommendation of the Fire Chief, the Mayor may nominate,
with the advice and consent of the Council, and appoint such medical
officers, chaplains and other staff officers as hereinafter provided, who need
not be members of the Fire Department, but who shall possess special
skills, training, experiences, licenses and expertise that the Fire Chief
may find necessary or beneficial to the efficient administration of the Fire
Department, all in accordance with the Fire Department rules and
regulations established pursuant to this chapter.
§ 15-17. Probationary and regular membership qualifications;
appointment and dismissal; duties.
A. The position of Fire Department Coordinator is hereby established and
may be held by a full- or part-time employee of the Borough whose
salary shall be set forth in the Borough's annual salary resolution.
B. The Fire Department Coordinator shall be appointed by the Mayor, with
the advice and consent of the Borough Council, and shall serve at the
pleasure of the Borough Council. The Fire Department Coordinator
shall be qualified by training, education and experience and shall have a
minimum of five years' fire service experience and possess other such
qualifications as the Borough Administrator shall find necessary.
C. The Fire Department Coordinator shall serve as the administrative
head of the Fire Department and shall report to the Borough
Administrator. The Fire Department Coordinator shall have such duties
as established in the Fire Department rules and regulations
promulgated pursuant to this chapter.
A. Any person who is a resident of the Borough or resides within a
contiguous municipality and is a citizen of the United States and is not
less than 18 years of age and is of good character and is physically fit to
perform the duties of a Fire Department member, as evidenced by a
certificate to that effect by the Fire Department medical officer
examination shall be eligible for appointment as a probationary
member of the Fire Department.
B. Each person found eligible shall be recommended by the company to
which he has been assigned and be approved by the Borough Council,
whereupon he shall serve a probationary period of not less than one
year and during such period shall satisfactorily complete all required
training in accordance with the Fire Department rules and regulations
and the general or specials orders promulgated by the Fire Chief for
this purpose. Upon completion of the probationary period to the
satisfaction of the Fire Chief, and the Borough Council, he shall be
appointed as a regular member of the Fire Department.
§ 15-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-17
1:49
§ 15-18. Firefighter/driver.
§ 15-19. (Reserved)
§ 15-20. Stipends and clothing allowances.
No salary or other compensation shall be paid to the Deputy Fire Chiefs,
Battalion Chief, Captains and Lieutenants, other staff officers and members
of the Fire Department except that each may receive such stipends and
clothing allowances as made available by appropriations of the Borough
Council for those purposes.
§ 15-21. Annual inspection; drill and training schedule.
C. The probationary and regular members of the Fire Department shall
have such duties as established in the Fire Department rules and
regulations promulgated pursuant to this chapter.
D. Any Fire Department member may be dismissed from the Fire
Department, suspended or relieved from duty in accordance with the
Fire Department rules and regulations promulgated for this purpose.
A. The position of Firefighter/driver is hereby established and may be held
by a full-time, part-time or per diem employee of the Borough whose
compensation shall be set forth in the Borough's annual Fire
Department salary resolution.
B. The Firefighter/driver shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice
and consent of the Borough Council, and shall serve during periods of
good behavior and efficiency. The person so appointed as firefighter/
driver shall be qualified by training, education and experience and shall
have a minimum of five years' fire service experience and possess other
such qualifications as the Borough Administrator shall find necessary.
C. The firefighter/driver shall have such duties as established in the Fire
Department rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to this
chapter.
A. There shall be an annual public inspection of the Fire Department by
the Mayor and Borough Council. The date for such inspection shall be
set by the Fire Chief, and the Fire Chief shall issue any necessary
general and special orders governing the public inspection.
B. The annual drill and training schedule shall be set by the Fire Chief.
Every member of the Fire Department shall attend drills and training in
accordance with the Fire Department rules and regulations and/or any
general or special orders promulgated by the Fire Chief for this
purpose.
C. Any member of the Fire Department refusing or neglecting to attend
fire alarms or other emergencies or absent from drills or training may
be dismissed from the Department, suspended or relieved from duty in
§ 15-17 CHATHAM CODE § 15-21
1:50
§ 15-22. Survivor's benefits; pension payment.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 43:12-28 et seq., the Borough
Council, shall by resolution, determine the eligibility for a survivor's pension
of the widow, widower, children or parent of an officer or member of the Fire
Department who has died as the result of injuries sustained in the course of
performance of duty, and not as a result of willful negligence. The amount
of the pension and manner of payment of the pension shall be determined
by the State of New Jersey, Division of Pensions and Benefits, in accordance
with applicable law.
§ 15-23. Exemption certificates.
Any Fire Department officer or member who has performed qualifying fire
duty in accordance with the requirements of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-55 et seq. shall
be entitled to an exempt firemen's certificate, to be issued by the Borough
Clerk and signed by the Mayor, within 90 days of the date of qualification
thereof, and shall be provided with all the rights, privileges and immunities
provided by law for the holder of such certificate.
§ 15-24. Junior Firemen's Auxiliary.
accordance with the Fire Department rules and regulations and/or
any general or special orders promulgated by the Fire Chief for this
purpose.
A. A Junior Firemen's Auxiliary Company (hereinafter the "Auxiliary
Company") to the Fire Department is hereby established and is subject
to the supervision and control of the Fire Chief. The members of the
Auxiliary Company shall be known as "junior members."
B. Junior members shall meet all the qualifications of regular members of
the Fire Department, except that they need only have reached the age
of 16 years and may be no older than 18 years of age.
C. Any person seeking to become a junior member must apply and be
appointed in the same manner as a member of the Fire Department.
Any person before being considered for membership in the Auxiliary
Company must obtain notarized permission to join the auxiliary from
his/her parents or guardian and must submit to the Fire Chief said
notarized permission in writing and acknowledged or approved in the
manner required by law for deeds to real estate to be recorded.
D. Junior members shall be insured by the same coverage and in the same
amounts provided for the members of the Fire Department.
E. Junior members shall be trained for eventual membership in the Fire
Department in accordance with the general and special orders that the
Fire Chief may promulgate for said purpose. No junior member shall be
allowed to perform duties that would expose him to the same degree of
hazard as a member of the Fire Department.
§ 15-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-24
1:51
§ 15-25. Adoption of rules and regulations.
The Borough Administrator or his designee may promulgate such rules
and regulations as necessary for the proper and efficient conduct of the
Fire Department. The Borough Administrator shall seek the review and
recommendation of the Fire Chief and the Fire Department Coordinator,
as appropriate, in promulgating such rules and regulations. The rules and
regulations so promulgated shall be maintained in the Fire Department and
in the office of the Borough Clerk.
Chapter 19
FUNDS
F. Junior members shall not fight fires, perform any rescues, or engage in
similar emergency operations, or use power equipment necessary to
undertake those duties. Junior members shall not operate any Fire
Department vehicle or apparatus.
G. Junior members shall be subject to all provisions of this chapter and
shall be subject to suspension or dismissal as provided for by general or
special orders issued by the Fire Chief for said purposes.
§ 15-24 CHATHAM CODE § 15-25
1:52
ARTICLE I
Sidewalk Trust Fund
[Adopted 4-25-2005 by Ord. No. 05-09]
§ 19-1. Establishment.
A Sidewalk Trust Fund for the replacement, repair and maintenance of
sidewalks is hereby established, which trust fund shall be administered
by the Chief Financial Officer in accordance with written policies and
procedures promulgated by the Borough Council by resolution.
§ 19-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-1
1:53

ARTICLE II
Community Garden Recreation Trust Fund
[Adopted 3-8-2010 by Ord. No. 10-07]
§ 19-2. Establishment; administration.
A. The Community Garden Recreation Trust Fund is hereby established to
make the licensed premises suitable for its purposes and thereafter
repair and maintain same.
B. The Community Garden Recreation Trust Fund shall be administered by
the Chief Finance Officer in accordance with written policy and
procedures prescribed by the Borough Council.
§ 19-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-2
1:55
Chapter 23
HEALTH, BOARD OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 39. Board of Health ordinances — See Part III.
§ 23-1. Composition.
The Board of Health of the Borough of Chatham, previously established by
ordinance and appointed by the Mayor, is hereby continued consistent with
N.J.S.A. 26:3-1 et seq. and shall be composed of seven members and two
alternate members. Members shall be residents of the Borough of Chatham
and shall serve without compensation.
§ 23-2. Appointment of members; terms of office; vacancies.
A. Pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 26:3-5, six members of the Board of
Health shall be appointed for the term of three years by the Mayor upon
the advice and consent of the Borough Council. In the event that the
Mayor fails to make a nomination at least 15 days prior to the date of
the second regular public meeting of the Council after a position
becomes vacant or the Borough Council fails to confirm a nomination,
then the appointment shall be made by the Borough Council by a vote of
a majority of the members present at the meeting, provided that at least
three affirmative votes shall be required, with the Mayor to have no
vote thereon except in case of a tie. One member of the Board of Health
shall be a Council member, appointed by the Borough Council, and the
term of the appointment of such member shall be one year. In the event
of a vacancy, the term of appointment shall be only for the unexpired
term. The terms of office of the non-Council members shall be so
arranged that the terms of no more than three members shall expire in
any one year.
B. The terms of all existing Board members shall continue in accordance
with their original appointment. The next vacancy occurring on the
Board of Health after the effective date of this chapter shall be filled by
the Council member to be appointed to the Board of Health, as
hereinabove provided.
C. Pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 26:3-5, the alternate members of
the Board of Health shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of the Council. In the event that the Mayor fails to make a
nomination at least 15 days prior to the date of the second regular
public meeting of the Council after an alternate member position
becomes vacant or the Borough Council fails to confirm a nomination,
then the appointment shall be made by the Borough Council by the vote
of a majority of the members present at the meeting, provided that at
§ 19-2 CHATHAM CODE § 23-2
23:56
§ 23-3. Meetings; quorum; record of proceedings; monthly reports.
The Board of Health shall meet at such times and places as shall be deemed
expedient in regard to public health within said Borough. A majority of the
appointed membership of the Board of Health shall constitute a quorum
thereof. The Board shall keep a record of its proceedings in a book suitable
for that purpose, which shall be the property of the Mayor and Council. The
Board shall make monthly reports of all proceedings to the Council.
§ 23-4. Powers and duties.
Chapter 28
INDEMNIFICATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 39.
least three affirmative votes shall be required, with the Mayor to have
no vote thereon except in case of a tie. In the event of a vacancy, the
term of the appointment shall be only for the unexpired term.
(1) Alternate members shall be designated at the time of appointment
as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." The terms of the
alternate members shall be two years, except that the terms of the
alternate members first appointed shall be two years for Alternate
No. 1 and one year for Alternate No. 2 so that the term of not more
than one alternate member shall expire in any one year.
(2) The alternate members may participate in discussions of the
proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or
disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall not be delayed in
order that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate
member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which
alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
A. The Board of Health shall perform such duties and have such powers
and employ such personnel as may be authorized by N.J.S.A. 26:3-1 et
seq.
B. The Board of Health shall have the power to adopt ordinances and
codes4 as provided in N.J.S.A. 26:3-64 et seq.
4. Editor's Note: See Part III, Board of Health Legislation, of this Code for ordinances
adopted by the Board of Health.
§ 23-2 INDEMNIFICATION § 28-1
28:57
§ 28-1. Indemnification and legal defense.
Except as hereinafter provided, the Borough of Chatham, hereinafter known
as the "Borough," shall, upon the request of any present or former official,
employee or appointee of the Borough, provide for indemnification and legal
defense of any civil action brought against said person or persons arising
from an act or omission falling within the scope of their public and/or
assigned duties.
§ 28-2. Construal of terms.
The terms of this chapter and the definition of official, employee and
appointee are to be construed liberally in order to effectuate the purposes
of this chapter, except that these terms shall not mean:
§ 28-3. Borough to provide defense under certain conditions.
The Borough shall provide for defense of and indemnify any present or
former official, employee or appointee of the Borough whenever any action
has been or shall be brought against such person, if the person or persons
involved:
§ 28-4. Costs and counsel fees.
In indemnifying and defending such persons, the Borough shall incur all
costs of defending such action, which defense shall extend to a cross-claim
or counterclaim against such person, as well as the costs of appeal, if any,
including reasonable counsel fees and expenses, and shall save harmless
and protect such person for any financial loss resulting therefrom.
A. Any person who is not a natural person;
B. Any person while providing goods or services of any kind under any
contract with the Borough except an employment contract;
C. Any person while providing legal or engineering services for
compensation unless said person is a full-time employee of the
Borough; and
D. Any person who as a condition of his or her appointment or contract is
required to indemnify and defend the Borough and/or secure insurance.
A. Acted or failed to act in a matter in which the Borough has or had an
interest;
B. Acted or failed to act in the discharge of a duty imposed or authorized
by law; and
C. Acted or failed to take action in good faith.
§ 28-1 CHATHAM CODE § 28-5
28:58
§ 28-5. Punitive damages.
The Borough shall not indemnify any person against the payment of punitive
damages, penalties or fines, but may provide for the legal defense of such
claims in accord with the standards set forth herein. The Borough may
refuse to provide for the defense and indemnification of any civil action
referred to herein if the Borough determines that:
§ 28-6. Criminal proceedings.
In any other action or proceeding, including criminal proceedings, the
Borough may provide for the defense of a present or former official,
employee or appointee, if the Borough first determines that such
representation is in the best interest of the Borough and that the actions
of the person to be defended did not constitute actual fraud, actual malice,
gross misconduct, or an intentional tort.
§ 28-7. Exclusive control by Borough.
Whenever the Borough provides for the defense of any action set forth
herein and as a condition of such defense, the Borough may assume
exclusive control over the representation of such persons defended and
such persons shall cooperate fully with the Borough. In the event that any
officer or employee or appointee engages an attorney without the approval
of the Borough and prior agreement as to the cost of services, all costs
so incurred shall be the sole responsibility of such officer, employee, or
appointee.
§ 28-8. Manner of defense.
The Borough may provide for the defense pursuant to this chapter by
authorizing its attorney to act on behalf of the person being defended or by
employing other counsel for this purpose or by asserting the right of the
Borough under any appropriate insurance policy that requires the insurer
to provide defense.
§ 28-9. Exceptions.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth above, the Borough will
not be responsible for indemnification under the following conditions.
A. The act or omission did not occur within the scope of a duty authorized
or imposed by law;
B. The act or failure to act was the result of actual fraud, willful
misconduct or actual malice of the person requesting defense and
indemnification; or
C. The defense of the action or proceeding by the Borough would create a
conflict of interest between the Borough and the person or person
involved.
§ 28-5 INDEMNIFICATION § 28-9
28:59
Chapter 33
LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM
§ 33-1. Findings.
§ 33-2. Creation of LOSAP.
LOSAP is created, in accordance with Chapter 388 of the Laws of 1997
(N.J.S.A. 40A:14-183 et seq.), to reward active volunteer members of CES
for their loyal, diligent and devoted services to the residents of the Borough
and the Township.
§ 33-3. Annual contribution.
A. Judgment or settlement of a civil cause of action relating to a claim
based upon willful fraud, malice, or misconduct.
B. Judgments calling for punitive or exemplary damages, unless there is a
judicial determination that the actions of the officer, employee or
appointee did not constitute actual fraud, actual malice, gross
misconduct, or an intentional tort.
C. Any insurance coverage is available for payment.
D. Where any officer, employee, or appointee is found to have acted in
violation of the Local Government Ethics Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:22-1 et seq.
A. The Borough deems it appropriate and necessary to act to ensure
retention of existing members and to provide them incentives for
recruiting new volunteer members for the Chatham Emergency Squad
(CES); and
B. The Borough has determined that the creation of a Length of Service
Awards Program (LOSAP) will enhance the ability of the Borough to
retain and recruit volunteer CES members.
C. As the CES services both the Borough and the Township of Chatham
averaging roughly equal number of service calls each year, the Borough
and the Township will be concurrently approached to place this on the
next general ballot and to equally divide the LOSAP cost each year (as
described further in the appropriate section below).
A. LOSAP shall provide for fixed, annual contributions (with the ability to
increase for the cost of living, and increase as LOSAP caps are
increased) to a deferred income account for each active member of the
CES who meets the criteria set forth below. The criteria may be
amended hereafter by amendment to this chapter.
B. Such contributions shall be made in accordance with the plan as
established by the Borough and administered in accordance with the
§ 28-9 CHATHAM CODE § 33-3
28:60
§ 33-4. Criteria for eligibility. [Amended 3-12-2018 by Ord. No.
18-04]
For the purposes of this chapter, "active volunteer member" means a person
who has been so designated by the governing board of the Chatham
Emergency Squad (CES) and who is faithfully and actually performing
volunteer service in the Chatham Emergency Squad. LOSAP shall provide
for annual contributions to each eligible, active volunteer member of the
CES, who meets the criteria as follows:
laws of the State of New Jersey, the United States Internal Revenue
Code, and this chapter.
A. The number of points required for an active year of service for an active
volunteer CES member is 100.
B. Under LOSAP, a year of active emergency service shall be credited for
each calendar year in which an active volunteer member accumulates
points that are granted in accordance with a schedule adopted by the
Township Committee and Borough Council, the sponsoring agencies.
The program shall provide that points shall be granted for activities
designated by the sponsoring agencies, which activities may include the
following:
(1) Training courses;
(2) Drills;
(3) Sleep-in or standby. A "standby" means line of duty activity of the
CES, lasting for four hours, not falling under one of the other
categories;
(4) Completion of a one-year elected or appointed position in the
organization;
(5) Election as a delegate to an emergency service convention;
(6) Attendance at official meetings of the sponsoring agency;
(7) Participation in emergency responses; or
(8) Miscellaneous activities including participation in inspections and
other nonemergency first aid or rescue activities not otherwise
listed.
C. An active volunteer member of the CES shall not be eligible if on
disciplinary probation or inactive status. If a CES member has been on
leave of absence (LOA) from duty crews, but is able to attain the points
required as stated below within the calendar year, he/she will be
considered active and eligible for LOSAP.
D. Any new, active volunteer member of the CES shall become eligible to
participate in LOSAP the calendar year he/she becomes "active" as
§ 33-3 INDEMNIFICATION § 33-4
28:61
§ 33-5. Prior service.
§ 33-6. Costs.
§ 33-7. Credit points.
Each active, volunteer member shall be credited with points for volunteer
services provided to the CES, in accordance with the attached schedules.5
§ 33-8. Passage and approval by voters.
Chapter 35
MUTUAL AID
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 15. Police Department — See Ch. 48.
defined above or is longer in inactive status, so long as the credit points
are earned.
A. Upon acceptance of LOSAP, a one-time contribution shall be provided.
LOSAP shall provide for contributions in the amount of $50 per year for
prior services, up to five years, by any active, volunteer member of the
CES at the time this program is accepted.
B. To determine credit for prior services, the standards set forth in § 33-4,
Criteria for eligibility (excluding credit points set forth in § 33-4A
above), shall be used.
A. The estimated costs of the program have been calculated as $40,000
per year ($20,000 for the Borough and $20,000 for the Township).
B. The estimated one-time cost of the program for prior service would be
$8,100 ($4,050 for each the Borough and the Township).
A. The attached ballot question and explanatory statement shall be
submitted to the Clerk of Morris County for the purpose of presenting
said ballot question to the voters of the Borough at the next general
election to be held on November 4, 2003.6
B. In the event this chapter is approved by the voters of the Borough and
the Township of Chatham, LOSAP shall become effective for the
calendar year 2004 as of January 2004.
5. Editor's Note: The schedules are included at the end of this chapter.
6. Editor's Note: Approved by the voters of the Borough of Chatham on November 4, 2003.
§ 33-4 CHATHAM CODE § 35-1
28:62
§ 35-1. Purpose.
The purpose is to formally authorize the execution of the mutual aid
agreement known as the "Morris County Regional Emergency Deployment
System (MCREDS)" with each of the municipalities within the County of
Morris in case of emergency.
§ 35-2. Statutory authority.
§ 35-3. Mutual aid agreements established.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156.1 et seq., there is hereby established the
mutual aid agreement known as the Morris County Regional Emergency
Deployment System (MCREDS) among and between each of the
municipalities within the County of Morris for the provision of mutual aid
in the event of an emergency. The Mayor is hereby authorized to execute
such agreements and the Borough Clerk is hereby authorized and directed
to attest such agreements and affix the municipal seal thereto.
§ 35-4. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon final passage and publication according
to law. It shall become effective with respect to the Borough's agreement
with another municipality when such other municipality has adopted a
reciprocal ordinance to provide mutual aid in the event of an emergency and
has entered into a shared service agreement with the Borough pursuant to
law.
§ 35-5. Terms and conditions.
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156 et seq., in the event of an emergency
the chief or other head of any municipal police department and force or
any park police department or system, municipal fire department and
force, volunteer fire company, or first aid or ambulance squad, corps or
company, or the mayor or chief executive officer of the municipality may
request from the chief or other head of the police department and force
of any other municipality assistance outside the territorial jurisdiction
of the department to which such request is directed for police aid, in
order to protect life and property or to assist in suppressing a riot or
disorder, and while so acting the members of the police department and
force supplying such aid shall have the same powers and authority as
have the members of the police department and force of the
municipality in which such aid is being rendered.
B. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156.1 et seq., the governing bodies of two
or more municipalities may by reciprocal ordinances enter into
agreements with each other for mutual police or fire aid in case of
emergency.
A. The participation by the Borough shall be pursuant to the terms and
conditions set forth in the mutual aid agreement, as adopted and
§ 35-1 INDEMNIFICATION § 35-5
28:63
Chapter 39
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 39, Officers and Employees, comprised of Art. I, Deputy
Borough Clerk, adopted 7-9-1962 by Ord. No. 1-54 (Ch. 24, Art. II, of
the 1975 Code), as amended; Art. II, Borough Administrator, adopted
10-15-1974 by Ord. No. 1-77 (Ch. 24, Art. I, of the 1975 Code),
as amended; Art. IV, Chief Financial Officer, adopted 9-25-1989 by
Ord. No. 18-89 (Ch. 24, Art. IV, of the 1975 Code), as amended; Art.
VI, Municipal Attorney, adopted 4-25-2005 by Ord. No. 05-17; Art.
VII, Municipal Engineer, adopted 4-25-2005 by Ord. No. 05-16; and
Art. VIII, Municipal Housing Liaison, adopted 9-25-2006 by Ord. No.
06-18, was repealed 6-12-2017 by Ord. No. 17-06. See now Ch. 2,
Administrative Code.]
Chapter 43
executed by the Borough, in conjunction with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40A:14-156.1 et seq. and as set forth herein. Any future amendments
or modifications to the mutual aid agreement shall not require an
amendment to this chapter, provided that such amended or modified
agreement is not inconsistent with the terms and conditions set forth
herein and is authorized by proper resolution of the Borough.
B. The mutual aid agreement shall include, but not be limited to, the
following terms and conditions:
(1) Each party agrees that, in the event of an emergency, disaster or
widespread crisis within the municipal jurisdiction of any other
party, the appropriate services and assistance will be provided
upon request to the extent reasonably possible without
endangering persons or property within the municipality rendering
such assistance.
(2) All mutual aid rendered pursuant to the mutual aid agreement and
the Morris County Regional Emergency Deployment System
(MCREDS) shall be provided without charge or expense to the
municipality receiving such assistance. By executing the mutual aid
agreement, each party acknowledges that it shall be solely
responsible for the provision of any and all salary and other
benefits for its personnel, whether paid or volunteer, rendering
assistance within the other municipality, to the same extent as if
such personnel were performing their duties within the
municipality providing the assistance.
(3) The mutual aid agreement shall have an initial term of one year and
shall be automatically renewed for additional and successive oneyear
terms, unless and until one of the parties thereto elects to
terminate the agreement by providing prior written notice to the
other parties to the agreement.
§ 35-5 CHATHAM CODE § 35-5
28:64
PAYROLL ACCOUNT
§ 43-1. Designation of account.
There shall be an account designated as the Borough of Chatham Payroll
Account, and the Chief Financial Officer, upon receipt of a warrant for the
amount due such account, shall deposit it to the credit of such account,
charging the appropriate budgetary accounts therewith.
§ 43-2. Preparation and approval of payroll.
§ 43-3. Warrants.
There shall be issued each month warrants drawn to the order of the
account for compensation due and payable prior to the Mayor and Council's
first regular meeting of the following month in advance:
§ 43-4. Checks. [Amended 9-27-2010 by Ord. No. 10-26]
A. The appropriate department heads, or such other officer or employee as
may be designated by the Mayor and Council shall prepare the
necessary payrolls for all employees, which payrolls shall be duly
certified by the person authorized to certify that the services have been
rendered and the amount specified is in fact due and owing to the
employee or employees. The payroll shall then be approved as provided
for in the case of claims as set forth in § 52-4 of the Code of the Borough
of Chatham, and after approval, shall be paid in due course. Nothing
herein contained shall prevent the payment of salaries in accordance
with the annual Salary Ordinance.
B. At the first regular meeting of the Mayor and Council each month, the
Chief Financial Officer shall submit the necessary payroll for the
amount due the several officers and employees referred to in § 52-3
hereof. The Mayor and Council shall approve a payroll.
A. For all officers and employees whose salaries are on an annual, monthly
or weekly basis.
B. For all officers and employees whose compensation is on a daily or
hourly basis when such compensation has been certified by the
chairman of the appropriate committee to the Borough Chief Financial
Officer.
A. The Chief Financial Officer shall draw and issue checks on this account
to the officers and employees entitled to payment therefrom.
B. In the absence of the Mayor, the Borough Council President is
authorized to sign checks. The Borough Council has the authority to
designate by resolution alternate officials and employees to draw and
issue checks.
§ 35-5 INDEMNIFICATION § 43-5
28:65
§ 43-5. Errors and adjustments.
In case of error or adjustment in the payroll, the Treasurer shall see that
such error or adjustment is properly corrected or made and appropriate
record made thereof.
Chapter 48
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 56.
§ 48-1. Establishment. [Amended 5-28-2002 by Ord. No. 02-10;
4-25-2005 by Ord. No. 05-09; 7-11-2005 by Ord. No. 05-25]
There is hereby created in and for the Borough of Chatham a Police
Department which shall consist of no more than a Chief of Police, one
Captain, two Lieutenants, six Sergeants, and seventeen patrol officers, to
be appointed to these positions by the governing body of the Borough of
Chatham. The decision whether or not to fill the mentioned positions is
within the complete and unfettered discretion of the Borough Council.
§ 48-2. Purpose.
The Police Department shall preserve the public peace; protect life and
property; detect, arrest and prosecute offenders of the laws of New Jersey
and the ordinances of the Borough of Chatham; direct and control traffic;
provide attendance and protection during emergencies; provide
appearances in court; cooperate with all other law enforcement agencies;
and provide training for the efficiency of its members and officers.
§ 48-3. Designation of appropriate authority. [Amended 4-25-2005
by Ord. No. 05-09; 6-11-2007 by Ord. No. 07-23]
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, the Borough Administrator is
hereby designated as the appropriate authority and is hereby vested with
the powers and duties of an appropriate authority as delegated by law and
by this chapter.
§ 48-4. Chief of Police; powers and duties. [Amended 4-25-2005 by
Ord. No. 05-09]
The Mayor shall appoint a Chief of Police with the consent and approval
of Borough Council. The Chief shall be directly responsible to the Borough
Administrator for the efficiency and routine day-to-day operations of the
Police Department. The Chief of Police shall, pursuant to policies
§ 43-5 CHATHAM CODE § 48-4
28:66
established by the Borough Council and consistent with Borough
ordinances:
§ 48-5. Appointment of police officers.
§ 48-6. Rules and regulations. [Amended 4-25-2005 by Ord. No.
05-09; 6-11-2007 by Ord. No. 07-23]
The appropriate authority shall, from time to time as may be necessary,
adopt and amend the rules and regulations for the government and
discipline of the Police Department and members thereof. Said rules and
regulations may fix and provide for the enforcement of such rules and
regulations and the enforcement of penalties for the violation of such rules
and regulations, and all members of the Police Department shall be subject
to such rules and regulations and penalties.
A. Administer and enforce the rules and regulations of the Police
Department and any special emergency directives for the disposition
and discipline of the Department and its officers and personnel.
B. Have, exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties of the
Police Department.
C. Prescribe the duties and assignments of all subordinates and other
personnel.
D. Delegate such of his authority as he may deem necessary for the
efficient operation of the Police Department to be exercised under his
direction and supervision.
E. Report at least monthly to the Borough Administrator in such form as
shall be prescribed by the Borough Council on the operation of the force
during the preceding month, and make such other reports as may be
requested by the Borough Council.
A. All members of the Chatham Borough Police Department shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the consent and approval of the Borough
Council in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118 et seq.
B. Appointments to the Chatham Borough Police Department shall be
made in accordance with the "Personnel Recruitment" provisions of the
Borough of Chatham Personnel Policies and Procedures as adopted by
resolution of the Borough Council.
C. No person shall be appointed to the Police Department who is not
qualified as provided in the New Jersey statutes and in accordance with
the hiring and promotion policies adopted by the Borough Council. The
Borough Council may also require that an applicant for appointment to
the Police Department shall successfully complete a physical, mental
and psychological examination. [Amended 4-25-2005 by Ord. No.
05-09]
§ 48-4 INDEMNIFICATION § 48-7
28:67
§ 48-7. Complaint against officer; hearing. [Amended 4-25-2005 by
Ord. No. 05-09]
§ 48-8. Special police officers.
The Mayor with the consent and approval of Borough Council may appoint
special law enforcement officers pursuant to P.L. 1985 c. 439 (N.J.S.A.
40A:14-146.8 et seq.) and in accordance with the following provisions:
A. Discipline of police officers will be imposed consistent with N.J.S.A.
40A:14-147. The written charges will be signed by the Chief of Police or
his/her designee. If the officer charged desires a hearing, he/she shall
make a written request for said hearing to the Chief of Police. The
Borough Administrator or his/her designee shall be the hearing officer
in any hearing requested by the charged officer. The officer charged
shall have the right to respond in writing to the charges. The hearing
officer shall be the Borough Administrator or his/her designee. If the
written information presented to the hearing officer demonstrates that
there are no material facts at issue, the hearing officer may decide the
matter on the basis of the written record without a testimonial hearing.
If there are material facts in dispute, the hearing officer shall conduct a
hearing, at which the charged officer is entitled to legal representation,
to cross-examine any witnesses called to testify against him, and to
present witnesses on his/her own behalf.
B. At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written
decision, which shall include findings of fact and conclusions as to guilt
and penalty with respect to the charges proffered against the officer. If
the hearing officer is someone other than the Borough Administrator,
the decision shall be forwarded to the Administrator, who, as the
appropriate authority, shall either accept or reject the recommended
decision.
C. The hearing procedures described in Subsection B shall only apply to
matters in the scope of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-147. Verbal and written
reprimands are not within the scope of that statute; therefore, no
hearings need be conducted with respect to verbal and written
reprimands.
A. Term. Special law enforcement officers shall be appointed for terms of
one year, said appointment not to be revoked except for cause after
adequate hearing.
B. Qualifications.
(1) No person shall be appointed as a special law enforcement officer
unless such person meets the qualification requirements of N.J.S.A.
40A:14-146.10. The Chief of Police shall submit candidates for
appointment to the Borough Council. The eligibility and
qualifications of such persons shall be reported to the Borough
Council by the Chief of Police in accordance with N.J.S.A.
§ 48-7 CHATHAM CODE § 48-8
28:68
40A:14-146.10(e). Appointment as a special law enforcement
officer shall become effective upon passage of a resolution to that
effect by the Borough Council.
(2) No person shall commence serving as a special law enforcement
officer unless he has been certified by the Police Training
Commission as provided by N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.11.
C. Classification. Persons appointed as special law enforcement officers
shall upon appointment be designated as either a Class One or Class
Two special law enforcement officer. The classifications shall be based
upon the following standards:
(1) Class One. Officers of this class shall be authorized to perform
routine traffic detail, spectator control and similar duties but shall
not have the power to issue summonses for disorderly persons or
petty disorderly persons offenses, violations of municipal
ordinances or violations of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes. The use
of a firearm by an officer of this class shall be strictly prohibited,
and no Class One officer shall be assigned any duties which may
require the carrying or use of a firearm.
(2) Class Two. Officers of this class shall be authorized to exercise full
powers and duties similar to those of a permanent regularly
appointed full-time police officer. The use of a firearm by an officer
of this class may be authorized only after the officer has been fully
certified as successfully completing training as prescribed by the
Police Training Commission.
(3) Class Three. Officers of this class shall be authorized to exercise
full powers and duties similar to those of a permanent, regularly
appointed full-time police officer while providing security at a
public or nonpublic school or a county college on the school or
college premises during hours when the public or nonpublic school
or county college is normally in session or when it is occupied by
public or nonpublic school or county college students or their
teachers or professors. While on duty in the Borough of Chatham,
an officer may respond to offenses or emergencies off school or
college grounds if they occur in the officer's presence while
traveling to a school facility or county college, but an officer shall
not otherwise be dispatched or dedicated to any assignment off
school or college property. The use of a firearm by Class Three
officers may be permitted under the conditions set forth in N.J.S.A.
40A:14-146.8 et seq. [Added 2-25-2019 by Ord. No. 19-03]
D. Number. No more than six persons shall be designated as Class One
special law enforcement officers. The number of persons designated as
Class Two special law enforcement officers shall not exceed 25% of the
total number of regular police officers. No more than one person shall
be designated as a Class Three special law enforcement officer.
[Amended 2-25-2019 by Ord. No. 19-03]
§ 48-8 INDEMNIFICATION § 48-8
28:69
§ 48-9. Civilian dispatchers. [Amended 4-25-2005 by Ord. No.
05-09]
In addition to the regular members of the police force provided for in § 48-5
and the special police officers provided for in § 48-8, the Mayor with the
consent and approval of the Borough Council may also employ persons 18
years of age or older as civilian dispatchers for the Police Department.
Persons shall be appointed to the office of civilian dispatcher for the Police
Department on an annual basis and shall be citizens of the United States;
shall be able to read, write and speak the English language; and shall be
of good moral character and never have been convicted of a crime. Such
person shall be hired in accordance with the hiring procedures set forth in
the Borough Personnel Policies and Procedures.
§ 48-10. Compensation. [Amended 3-8-2010 by Ord. No. 10-06]
The compensation for all members of the Police Department and the civilian
dispatchers, special officers, and the Executive Administrative Assistant
shall be fixed by the Borough Council.
§ 48-11. Parking enforcement officer.
The Mayor with consent and approval of Borough Council shall appoint
one civilian parking enforcement officer pursuant to P.L. 1987, Chapter 260
(N.J.S.A. 40A:9-154.7).
§ 48-12. Executive Administrative Assistant. [Added 3-8-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-06]
E. Firearms. The carrying of firearms by special law enforcement officers
shall be strictly governed by N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.14(b).
F. Hours of work. No special law enforcement officer may work more than
20 hours per week, except as provided as follows:
(1) Without limitations as to hours during periods of emergency.
(2) A special law enforcement officer may be assigned for not more
than 20 hours per week to provide public safety and law
enforcement services to a public entity, in addition to not more than
20 hours per week performing the duties pursuant to this chapter.
(3) For hours to be determined by the Chief of Police while assigned to
public safety duties for a private entity, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:14-146.14(b).
A. In addition to the regular members of the police force provided for in §
48-5, the special police officers provided for in § 48-8 and the civilian
dispatchers provided for in § 48-9, the Mayor, with the consent and
approval of the Borough Council, shall appoint one civilian Executive
Administrative Assistant for the Chatham Borough Police Department.
§ 48-8 CHATHAM CODE § 48-12
28:70
Chapter 52
PURCHASING AND CLAIMS APPROVAL
§ 52-1. Purchase of materials and services.
Purchases of all materials and services by the Borough shall be in
accordance with the Local Public Contracts Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:11-4.
Procedures for adherence thereto shall be set forth in a Borough purchasing
manual, and the Borough Purchasing Officer shall monitor all purchases
to ensure that said manual and all regulations and policies are being
implemented and followed.
§ 52-2. Submission of claim to Chief Financial Officer.
Any person claiming payment from the Borough of Chatham shall present a
detailed bill of demand, duly certified, to the Chief Financial Officer.
§ 52-3. Certification of claim.
It shall be the duty of the Chief Financial Officer to see that the signature
of a department head or other municipal official having knowledge of the
facts, certifying that materials or services have been received, appears on
every claim. Said certification shall be based on signed delivery slips or
other reasonable procedures.
§ 52-4. Approval by chairman of appropriate committee.
Claims shall then be presented by the Chief Financial Officer to the
Chairman of the Finance Committee for approval. If further approval is
deemed necessary on any claim, it shall be referred to the chairman of the
committee responsible for the purchase.
B. The person appointed to the position of Executive Administrative
Assistant shall be a citizen of the United States; shall be able to read,
write and speak the English language; and shall be of good moral
character and never have been convicted of a crime. Such person shall
be hired in accordance with the hiring procedures set forth in the
Borough Personnel Policies and Procedures, as well as the
qualifications and requirements set forth in the Chatham Borough
Police Department Policies and Procedures.
C. The Executive Administrative Assistant shall not have any statutory law
enforcement powers. The Chief of Police will prescribe the
administrative duties and responsibilities of the Executive
Administrative Assistant, which shall be prescribed in a manner to
promote the efficient and effective operation of the Chatham Borough
Police Department.
§ 48-12 INDEMNIFICATION § 52-5
28:71
§ 52-5. Submission to governing body.
The Chairman of the Finance Committee shall present the claims to the
governing body for formal approval at a regular meeting, and the schedule
of claims approved by the governing body shall be presented to the Mayor
for signature, approving the same for payment.
§ 52-6. Governing body approval or rejection.
Claims shall be considered by the governing body, which shall approve the
same, except that the governing body may reject any claim presented to
it, stating the reason for such rejection. Any disapproved claim shall be
referred back to the Chief Financial Officer with such instructions as the
governing body may give at the time of disapproval.
§ 52-7. Record of claims.
It shall be the duty of the Chief Financial Officer to record all claims in the
official minutes, indicating that the governing body has approved the same
by formal action, with appropriate record as to any claims disapproved or
rejected.
§ 52-8. Approval for payment.
It shall be the duty of the Chief Financial Officer to indicate on said claims
that they have been approved for payment, with the date of approval thereof
noted on the claims.
§ 52-9. Preparation of checks; payment of claims. [Amended
4-25-2005 by Ord. No. 05-09; 9-27-2010 by Ord. No. 10-28]
§ 52-10. Cooperative purchasing.
A. After the Chief Financial Officer has certified that the claims have been
approved, he shall forthwith issue checks for the payment thereof,
which checks shall be signed by the Mayor, the Borough Administrator
and the Chief Financial Officer. After preparing checks for the payment
of claims, he shall record them in proper books of account and
thereafter mail or otherwise distribute the checks to the claimants.
B. In the absence of the Mayor, the Borough Council President is
authorized to sign checks. The Borough Council has the authority to
designate by resolution an alternate signature for the Borough
Administrator and Chief Financial Officer.
A. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:11-11(5), the Borough
Administrator or his/her designee is hereby authorized to enter into a
cooperative purchasing agreement with the lead agency or any other
contracting unit within the County of Morris or adjoining counties for
the purchase of work, materials and supplies.
§ 52-5 CHATHAM CODE § 52-10
28:72
§ 52-11. Qualified Purchasing Agent. [Added 6-11-2012 by Ord. No.
12-10]
Chapter 56
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
Chapter 63
SHADE TREE COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Trees — See Ch. 314.
B. The lead agency entering into contracts on behalf of the Borough of
Chatham shall be responsible for complying with the provisions of the
Local Public Contracts Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.) and all other
provisions of the Revised Statutes of the State of New Jersey.
A. There is hereby created the position of Purchasing Agent for the
Borough of Chatham.
B. The Purchasing Agent shall be appointed by the Mayor and Council of
the Borough of Chatham.
C. The Purchasing Agent is required to possess a valid Qualified
Purchasing Agent certificate, as issued by the New Jersey Division of
Local Government Services, Department of Community Affairs.
D. The Purchasing Agent shall have, on behalf of the Mayor and Council of
the Borough of Chatham, the authority, responsibility and
accountability for the purchasing activity pursuant to Local Public
Contracts Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.) to prepare public advertising
for and to receive bids and requests for proposals for the provision or
performance of goods, services and construction contracts; to award
contracts pursuant to New Jersey law in accordance with the
regulations, forms and procedures promulgated by state regulatory
agencies; the establishment and enforcement of any and all local
purchasing policies adopted by the governing body; the purchasing and
claims approval authority of the Borough Purchasing Officer set forth
by ordinance; and the conduct of any activities as may be necessary or
appropriate to the purchasing function of the Borough of Chatham.
E. Having appointed a Qualified Purchasing Agent pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:11-9, the Borough will take advantage of the higher bid threshold
(currently $36,000 with a quote threshold of 15% or $5,400) pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40A:11-3(a), as such threshold may be adjusted from time to
time pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:11-3(c), but may at its discretion go to bid
at a lower amount to encourage greater competition among bidders.
§ 52-10 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 52-11
56:73
§ 63-1. Creation. [Amended 8-13-1990 by Ord. No. 13-90]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:64-1 et seq., a Municipal Shade
Tree Commission is hereby created.
§ 63-2. Composition; residency requirement; compensation;
vacancies. [Amended 3-22-2004 by Ord. No. 04-08; 4-25-2005 by
Ord. No. 05-09]
The Shade Tree Commission of the Borough of Chatham as established by
ordinance and appointed by the Mayor, is hereby continued consistent with
N.J.S.A. 40:64-1 et seq. and shall be composed of seven members and may
not include more than two additional alternate members. Members shall be
residents of the Borough of Chatham and shall serve without compensation.
Any vacancy occurring by reason of the death, resignation or removal of any
member shall be filled for the unexpired term by a person appointed by the
Mayor with advice and consent of the Council.
§ 63-3. Appointment of members; terms; alternate members.
[Amended 3-22-2004 by Ord. No. 04-08; 6-12-2017 by Ord. No.
17-06]
The terms of all existing Shade Tree Commission members shall continue
in accordance with their original appointment. The members and alternate
members shall be appointed by the Mayor to serve a five-year term. In
the event that the Mayor fails to make a nomination at least 15 days
prior to the date of the second regular public meeting of the Council after
a position becomes vacant, then the appointment shall be made by the
Borough Council by the vote of a majority of the members present at the
meeting, provided that at least three affirmative votes shall be required,
with the Mayor to have no vote thereon except in case of a tie. The terms
of office of the members shall be so arranged that the terms of no more
than two members shall expire in any one year. Alternate members shall be
designated at the time of appointment as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate
No. 2". The terms of the alternate members shall be for five years, except
that the initial terms of the alternate members first appointed shall be five
years for Alternate No. 1 and four years for Alternate No. 2 so that the term
of not more than one alternate member shall expire in any one year. The
alternate members may participate in discussions of the proceedings but
may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member.
A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead
of an alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which
alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
§ 63-4. Organization; compensation of Secretary and employees.
The Commission shall organize, within 30 days after the appointment of
its total membership and annually thereafter, by the election of one of its
§ 52-11 CHATHAM CODE § 63-4
56:74
members as Chairman and the appointment of a Secretary, who need not
but may be a member of the Commission. The salary, if any, of the Secretary
shall be fixed by the governing body of the municipality, and the salaries of
all other employees shall be fixed by the Commission and shall as nearly as
possible conform to salary schedules for corresponding positions within the
municipality.
§ 63-5. Powers and duties.
The Shade Tree Commission appointed and organized pursuant to this
chapter shall have the following powers within the Borough of Chatham:
§ 63-6. Annual submission of estimated expenditures.
A. Exercise full and exclusive control over the regulation, planting and
care of shade and ornamental trees and shrubbery now located or
which may hereafter be planted in any public highway, park or parkway,
except such as are excluded pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:64-1, including the
planting, trimming, spraying, care and protection thereof.
B. Regulate and control the use of the ground surrounding the same so far
as may be necessary for their proper growth, care and protection.
C. Move or require the removal of any tree or part thereof dangerous to
public safety.
D. Encourage arboriculture; make, alter, amend and repeal, in the manner
prescribed for the passage, alteration, amendment and repeal of
ordinances by the governing body of the municipality, any and all
ordinances necessary or proper for carrying out the provisions hereof.
E. Administer treatment to or remove any tree situated upon private
property which is believed to harbor a disease or insects readily
communicable to neighboring healthy trees in the care of the
municipality, and enter upon private property for that purpose with the
consent of the owner thereof, provided the suspected condition is first
confirmed by certificate issued by or on behalf of the Department of
Agriculture.
F. Such other powers as may from time to time be granted by N.J.S.A.
40:64-1 et seq.
A. During the month of November in each year, the Shade Tree
Commission shall certify to the governing body of the municipality the
estimated sum necessary for the proper conduct of its work during the
ensuing fiscal year, which shall include the sums estimated to be
expended for such of the following items as it is anticipated expenditure
will be made:
(1) Payment of wages and salaries of employees.
§ 63-4 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 63-6
56:75
§ 63-7. Violations and penalties; enforcement; authenticity of
ordinances.7
§ 63-8. Disposition of moneys collected.8
All moneys collected in the municipality, either as fines or penalties, for
any violation of a rule or regulation of the Shade Tree Commission, or as a
charge against real estate, under any provision of this chapter, shall be paid
over to the Chief Financial Officer.
§ 63-9. Nonliability for injuries or death.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to make the Shade Tree
Commission or any member thereof responsible for the death or injury of
any person or for an injury to any property or highway tree or shrub.
(2) Expenses of Commission members in discharging official duties,
including expenses incident to attendance at professional
meetings.
(3) Purchase of trees and shrubbery.
(4) Purchase of necessary equipment and materials and the cost of
services for the prudent promotion of the work.
B. The governing body of the municipality shall annually appropriate such
sum as it may deem necessary for said purposes.
A. The Commission may prescribe a fine for the violation of each of its
ordinances in an amount not exceeding $1,500 for each violation, and
the courts which now or hereafter shall have jurisdiction over actions
for the violation of ordinances of the municipality in which the
Commission has been or shall be appointed shall have jurisdiction in
actions for the violation of such ordinances as the Commission shall
enact.
B. The officers authorized by law to serve and execute process in the
aforementioned courts shall be the officers to serve and execute any
process issued out of any court under this chapter.
C. A copy of any ordinance of the Commission, certified to under the hand
of its Secretary or Chairman, shall be received in any court of this state
as full and legal proof of the existence of the ordinance and that all
requirements of law in relation to the ordaining, publishing and making
of the same, so as to make it legal and binding, have been complied
with, unless the contrary be shown.
7. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
8. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 63-6 CHATHAM CODE § 63-9
56:76
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 69
AFFORDABLE HOUSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal Housing Liaison — See Ch. 39, Art.
VIII.
Development fees — See Ch. 119.
Affordable housing fees — See Ch. 129, Art. I.
Land development regulations — See Ch. 165.
§ 69-1. Purpose.
§ 69-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACT — The Fair Housing Act of 1985, P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301
et seq.)
A. This chapter is intended to assure that low- and moderate-income units
in the Borough of Chatham are created with controls on affordability
over time and that low- and moderate-income households shall occupy
these units.
B. The Borough of Chatham Planning Board has adopted a Housing
Element and Fair Share Plan (the "Fair Share Plan") pursuant to the
Municipal Land Use Law at N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. The Fair Share
Plan has been endorsed by the Mayor and Borough Council. The Fair
Share Plan describes the ways the Borough shall address its fair share
for low- and moderate-income housing as determined by the Council on
Affordable Housing (COAH) and documented in the Housing Element.
C. This chapter implements and incorporates the Fair Share Plan and
addresses the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:97, as may be amended and
supplemented.
D. The Borough of Chatham shall file monitoring reports with COAH in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:96, tracking the status of the
implementation of the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan. Any plan
evaluation report of the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan and
monitoring prepared by COAH in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:96 shall be
available to the public at the Borough of Chatham Municipal Building,
Municipal Clerk's Office, 54 Fairmount Avenue, Chatham, New Jersey,
or from COAH at 101 South Broad Street, Trenton, New Jersey, and on
COAH's website, www.nj.gov/dca/affiliates/coah.
§ 63-9 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 69-2
56:77
ADAPTABLE — A unit constructed in compliance with the technical design
standards of the Barrier Free Sub-Code, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The person or entity designated by the
Borough to administer affordable units in accordance with this chapter,
N.J.A.C. 5:93, and UHAC (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26).
AFFIRMATIVE MARKETING — A regional marketing strategy designed
to attract buyers and/or renters of affordable units pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.15.
AFFORDABILITY AVERAGE — The average percentage of median income
at which new restricted units in an affordable housing development are
affordable to low- and moderate-income households.
AFFORDABLE — A sales price or rent level that is within the means of a
low- or moderate-income household as defined within N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4, and,
in the case of an ownership unit, that the sales price for the unit conforms
to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6, as may be amended and
supplemented, and in the case of a rental unit, that the rent for the unit
conforms to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.12, as may be
amended and supplemented.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included in
or approved pursuant to the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan or
otherwise intended to address the Borough's fair share obligation, and
includes, but is not limited to, an inclusionary development, a municipal
construction project or a 100% affordable housing development.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROGRAM(S) — Any mechanism in a municipal
Fair Share Plan prepared or implemented to address a municipality's fair
share obligation.
AFFORDABLE UNIT — A housing unit proposed or created pursuant to
the Act and approved for crediting by the court and/or funded through an
affordable housing trust fund.
AGE-RESTRICTED UNIT — A housing unit designed to meet the needs
of, and exclusively for, the residents of an age-restricted segment of the
population such that: all the residents of the development wherein the unit
is situated are 62 years of age or older; or at least 80% of the units are
occupied by one person who is 55 years of age or older; or the development
has been designated by the Secretary of the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development as "housing for older persons," as defined
in Section 807(b)(2) of the Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C. § 3607.
AGENCY — The New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency
established by P.L. 1983, c. 530 (N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1 et seq.).
ALTERNATIVE LIVING ARRANGEMENT — A structure in which households
live in distinct bedrooms, yet share kitchen and plumbing facilities, central
heat and common areas. Alternative living arrangements include, but are
not limited to: transitional facilities for the homeless; Class A, B, C, D and
E boarding homes as regulated by the State of New Jersey Department
of Community Affairs; residential health care facilities as regulated by the
§ 69-2 CHATHAM CODE § 69-2
56:78
New Jersey Department of Health; group homes for the developmentally
disabled and mentally ill as licensed and/or regulated by the New Jersey
Department of Human Services; and congregate living arrangements.
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE — A facility that is licensed by the New
Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services to provide apartment-style
housing and congregate dining and to assure that assisted living services
are available when needed for four or more adult persons unrelated to the
proprietor and that offers units containing, at a minimum, one unfurnished
room, a private bathroom, a kitchenette and a lockable door on the unit
entrance.
CERTIFIED HOUSEHOLD — A household that has been certified by an
administrative agent as a low-income household or moderate-income
household.
COAH — The Council on Affordable Housing, as established by the New
Jersey Fair Housing Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.).
DCA — The State of New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
DEFICIENT HOUSING UNIT — A housing unit with health and safety code
violations that requires the repair or replacement of a major system. A
major system includes weatherization, roofing, plumbing (including wells),
heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including septic systems), lead paint
abatement and/or load-bearing structural systems.
DEVELOPER — Any person, partnership, association, company or
corporation that is the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or any
land included in a proposed development including the holder of an option
to contract to purchase, or other person having an enforceable proprietary
interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation, or enlargement of any use or change in the use of any building
or other structure, or of any mining, excavation or landfill, and any use or
change in the use of any building or other structure, or land or extension
of use of land, for which permission may be required pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
INCLUSIONARY DEVELOPMENT — A development containing both
affordable units and market rate units. This term includes, but is not limited
to: new construction, the conversion of a nonresidential structure to
residential use and the creation of new affordable units through the gut
rehabilitation or reconstruction of a vacant residential structure.
LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a low-income
household.
LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income equal to 50% or less of the median household income.
MAJOR SYSTEM — The primary structural, mechanical, plumbing,
electrical, fire protection, or occupant service components of a building,
§ 69-2 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 69-2
56:79
which include, but are not limited to, weatherization, roofing, plumbing
(including wells), heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including septic
systems), lead paint abatement and load bearing structural systems.
MARKET-RATE UNITS — Housing not restricted to low- and moderateincome
households that may sell or rent at any price.
MEDIAN INCOME — The median income by household size for the
applicable housing region, as adopted annually by COAH or a successor
entity approved by the court.
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross
annual household income in excess of 50% but less than 80% of the median
household income.
MODERATE-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a
moderate-income household.
NONEXEMPT SALE — Any sale or transfer of ownership other than the
transfer of ownership between spouses; the transfer of ownership between
former spouses ordered as a result of a judicial decree of divorce or judicial
separation, but not including sales to third parties; the transfer of
ownership between family members as a result of inheritance; the transfer
of ownership through an executor's deed to a Class A beneficiary and the
transfer of ownership by court order.
RANDOM SELECTION PROCESS — A process by which currently incomeeligible
households are selected for placement in affordable housing units
such that no preference is given to one applicant over another except for
purposes of matching household income and size with an appropriately
priced and sized affordable unit (e.g., by lottery).
REGIONAL ASSET LIMIT — The maximum housing value in each housing
region affordable to a four-person household with an income at 80% of
the regional median as defined by duly adopted Regional Income Limits
published annually by COAH or a successor entity.
REHABILITATION — The repair, renovation, alteration or reconstruction of
any building or structure, pursuant to the Rehabilitation Sub-Code, N.J.A.C.
5:23-6.
RENT — The gross monthly cost of a rental unit to the tenant, including the
rent paid to the landlord, as well as an allowance for tenant-paid utilities
computed in accordance with allowances published by DCA for its Section
8 program. In assisted living residences, rent does not include charges for
food and services.
RESTRICTED UNIT — A dwelling unit, whether a rental unit or an
ownership unit, that is subject to the affordability controls of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1, as amended and supplemented, but does not include a marketrate
unit financed under UHORP or MONI.
UHAC — The Uniform Housing Affordability Controls set forth in N.J.A.C.
5:80-26 et seq.
§ 69-2 CHATHAM CODE § 69-2
56:80
VERY LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income equal to 30% or less of the median household income for
the applicable housing region.
VERY LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a very
low-income household.
WEATHERIZATION — Building insulation (for attic, exterior walls and crawl
space), siding to improve energy efficiency, replacement storm windows,
replacement storm doors, replacement windows and replacement doors,
and is considered a major system for purposes of a rehabilitation program.
§ 69-3. Applicability.
§ 69-4. General standards for residential development.
Each residential development subject to this chapter shall comply with the
following:
A. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all affordable housing
developments and affordable housing units that currently exist and that
are proposed to be created within the Borough of Chatham pursuant to
the Borough's most recently adopted Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan.
B. In addition, any property in the Borough that is currently zoned for
nonresidential uses and that is subsequently rezoned for residential
purposes or receives a zoning change or a use variance to permit
residential development, or receives a zoning change or a density
variance to permit higher density residential development, and
provided such residential development provides a sufficient
compensatory benefit in terms of the density of development permitted,
shall provide an affordable housing set-aside of 15% if the affordable
units will be for rent and 20% if the affordable units will be for sale. The
determination of a sufficient compensatory benefit shall be made by the
reviewing authority based upon prevailing legislation and/or case law.
C. The following sections shall apply to all developments that contain lowand
moderate-income housing units, including any currently
unanticipated future developments that will provide low-and moderateincome
housing units.
A. Residential development with five or more units shall set aside a
minimum of 20% of the total number of units as affordable housing for
owner-occupied development and 15% for rental development.
B. Residential development with fewer than five units shall make a
payment in lieu of on-site construction of affordable units of the greater
of the residential development fee set forth at § 119-4 or a pro rata fair
share contribution to the Borough's Affordable Housing Trust Fund
based on the fractional affordable housing requirement for said
§ 69-2 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 69-4
56:81
§ 69-5. Alternative living arrangements.
The administration of an alternative living arrangement shall be in
compliance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.8 and UHAC, with the following exceptions:
§ 69-6. Phasing schedule for inclusionary zoning.
In inclusionary developments the following schedule shall be followed:
development calculated in accordance with Subsection D of this
section.
C. When any calculation of the percentage of affordable units required to
be provided results in a fractional unit of 1/2 or more, the fraction shall
be rounded up to the next whole unit. When a calculation results in a
faction of less than 1/2, the fraction shall be rounded down to the
previous whole unit.
D. Any fractional affordable housing requirement shall be addressed by a
payment in lieu of on-site construction of affordable housing, which
shall be placed in the Affordable Housing Trust Fund established
pursuant to Chapter 119. The amount of the payment shall be
consistent with COAH regulations and shall be negotiated with the
Borough based on consideration of the anticipated cost of providing
affordable housing units. For purposes of this chapter, the payment in
lieu of affordable housing shall initially be established as $180,000
multiplied by the fractional affordable housing requirement as
calculated to two decimal points. The payment in lieu of affordable
housing is presumptively the cost to construct an affordable unit in the
Borough. The Planning Board or Zoning Board, as appropriate, may
adjust from time to time the presumptive amount based upon the
appropriate evidence.
A. Affirmative marketing (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15), provided, however, that the
units or bedrooms may be affirmatively marketed by the provider in
accordance with an alternative plan approved by the Court;
B. Affordability average and bedroom distribution (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3).
C. With the exception of units established with capital funding through a
twenty-year operating contract with the Department of Human
Services, Division of Developmental Disabilities, alternative living
arrangements shall have at least thirty-year controls on affordability in
accordance with UHAC, unless an alternative commitment is approved
by the court.
D. The service provider for the alternative living arrangement shall act as
the administrative agent for the purposes of administering the
affirmative marketing and affordability requirements for the alternative
living arrangement.
§ 69-4 CHATHAM CODE § 69-6
56:82
Maximum Percentage of Market-
Rate Units Completed
Minimum Percentage of Lowand
Moderate-Income Units
Completed
25 0
25+1 10
50 50
75 75
90 100
§ 69-7. New construction.
A. Low/moderate split and bedroom distribution of affordable housing
units:
(1) The fair share obligation shall be divided equally between low- and
moderate-income units, except that where there is an odd number
of affordable housing units, the extra unit shall be a low income
unit. At least 13% of all restricted rental units shall be very lowincome
units. The very low-income units shall be counted as part of
the required number of low income units within the development.
(2) In each affordable development, at least 50% of the restricted units
within each bedroom distribution shall be low-income units.
(3) Affordable developments that are not age-restricted shall be
structured in conjunction with realistic market demands such that:
(a) The combined number of efficiency and one-bedroom units
shall be no greater than 20% of the total low- and moderateincome
units;
(b) At least 30% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be two
bedroom units;
(c) At least 20% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
three bedroom units; and
(d) The remaining units may be allocated among two and three
bedroom units at the discretion of the developer.
(4) Affordable developments that are age-restricted shall be structured
such that the number of bedrooms shall equal the number of agerestricted
low- and moderate-income units within the inclusionary
development. This standard may be met by having all one-bedroom
units or by having a two-bedroom unit for each efficiency unit.
B. Accessibility requirements:
(1) The first floor of all restricted townhouse dwelling units and all
restricted units in all other multistory buildings shall be subject to
§ 69-6 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 69-7
56:83
the technical design standards of the Barrier Free Sub-Code,
N.J.A.C. 5:23-7 and the following.
(2) All restricted townhouse dwelling units and all restricted units in
other multistory buildings in which a restricted dwelling unit is
attached to at least one other dwelling unit shall have the following
features:
(a) An adaptable toilet and bathing facility on the first floor; and
(b) An adaptable kitchen on the first floor; and
(c) An interior accessible route of travel on the first floor; and
(d) An adaptable room that can be used as a bedroom, with a door
or the casing for the installation of a door, on the first floor;
and
(e) If not all of the foregoing requirements in Subsections B(2)(a)
through B(2)(d) can be satisfied, then an interior accessible
route of travel must be provided between stories within an
individual unit, but if all of the terms of Subsections B(2)(a)
through B(2)(d) above have been satisfied, then an interior
accessible route of travel shall not be required between stories
within an individual unit; and
(f) An accessible entranceway as set forth at P.L. 2005, c. 350
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-311a et seq.) and the Barrier Free Sub-Code,
N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, or evidence that the Borough has collected
funds from the developer sufficient to make 10% of the
adaptable entrances in the development accessible:
[1] Where a unit has been constructed with an adaptable
entrance, upon the request of a disabled person who is
purchasing or will reside in the dwelling unit, an
accessible entrance shall be installed.
[2] To this end, the builder of restricted units shall deposit
funds within the Borough's Affordable Housing Trust Fund
sufficient to install accessible entrances in 10% of the
affordable units that have been constructed with
adaptable entrances.
[3] The funds deposited above shall be used by the Borough
for the sole purpose of making the adaptable entrance of
an affordable unit accessible when requested to do so by a
person with a disability who occupies or intends to occupy
the unit and requires an accessible entrance.
[4] The developer of the restricted units shall submit a design
plan and cost estimate to the Construction Official of the
Borough for the conversion of adaptable to accessible
entrances.
§ 69-7 CHATHAM CODE § 69-7
56:84
[5] Once the Construction Official has determined that the
design plan to convert the unit entrances from adaptable
to accessible meet the requirements of the Barrier Free
Sub-Code, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, and that the cost estimate of
such conversion is reasonable, payment shall be made to
the Borough's Affordable Housing Trust Fund in care of
the Borough Treasurer who shall ensure that the funds are
deposited into the Affordable Housing Trust Fund and
appropriately earmarked.
(g) Full compliance with the foregoing provisions shall not be
required where an entity can demonstrate that it is site
impracticable to meet the requirements. Determinations of site
impracticability shall be in compliance with the Barrier Free
Sub-Code, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
C. Design:
(1) In inclusionary developments, to the extent possible, low- and
moderate-income units shall be integrated with the market units.
(2) In inclusionary developments, low- and moderate-income units
shall have access to all of the same common elements and facilities
as the market units.
D. Maximum rents and sales prices:
(1) In establishing rents and sales prices of affordable housing units,
the administrative agent shall follow the procedures set forth in
UHAC, utilizing the regional income limits established by COAH or
a successor entity.
(2) The maximum rent for restricted rental units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households earning
no more than 60% of median income, and the average rent for
restricted rental units shall be affordable to households earning no
more than 52% of median income.
(3) The developers and/or municipal sponsors of restricted rental units
shall establish at least one rent for each bedroom type for both lowincome
and moderate-income units, provided that at least 10% of
all low- and moderate-income rental units shall be affordable to
very low-income households.
(4) The maximum sales price of restricted ownership units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households earning
no more than 70% of median income, and each affordable
development must achieve an affordability average of 55% for
restricted ownership units; in achieving this affordability average,
moderate-income ownership units must be available for at least
three different sales prices for each bedroom type, and low-income
§ 69-7 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 69-7
56:85
ownership units must be available for at least two different sales
prices for each bedroom type.
(5) In determining the initial sales prices and rent levels for
compliance with the affordability average requirements for
restricted units other than assisted living facilities and agerestricted
developments, the following standards shall be used:
(a) A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
(b) A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one and one-half
person household;
(c) A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a three-person
household;
(d) A three-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a four and one-half
person household; and
(e) A four-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a six-person
household.
(6) In determining the initial sales prices and rents for compliance with
the affordability average requirements for restricted units in
assisted living facilities and age-restricted developments, the
following standards shall be used:
(a) A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
(b) A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one and one-half
person household; and
(c) A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a two-person
household or to two one-person households.
(7) The initial purchase price for all restricted ownership units shall be
calculated so that the monthly carrying cost of the unit, including
principal and interest (based on a mortgage loan equal to 95% of
the purchase price and the Federal Reserve H.15 rate of interest),
taxes, homeowner and private mortgage insurance and
condominium or homeowner association fees do not exceed 28% of
the eligible monthly income of the appropriate size household as
determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be amended and
supplemented; provided, however, that the price shall be subject to
the affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may
be amended and supplemented.
(8) The initial rent for a restricted rental unit shall be calculated so as
not to exceed 30% of the eligible monthly income of the appropriate
size household, including an allowance for tenant-paid utilities, as
determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be amended and
supplemented; provided, however, that the rent shall be subject to
§ 69-7 CHATHAM CODE § 69-7
56:86
§ 69-8. Utilities.
§ 69-9. Occupancy standards.
In referring certified households to specific restricted units, the
administrative agent shall, to the extent feasible and without causing an
undue delay in the occupancy of a unit, strive to:
§ 69-10. Control periods for restricted ownership units;
enforcement mechanisms.
the affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may
be amended and supplemented.
(9) The price of owner-occupied low- and moderate-income units may
increase annually based on the percentage increase in the regional
median income limit for each housing region. In no event shall the
maximum resale price established by the administrative agent be
lower than the last recorded purchase price.
(10) The rent of low- and moderate-income units may be increased
annually based on the permitted percentage increase in the
Housing Consumer Price Index for the United States. This increase
shall not exceed 9% in any one year. Rents for units constructed
pursuant to low-income housing tax credit regulations shall be
indexed pursuant to the regulations governing low-income housing
tax credits.
A. Affordable units shall utilize the same type of heating source as market
units within an inclusionary development.
B. Tenant-paid utilities included in the utility allowance shall be set forth
in the lease and shall be consistent with the utility allowance approved
by DCA for its Section 8 program.
A. Provide an occupant for each bedroom;
B. Provide children of different sexes with separate bedrooms;
C. Provide separate bedrooms for parents and children; and
D. Prevent more than two persons from occupying a single bedroom.
A. Control periods for restricted ownership units shall be in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5, as may be amended and supplemented, and
each restricted ownership unit shall remain subject to the requirements
of this chapter for a period of at least 30 years, until the Borough takes
action to release the unit from such requirements; prior to such action,
a restricted ownership unit must remain subject to the requirements of
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented.
§ 69-7 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 69-10
56:87
§ 69-11. Price restrictions for restricted ownership units;
homeowner association fees; resale prices.
Price restrictions for restricted ownership units shall be in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented, including:
B. The affordability control period for a restricted ownership unit shall
commence on the date the initial certified household takes title to the
unit.
C. Prior to the issuance of the initial certificate of occupancy for a
restricted ownership unit and upon each successive sale during the
period of restricted ownership, the administrative agent shall
determine the restricted price for the unit and shall also determine the
nonrestricted, fair market value of the unit based on either an appraisal
or the unit's equalized assessed value without the restrictions in place.
D. At the time of the initial sale of the unit, the initial purchaser shall
execute and deliver to the administrative agent a recapture note
obligating the purchaser (as well as the purchaser's heirs, successors
and assigns) to repay, upon the first nonexempt sale after the unit's
release from the restrictions set forth in this chapter, an amount equal
to the difference between the unit's nonrestricted fair market value and
its restricted price, and the recapture note shall be secured by a
recapture lien evidenced by a duly recorded mortgage on the unit.
E. The affordability controls set forth in this chapter shall remain in effect
despite the entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure with
respect to restricted ownership units.
F. A restricted ownership unit shall be required to obtain a continuing
certificate of occupancy or a certified statement from the Construction
Official stating that the unit meets all code standards upon the first
transfer of title following the removal of the restrictions provided under
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5(a), as may be amended and supplemented.
A. The initial purchase price for a restricted ownership unit shall be
approved by the administrative agent.
B. The administrative agent shall approve all resale prices, in writing and
in advance of the resale, to assure compliance with the foregoing
standards.
C. The master deeds of inclusionary developments shall provide no
distinction between the condominium or homeowner association fees
and special assessments paid by low- and moderate-income purchasers
and those paid by market purchasers.
D. The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
administrative agent to increase the maximum sales price for the unit
on the basis of anticipated capital improvements. Eligible capital
§ 69-10 CHATHAM CODE § 69-11
56:88
§ 69-12. Buyer income eligibility.
§ 69-13. Limitations on indebtedness secured by ownership unit;
subordination.
improvements shall be those that render the unit suitable for a larger
household or the addition of a bathroom. See § 69-14.
A. Buyer income eligibility for restricted ownership units shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and
supplemented, such that low-income ownership units shall be reserved
for households with a gross household income less than or equal to 50%
of median income and moderate-income ownership units shall be
reserved for households with a gross household income less than 80%
of median income.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, the administrative agent may,
upon approval by the Borough Council, and subject to the court's
approval, permit moderate-income purchasers to buy low-income units
in housing markets if the administrative agent determines that there is
an insufficient number of eligible low-income purchasers to permit
prompt occupancy of the units. All such low-income units to be sold to
moderate-income households shall retain the required pricing and
pricing restrictions for low-income units.
C. A certified household that purchases a restricted ownership unit must
occupy it as the certified household's principal residence and shall not
lease the unit; provided, however, that the administrative agent may
permit the owner of a restricted ownership unit, upon application and a
showing of hardship, to lease the restricted unit to another certified
household for a period not to exceed one year.
D. The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted ownership unit when the household is a low-income
household or a moderate-income household, as applicable to the unit,
and the estimated monthly housing cost for the particular unit
(including principal, interest, taxes, homeowner and private mortgage
insurance and condominium or homeowner association fees, as
applicable) does not exceed 33% of the household's eligible monthly
income.
A. Prior to incurring any indebtedness to be secured by a restricted
ownership unit, the owner shall apply to the administrative agent for a
determination in writing that the proposed indebtedness complies with
the provisions of this section, and the administrative agent shall issue
such determination prior to the owner incurring such indebtedness.
B. With the exception of first purchase money mortgages, neither an
owner nor a lender shall at any time cause or permit the total
indebtedness secured by a restricted ownership unit to exceed 95% of
the maximum allowable resale price of the unit, as such price is
§ 69-11 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 69-13
56:89
§ 69-14. Capital improvements to ownership units.
§ 69-15. Control periods for restricted rental units.
determined by the administrative agent in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.6(b).
A. The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
administrative agent to increase the maximum sales price for the unit
on the basis of capital improvements made since the purchase of the
unit. Eligible capital improvements shall be those that render the unit
suitable for a larger household or that add an additional bathroom. In
no event shall the maximum sales price of an improved housing unit
exceed the limits of affordability for the larger household.
B. Upon the resale of a restricted ownership unit, all items of property that
are permanently affixed to the unit or were included when the unit was
initially restricted (for example, refrigerator, range, washer, dryer,
dishwasher, wall-to-wall carpeting) shall be included in the maximum
allowable resale price. Other items may be sold to the purchaser at a
reasonable price that has been approved by the administrative agent at
the time of the signing of the agreement to purchase. The purchase of
central air conditioning installed subsequent to the initial sale of the
unit and not included in the base price may be made a condition of the
unit resale provided the price, which shall be subject to ten-year,
straight-line depreciation, has been approved by the administrative
agent. Unless otherwise approved by the administrative agent, the
purchase of any property other than central air conditioning shall not
be made a condition of the unit resale. The owner and the purchaser
must personally certify at the time of closing that no unapproved
transfer of funds for the purpose of selling and receiving property has
taken place at the time of or as a condition of resale.
A. Control periods for restricted rental units shall be in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.11, as may be amended and supplemented, and each
restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the requirements of this
chapter for a period of at least 30 years, until the Borough takes action
to release the unit from such requirements. Prior to such action, a
restricted rental unit must remain subject to the requirements of
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented.
B. Deeds of all real property that include restricted rental units shall
contain deed restriction language. The deed restriction shall have
priority over all mortgages on the property, and the deed restriction
shall be filed by the developer or seller with the records office of the
County of Morris. A copy of the filed document shall be provided to the
administrative agent within 30 days of the receipt of a certificate of
occupancy.
C. A restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the affordability controls
of this chapter despite the occurrence of any of the following events:
§ 69-13 CHATHAM CODE § 69-15
56:90
§ 69-16. Rent restrictions for rental units; leases.
§ 69-17. Tenant income eligibility.
(1) Sublease or assignment of the lease of the unit;
(2) Sale or other voluntary transfer of the ownership of the unit; or
(3) The entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure on the
property containing the unit.
A. A written lease shall be required for all restricted rental units and
tenants shall be responsible for security deposits and the full amount of
the rent as stated on the lease. A copy of the current lease for each
restricted rental unit shall be provided to the administrative agent.
B. No additional fees or charges shall be added to the approved rent
(except, in the case of units in an assisted living residence, to cover the
customary charges for food and services) without the express written
approval of the administrative agent.
C. Application fees (including the charge for any credit check) shall not
exceed 5% of the monthly rent of the applicable restricted unit and shall
be payable to the administrative agent to be applied to the costs of
administering the controls applicable to the unit as set forth in this
chapter.
D. No rent control ordinance or other pricing restriction shall be
applicable to either the market units or the affordable units in any
development in which at least 15% of the total number of dwelling units
are restricted rental units in compliance with this chapter.
A. Tenant income eligibility shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.13, as may be amended and supplemented, and shall be
determined as follows:
(1) Very low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than or equal to 30% of median
income.
(2) Low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with a
gross household income less than or equal to 50% of median
income.
(3) Moderate-income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than 80% of median income.
B. The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted rental unit when the household is a very low-income
household, low-income household or a moderate-income household, as
applicable to the unit, and the rent proposed for the unit does not
exceed 35% (40% for age-restricted units) of the household's eligible
monthly income as determined pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.16, as may
§ 69-15 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 69-17
56:91
§ 69-18. Municipal Housing Liaison.
be amended and supplemented; provided, however, that this limit may
be exceeded if one or more of the following circumstances exists:
(1) The household currently pays more than 35% (40% for households
eligible for age-restricted units) of its gross household income for
rent, and the proposed rent will reduce its housing costs;
(2) The household has consistently paid more than 35% (40% for
households eligible for age-restricted units) of eligible monthly
income for rent in the past and has proven its ability to pay;
(3) The household is currently in substandard or overcrowded living
conditions;
(4) The household documents the existence of assets with which the
household proposes to supplement the rent payments; or
(5) The household documents reliable anticipated third-party
assistance from an outside source such as a family member in a
form acceptable to the administrative agent and the owner of the
unit.
C. The applicant shall file documentation sufficient to establish the
existence of the circumstances in Subsections B(1) through B(5) above
with the administrative agent, who shall counsel the household on
budgeting.
A. There is hereby established the position of Municipal Housing Liaison
for the Borough of Chatham. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be
appointed by resolution of the Mayor and Borough Council and may be
a full or part-time municipal employee. The Municipal Housing Liaison
shall be approved by COAH or the court, as appropriate, and shall be
duly qualified through a training program sponsored by Affordable
Housing Professionals of New Jersey before assuming the duties of
Municipal Housing Liaison.
B. Compensation shall be fixed by the Mayor and Borough Council at the
time of the appointment of the Municipal Housing Liaison.
C. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight and
administration of the affordable housing program for the Borough,
including the following responsibilities which may not be contracted
out to the administrative agent:
(1) Serving as the Borough's primary point of contact for all inquiries
from the state, affordable housing providers, administrative agents
and interested households;
(2) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in the Borough's fair
share plan;
§ 69-17 CHATHAM CODE § 69-18
56:92
§ 69-19. Administrative agent.
The administrative agent shall perform the duties and responsibilities of
an administrative agent as set forth in UHAC, including those set forth in
Sections 5:80-26.14, 16 and 18 thereof, which includes:
(3) Compiling, verifying and submitting annual monitoring reports as
may be required by the Court;
(4) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
administrative agents, as needed; and
(5) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring and affirmative marketing at least
annually and more often as needed.
D. Subject to approval by COAH or the Court, as appropriate, the Borough
may contract with or authorize a consultant, authority, government
entity or any agency charged by the Mayor and Borough Council to act
as the Borough's administrative agent, which entity shall have the
responsibility of administering the affordable housing program of the
Borough of Chatham as set forth herein, except for those
responsibilities which cannot be contracted out pursuant to Subsection
C above. If the Borough contracts with another entity to administer all
or any part of the affordable housing program, including the
affordability controls and affirmative marketing plan, the Municipal
Housing Liaison shall supervise the contracting administrative agent.
E. An operating manual for each affordable housing program shall be
prepared and provided by the administrative agent(s), to be adopted by
resolution of the Mayor and Borough Council and subject to approval of
COAH or the Court, as appropriate. The operating manual(s) shall be
available for public inspection in the office of the Borough Clerk, in the
office of the Municipal Housing Liaison, and in the office(s) of the
administrative agent(s).
A. Affirmative marketing:
(1) Conducting an outreach process to affirmatively market affordable
housing units in accordance with the Affirmative Marketing Plan of
the Borough and the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15; and
(2) Providing counseling or contracting to provide counseling services
to low- and moderate-income applicants on subjects such as
budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental lease
requirements, and landlord/tenant law.
B. The fees of the administrative agent shall be paid by the developers/
owners/sellers of the affordable units on a fee for service basis in
accordance with the fee schedule referenced in § 69-22 herein below.
C. Household certification:
§ 69-18 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 69-19
56:93
(1) Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on interviews
with interested households;
(2) Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient documentation of
gross income and assets upon which to base a determination of
income eligibility for a low- or moderate-income unit;
(3) Providing written notification to each applicant as to the
determination of eligibility or noneligibility;
(4) Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units execute a
certificate substantially in the form, as applicable, of either the
ownership or rental certificates set forth in Appendixes J and K of
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.;
(5) Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible applicant
households living in the housing region and eligible applicant
households with members working in the housing region where the
units are located; and
(6) Employing a random selection process as provided in the
affirmative marketing plan of the Borough when referring
households for certification to affordable units.
D. Affordability controls:
(1) Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed restrictions
and mortgages for recording at the time of conveyance of title of
each restricted unit;
(2) Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for its
control period, including the recorded deed with restrictions,
recorded mortgage and note, as appropriate;
(3) Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and cancellation
of the mortgage note are effectuated and properly filed with the
Morris County Register of Deeds or Morris County Clerk's office
after the termination of the affordability controls for each
restricted unit;
(4) Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and
(5) Ensuring the issuance of continuing certificates of occupancy or
certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10.
E. Resales and rerentals:
(1) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of communicating
information between owners and the administrative agent
regarding the availability of restricted units for resale or rerental;
and
§ 69-19 CHATHAM CODE § 69-19
56:94
(2) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of communicating
information to low-and moderate-income households regarding the
availability of restricted units for resale or re-rental.
F. Processing requests from unit owners:
(1) Reviewing and approving requests for determination from owners
of restricted units who wish to take out home equity loans or
refinance during the term of their ownership that the amount of
indebtedness to be incurred will not violate the terms of this
chapter;
(2) Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices from
owners of restricted units who wish to make capital improvements
to the units that would affect the selling price, such authorizations
to be limited to those improvements resulting in additional
bedrooms or bathrooms and the depreciated cost of central air
conditioning systems;
(3) Notifying the municipality of an owner's intent to sell a restricted
unit; and
(4) Making determinations on requests by owners of restricted units
for hardship waivers.
G. Enforcement:
(1) Securing annually from the municipality a list of all affordable
housing units for which tax bills are mailed to absentee owners,
and notifying all such owners that they must either move back to
their unit or sell it;
(2) Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted units, at
the earliest point of contact in the processing of the project or
development, written acknowledgement of the requirement that no
restricted unit can be offered, or in any other way committed, to
any person, other than a household duly certified to the unit by the
administrative agent;
(3) The posting annually in all rental properties, including two-family
homes, of a notice as to the maximum permitted rent together with
the telephone number of the administrative agent where
complaints of excess rent or other charges can be made;
(4) Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable dwelling units,
reminding them of the notices and requirements outlined in
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4;
(5) Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent payments to the
municipality's Affordable Housing Trust Fund; and
(6) Creating and publishing a written operating manual for each
affordable housing program administered by the administrative
§ 69-19 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 69-19
56:95
§ 69-20. Affirmative marketing requirements.
agent, to be approved by the Borough Council and the Court,
setting forth procedures for administering the affordability
controls.
H. Additional responsibilities:
(1) The administrative agent shall have the authority to take all actions
necessary and appropriate to carry out its responsibilities
hereunder.
(2) The administrative agent shall prepare monitoring reports for
submission to the Municipal Housing Liaison in time to meet any
monitoring requirements and deadlines imposed by the court.
(3) The administrative agent shall attend continuing education
sessions on affordability controls, compliance monitoring, and
affirmative marketing at least annually and more often as needed.
I. The Municipal Housing Liaison and the administrative agent shall have
authority to take all actions necessary and appropriate to carry out
their respective responsibilities hereunder, including joint consultation
concerning any of the above responsibilities. If no administrative agent
is designated by the Mayor and Borough Council, the Municipal
Housing Liaison shall have the powers and duties set forth in this
section, subject to the approval of the court as to the qualification of the
Municipal Housing Liaison to undertake such powers and duties and
subject to the Municipal Housing Liaison's attendance at continuing
education sessions as set forth in § 69-19G(3) above.
A. The Borough shall adopt by resolution an affirmative marketing plan,
subject to approval of the Court, that is compliant with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.15, as may be amended and supplemented.
B. The affirmative marketing plan is a regional marketing strategy
designed to attract buyers and/or renters of all majority and minority
groups, regardless of race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry,
marital or familial status, gender, affectional or sexual orientation,
disability, age or number of children to housing units which are being
marketed by a developer, sponsor or owner of affordable housing. The
affirmative marketing plan is intended to target those potentially
eligible persons who are least likely to apply for affordable units in that
region. It is a continuing program that directs marketing activities
toward Housing Region 2 and is required to be followed throughout the
period of restriction.
C. The affirmative marketing plan shall provide a regional preference for
all households that live and/or work in Housing Region 2, comprised of
Morris, Essex, Union and Warren Counties.
§ 69-19 CHATHAM CODE § 69-20
56:96
§ 69-21. Enforcement.
D. The municipality has the ultimate responsibility for adopting the
affirmative marketing plan and for the proper administration of the
affirmative marketing program, including initial sales and rentals and
resales and rerentals. The administrative agent designated by the
Borough shall implement the affirmative marketing plan to assure the
affirmative marketing of all affordable units.
E. In implementing the affirmative marketing plan, the administrative
agent shall provide a list of counseling services to low- and moderateincome
applicants on subjects such as budgeting, credit issues,
mortgage qualification, rental lease requirements, and landlord/tenant
law.
F. The affirmative marketing plan shall describe the media to be used in
advertising and publicizing the availability of housing. In implementing
the affirmative marketing plan, the administrative agent shall consider
the use of language translations where appropriate.
G. The affirmative marketing process for available affordable units shall
begin at least four months (120 days) prior to the expected date of
occupancy.
H. Applications for affordable housing shall be available in several
locations, including, at a minimum, the County Administration Building
and/or the county library for each county within the housing region;
Borough Hall and the Library of the Chathams; and the developer's
rental office. Applications shall be mailed to prospective applicants
upon request.
I. The costs of advertising and affirmative marketing of the affordable
units shall be the responsibility of the developer, sponsor or owner.
A. Upon the occurrence of a breach of any of the regulations governing the
affordable unit by an owner, developer or tenant, the municipality shall
have all remedies provided at law or equity, including but not limited to
foreclosure, tenant eviction, a requirement for household
recertification, acceleration of all sums due under a mortgage,
recuperation of any funds from a sale in violation of the regulations,
injunctive relief to prevent further violation of the regulations, entry on
the premises, and specific performance.
B. After providing written notice of a violation to an owner, developer or
tenant of a low- or moderate-income unit and advising the owner,
developer or tenant of the penalties for such violations, the municipality
may take the following action(s) against the owner, developer or tenant
for any violation that remains uncured for a period of 60 days after
service of the written notice:
(1) The municipality may file a court action pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2A:58-11 alleging a violation or violations of the regulations
§ 69-20 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 69-21
56:97
governing the affordable housing unit. If the owner, developer or
tenant is adjudged by the court to have violated any provision
of the regulations governing affordable housing units, the owner,
developer or tenant shall be subject to one or more of the following
penalties, at the discretion of the court:
(a) A fine of not more than $500 per day or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed 90 days, or both, provided that each and
every day that the violation continues or exists shall be
considered a separate and specific violation of these provisions
and not a continuation of the initial offense;
(b) In the case of an owner who has rented a low- or moderateincome
unit in violation of the regulations governing affordable
housing units, payment into the Borough affordable housing
trust fund of the gross amount of rent illegally collected;
(c) In the case of an owner who has rented a low- or moderateincome
unit in violation of the regulations governing affordable
housing units, payment of an innocent tenant's reasonable
relocation costs, as determined by the court.
(2) The municipality may file a court action in the Superior Court
seeking a judgment that would result in the termination of the
owner's equity or other interest in the unit, in the nature of a
mortgage foreclosure. Any such judgment shall be enforceable as if
the same were a judgment of default of the first purchase money
mortgage and shall constitute a lien against the low- or moderateincome
unit.
(a) The judgment shall be enforceable, at the option of the
municipality, by means of an execution sale by the sheriff, at
which time the low- and moderate-income unit of the violating
owner shall be sold at a sale price which is not less than the
amount necessary to fully satisfy and pay off any first purchase
money mortgage and prior liens and the costs of the
enforcement proceedings incurred by the municipality,
including attorney's fees. The violating owner shall have his
right to possession terminated as well as his title conveyed
pursuant to the sheriff's sale.
(b) The proceeds of the sheriff's sale shall first be applied to satisfy
the first purchase money mortgage lien and any prior liens
upon the low- and moderate-income unit. The excess, if any,
shall be applied to reimburse the municipality for any and all
costs and expenses incurred in connection with either the
court action resulting in the judgment of violation or the
sheriff's sale. In the event that the proceeds from the sheriff's
sale are insufficient to reimburse the municipality in full as
aforesaid, the violating owner shall be personally responsible
for the full extent of such deficiency, in addition to any and all
§ 69-21 CHATHAM CODE § 69-21
56:98
costs incurred by the municipality in connection with collecting
such deficiency. In the event that a surplus remains after
satisfying all of the above, such surplus, if any, shall be placed
in escrow by the municipality for the owner and shall be held
in such escrow for a maximum period of two years or until
such earlier time as the owner shall make a claim with the
municipality for such. Failure of the owner to claim such
balance within the two-year period shall automatically result
in a forfeiture of such balance to the municipality. Any interest
accrued or earned on such balance while being held in escrow
shall belong to and shall be paid to the municipality, whether
such balance shall be paid to the owner or forfeited to the
municipality.
(c) Foreclosure by the municipality due to violation of the
regulations governing affordable housing units shall not
extinguish the restrictions of the regulations governing
affordable housing units as the same apply to the low- and
moderate-income unit. Title shall be conveyed to the purchaser
at the sheriff's sale, subject to the restrictions and provisions of
the regulations governing the affordable housing unit. The
owner determined to be in violation of the provisions of this
plan and from whom title and possession were taken by means
of the sheriff's sale shall not be entitled to any right of
redemption.
(d) If there are no bidders at the sheriff's sale, or if insufficient
amounts are bid to satisfy the first purchase money mortgage
and any prior liens, the municipality may acquire title to the
low- and moderate-income unit by satisfying the first purchase
money mortgage and any prior liens and crediting the violating
owner with an amount equal to the difference between the first
purchase money mortgage and any prior liens and costs of the
enforcement proceedings, including legal fees and the
maximum resale price for which the low- and moderate-income
unit could have been sold under the terms of the regulations
governing affordable housing units. This excess shall be
treated in the same manner as the excess which would have
been realized from an actual sale as previously described.
(e) Failure of the low- and moderate-income unit to be either sold
at the sheriff's sale or acquired by the municipality shall
obligate the owner to accept an offer to purchase from any
qualified purchaser which may be referred to the owner by the
municipality, with such offer to purchase being equal to the
maximum resale price of the low- and moderate-income unit as
permitted by the regulations governing affordable housing
units.
(f) The owner shall remain fully obligated, responsible and liable
for complying with the terms and restrictions of governing
§ 69-21 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 69-21
56:99
§ 69-22. Fees.
§ 69-23. Appeals.
Appeals from all decisions of an administrative agent appointed pursuant to
this chapter shall be filed in writing with the court.
Chapter 71
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise from alarms — See Ch. 184,
§ 184-8B(5).
§ 71-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain phrases and words are herein
defined as follows:
CENTRAL STATION — A private alarm system which automatically alerts
a person beyond the limits of the property served who is engaged in the
business of relaying information by telephone, or otherwise, to the Chatham
Borough Police Department.[Added 5-29-2007 by Ord. No. 07-19]
FALSE ALARM — Activation of an alarm system causing the police or other
emergency unit to respond, the cause of which was not fire, smoke or
similar hazard, an emergency, an unauthorized entry, the commission of an
affordable housing units until such time as title is conveyed
from the owner.
A. The Borough Administrator, in consultation with the administrative
agent and Municipal Housing Liaison, as appropriate, shall establish
the following fees, and such other reasonable fees necessary to cover
the administrative costs of the Borough's affordable housing program,
by duly adopted resolution of the Borough Council.
(1) Certification fee.
(2) Resubmission fee.
(3) Resale fee.
(4) Refinancing certification review.
(5) Tenant renewal lease fee.
B. In addition to the above administrative fees, the applicant, seller and/or
landlord, as appropriate, shall be responsible for the actual for any
appraisal, credit check, title work and/or recording costs, if any.
§ 69-21 CHATHAM CODE § 71-1
71:100
unlawful act, or caused by a specific condition or occurrence clearly beyond
the control of the permittee or his agents.
LEASE LINE SYSTEM — A private alarm system which provides direct
connection by a telephone lease line from a specific location to the Chatham
Borough police command desk with a visual or audio signal.
PERMITTEE — Any person to whom a permit has been issued under this
chapter.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, corporation, association or
other legal entity.
PRIVATE ALARM SYSTEM — Any system installed to serve an improved
property, store, building or other facility and designed or used for the
detection of fire, smoke or similar hazards, for the detection of an
unauthorized entry or the commission of any unlawful act or for the
reporting of any emergency, which system communicates or causes the
communication of information to the Chatham Borough Police Department.
TAPE DIALER SYSTEM — A private alarm system which automatically
selects a telephone trunk line of the Chatham Borough Police Department
and then reproduces a prerecorded message.9
WARNING DEVICE SYSTEM — A private alarm system which is designed
to sound an alarm by a bell, horn, siren or other noisemaking instrument
located upon the property where the system is installed and audible beyond
the limits of the property. For the purpose of this chapter, the sounding
of any of the aforementioned instruments shall be considered a
communication to the Chatham Borough Police Department.
§ 71-2. Compliance.
No person shall install, maintain or use, or cause to be installed, maintained
or used, or allow on any premises owned or occupied by him for the
installation, maintenance or use of any private alarm system, as defined in
this chapter, except pursuant to a private alarm system permit issued by the
Chief of Police, the terms of this chapter and such regulations as may be
issued pursuant hereto.
§ 71-3. Issuance of permits; application information.
Private alarm system permits shall be issued by the Chief of Police on an
annual basis upon written application of the permittee on forms supplied by
the Police Department and payment of the applicable fee. Each application
shall include at least the following information: the name, address and
telephone number of the permittee-applicant, the address and telephone
number of the premises where the alarm is to be located, the type of
alarm system, the business and home addresses and telephone numbers
of at least two individuals who have agreed to be responsible in case of
9. Editor's Note: The former definition of "telephone call system," which immediately
followed, was repealed 5-29-2007 by Ord. No. 07-19.
§ 71-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 71-3
71:101
an emergency or otherwise relating to the premises or the alarm system,
and the name, address, business and emergency telephone number of the
individual or company responsible for and authorized at the permittee's
expense to service the system upon request of the Police Department.
Except where a permit is or has been suspended, permits hereunder shall
be issued automatically, as long as the applicant and the system are in
compliance with this chapter and such regulations as may be issued
pursuant hereto; provided, however, that the Chief of Police may impose
reasonable conditions on any permit where, in his judgment, each condition
is reasonably required for the proper function of the alarm system or the
safety and convenience of the police, other possibly responding emergency
units or the public.
§ 71-4. Types of permitted systems; fees.
§ 71-5. General provisions and regulations. [Amended 8-10-1992 by
Ord. No. 7-92]
A. All permits shall expire on December 31 of each year, and only the
following types of private alarm systems shall be permitted, subject to
payment of the fees indicated: [Amended 8-10-1992 by Ord. No.
7-92; 5-29-2007 by Ord. No. 07-19]
Type Fee
Central Station $25
Lease line $75
Tape dialer $50
Warning device $25
B. All fees are for one year, or any part thereof, except that the fee for a
lease line system not to be in operation before July 1 of any year shall be
$30.
A. All alarm devices shall be installed in accordance with all applicable
municipal and governmental laws, ordinances and requirements.
B. Any unauthorized equipment may be disconnected by the Chief of
Police or his designated representative for noncompliance with this
chapter; any person installing, maintaining or using unauthorized
equipment shall be prosecuted for violation of this chapter; and each
and every day said equipment is in use shall be considered a separate
violation.
C. A permittee or his representative shall respond to the source of a signal
or transmission from an alarm device as promptly as possible after the
activation of such device and shall contact the Police or Fire
Department dispatched to the scene. He shall relieve the police or
fireman in charge whenever there is no apparent fire or criminal
activity at the scene of the alarm.
§ 71-3 CHATHAM CODE § 71-5
71:102
§ 71-6. Authority to issue regulations.
The Chief of Police is authorized and empowered to issue such regulations
as he may deem reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes of this
chapter, ensure the proper function of private alarm systems and provide
for the safety and convenience of the police, other possible responding
emergency units and the public. Such regulations shall be in writing and
shall be given to each permittee at the time of issuance or renewal of his
permit or at the time of the promulgation or amendment thereof.
§ 71-7. Suspension of permit.
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to suspend any permit issued
pursuant to this chapter for failure of the permittee to comply with this
chapter, any regulation issued pursuant hereto or any condition of his
permit. Such suspension shall be effective when written notice thereof is
personally delivered to any individual whose name has been furnished by
the permittee on his application or when such notice has been posted in a
conspicuous place on the premises where the alarm system is located and a
copy thereof mailed to the permittee at the address given on his application.
When a permit has been suspended, the private alarm system shall not be
operated unless and until the permit has been restored as evidenced by
written notice from the Chief of Police or the Borough Council.
§ 71-8. False alarm service fees. [Added 8-10-1992 by Ord. No. 7-92]
D. Any permittee shall be deemed to have consented to inspection of the
premises on which said alarm device is installed, at reasonable hours,
by the Police or Fire Chief or his designated representative. This
provision shall not be construed to impose a duty on the municipality to
make inspections or to relieve the alarm owner from inspecting, testing
and maintaining his own alarm device(s).
E. All costs and recurring charges incurred in the installation and
maintenance of alarm systems shall be borne by the permittee.
F. All private alarm systems shall be maintained in good working order by
the permittee and, in particular, in a manner so as to avoid the
occurrence of false alarms. The occurrence of three false alarms in one
calendar month or one or more false alarms in each of three
consecutive calendar months shall constitute prima facie evidence that
the system was not maintained in good working order.
A. The holder of any permit, except in the case of a permit issued for a
publicly owned building, shall be assessed a service fee for each false
alarm in excess of five occurring in any one calendar year. The service
fee shall be as follows:
(1) Sixth false alarm: $25.
(2) Seventh false alarm: $35.
§ 71-5 ALARM SYSTEMS § 71-8
71:103
§ 71-9. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by a regulation, condition attached to a permit,
suspension of a permit or failure to issue a permit may appeal to the
Borough Council. An appeal shall be taken by filing a written statement with
the Borough Administrator, which statement shall set forth fully the matter
under appeal and the grounds for appeal. The Borough Council shall then
set a time and place for hearing of the appeal, notify the appellant, conduct
the hearing and affirm, modify or reverse the matter appealed. The Borough
Council shall have the right, however, to refuse to hear or decide any appeal
which has not been filed within 14 days after the appellant had notice of the
matter as to which the appeal has been taken.
§ 71-10. Limitations of Borough's obligations.
§ 71-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-10-1992 by Ord. No.
7-92]
Unless a different penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute,
every person convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter shall be
liable to a penalty as provided in Chapter 1, § 1-14.
(3) Eighth and subsequent false alarms: $50.
B. The Chief of Police shall fix such assessments and notify the permittee.
They shall be paid to the Borough of Chatham within 30 days of service
of written notice upon the permittee of the assessment of the fees. The
written notice shall state the date and time of each false alarm
attributable to the permittee which forms the basis for the assessment.
A. Notwithstanding the issuance of any permit, the Borough assumes no
obligation to allow a particular private alarm system or type of private
alarm system beyond December 31 of any year if the Borough Council
shall find that it is not in the public interest so to do.
B. Neither the Borough nor its agents or employees assume any obligation
whatsoever concerning the adequacy, operation or maintenance of any
private alarm system. Neither the Borough nor its agents or employees
assume any liability whatsoever for any failure of any private alarm
system, failure to respond to any such alarm system or for any act of
omission or commission relating to any such alarm system.
C. The permittee, upon acceptance of his permit by that action, agrees to
hold and save harmless the Borough, its agents and employees from any
liability whatsoever in connection with his alarm system or the
operation of the same.
§ 71-8 CHATHAM CODE § 71-11
71:104
Chapter 75
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and playgrounds (consumption of
alcoholic beverages restricted) — See Ch.
195.
Food-handling establishments — See Ch. 284.
§ 75-1. Purpose.
This chapter is for the purpose of fixing license fees and regulating the
sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages in the Borough of Chatham in
accordance with the provisions of an act of the Legislature of New Jersey
entitled "An Act Concerning Alcoholic Beverages," being Chapter 436 of the
Laws of 1933, its supplements and amendments,10 and in accordance with
the rules and regulations issued or to be issued by the State Commissioner
of Alcoholic Beverages Control applicable thereto.
§ 75-2. Application for license.
All applications for licenses under this chapter and all licenses issued
thereunder and proceedings in connection therewith shall be subject to said
act and said rules and regulations of said State Commissioner of Alcoholic
Beverage Control applicable thereto, and shall be subject to any other
statutes of New Jersey or of the United States now extant or hereafter
enacted affecting such subject matters.
§ 75-3. Authority of Council to issue licenses.
The Council of the Borough of Chatham, being the governing body of said
municipality, shall constitute the authority for the issuance of licenses under
this chapter and shall forthwith report the issuance of all such licenses to
said State Commissioner of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 75-4. Prerequisites for issuance of licenses.
No license shall be issued except after written application presented by the
proposed licensee, upon forms approved by the governing body, and after
conformity with publication of notice and otherwise, as required by said act.
§ 75-5. License required to sell or distribute.
It shall be unlawful to sell or distribute alcoholic beverages in the Borough
of Chatham without a license previously applied for and granted, pursuant
to the provisions of said act.
10.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.
§ 71-11 ALARM SYSTEMS § 75-6
71:105
§ 75-6. Number of licenses limited. [Added 12-4-1939; amended
12-16-1940; 11-8-1948; 11-17-1952; 3-9-1953; 9-9-1957 by Ord. No.
1-4.7; 7-10-1967 by Ord. No. 1-4.10(67); 5-11-1970 by Ord. No.
1-4.12(70); 4-12-1971 by Ord. No. 1-4.12A; 5-12-1975 by Ord. No.
5-75]
The number of plenary retail consumption licenses shall be limited to four
and the number of plenary retail distribution licenses shall be limited to
four.
§ 75-7. License fees. [Amended 4-11-1955; 5-9-1960 by Ord. No.
1-4.9; 4-13-1970 by Ord. No. 1-4.11(70); 4-13-1981 by Ord. No.
3-81; 5-23-1983 by Ord. No. 12-83; 5-28-1985 by Ord. No. 11-85;
4-13-1987 by Ord. No. 3-87; 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 6-89; 4-25-2005
by Ord. No. 05-09]
§ 75-8. View of premises from exterior required.
All premises in which said alcoholic beverages shall be sold or otherwise
dispensed, except those which hold club licenses, shall have reasonable
access of light from the public highway, and such premises shall be deemed
to have reasonable access of light when a normal-sized adult can, on
inspection from the exterior, view the interior of said licensed premises.
§ 75-9. Prohibited hours of sale. [Amended 12-4-1939; 12-18-1939;
7-7-1943; 3-10-1958 by Ord. No. 1-4.8; 11-7-1967; 11-6-1968;
5-12-1975 by Ord. No. 5-75; 2-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-03]
A. The fee for a plenary retail consumption license shall be $2,300.
B. The fee for a plenary retail distribution license shall be $1,600.
A. Sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption and sale of
wine and malt beverages for off-premises consumption. No plenary
retail consumption licensee or any agent, servant or employee of any
licensee shall sell, serve, distribute or deliver or allow, permit or suffer
the sale, service, distribution or delivery of any alcoholic beverage for
consumption on any licensed premises on any weekday or Saturday
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m., prevailing time, or on
Sunday between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m., prevailing time.
B. Sale of alcoholic beverages for off-premises consumption. No licensee
permitted to sell at retail for off-premises consumption or any agent,
servant or employee of any licensee, shall sell, serve, distribute or
deliver or allow, permit or suffer the sale, service, distribution or
delivery of any alcoholic beverage at retail in its original container for
consumption off the licensed premises on any weekday or Saturday
before 9:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m., prevailing time, and on Sunday
before 10:00 a.m. and after 9:00 p.m., prevailing time, except that wine
and malt alcoholic beverages in original containers may be sold for offpremises
consumption on the same days and during the same hours as
§ 75-6 CHATHAM CODE § 75-9
71:106
§ 75-10. Serving in back or side rooms restricted.
No person shall be served in any back room or side room which is not open
to the use of the public generally, except that in hotels guests may be served
in their rooms or in private or public dining rooms, and provided also that
this prohibition shall not apply to club licenses.
§ 75-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, § 1-14. The continuation of such violation for each successive day
shall constitute a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or
permitting the continuation of the violation may be punished as provided
above for each separate offense.
Chapter 79
ANIMALS AND RABIES CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 184. Parks and playgrounds — See Ch. 195.
§ 79-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL — Dog or cat, for the purpose of this chapter.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — A certified municipal Animal Control
Officer, or in the absence of such an officer, the chief law enforcement
officer of the Borough or his designee.
ANIMAL OF LICENSING AGE — Any dog or cat which has attained the age
of seven months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on premises is
permitted in the Borough. [Amended 7-8-2019 by Ord. No. 19-12]
C. Closing provisions. During the hours that the sale of alcoholic
beverages are hereinabove prohibited, the entire licensed premises
shall also be closed, and no person shall be admitted or permitted to
remain therein except the licensee or bona fide employees of the
licensee, however, restaurants as defined in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1t, hotels,
delicatessens, drug stores, or grocery stores may remain open for the
conduct of business other than the sale of alcoholic beverages.11
11.Editor's Note: Former § 48-10, Certain sales prohibited, as amended 5-12-1975 by Ord. No.
5-75, which immediately followed this section, was deleted 4-25-2005 by Ord. No. 05-09.
§ 75-9 ALARM SYSTEMS § 79-1
71:107
BITE — To seize with the teeth or jaws so as to enter, nip or grip the person
or thing seized; also to cut, wound, pierce or impress deeply the person or
thing seized.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Chatham, in the County of Morris.
CAT — Any member of the domestic feline species; male, female, or
neutered.
DOG — Any dog, bitch or spayed bitch.
IMMEDIATE — That the pet solid waste is removed at once, without delay.
KENNEL — Any establishment wherein or whereon the business of
boarding or selling dogs or breeding dogs for sale is carried on, except a pet
shop.
NEUTERED — To render permanently incapable of reproduction as certified
by a licensed veterinarian.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of an animal shall include
every person having a right of property (or custody) in such animal and
every person who has such animal in his/her keeping, or who harbors or
maintains an animal or knowingly permits an animal to remain on or about
any premises occupied by that person. A person shall be deemed to have
an animal in his keeping or under his control whenever the ownership or
custody of such animal is an unemancipated infant or other member of his/
her household.
OWNER'S PREMISES — Includes the building or plot of land on which said
building stands in which the owner of an animal has a place of abode or
place of business in the Borough.
PERSON — An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association of
persons, or institution commonly recognized by law as a unit.
PET — A domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance animal)
kept for amusement or companionship.
PET SHOP — Any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition pen, not part
of a kennel, wherein animals for sale are kept or displayed.
PET SOLID WASTE — Waste matter expelled from the bowels of the pet;
excrement
POUND — An establishment for the confinement of animals seized either
under the provisions of this chapter or otherwise.
PROPER DISPOSAL — Placement in a designated waste receptacle, or other
suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container which is regularly
emptied by the municipality or some other refuse collector, or disposal into
a system designed to convey domestic sewage for proper treatment and
disposal.
SHELTER — Any establishment where animals are received, housed, and
distributed.
§ 79-1 CHATHAM CODE § 79-1
71:108
VICIOUS ANIMAL — Any animal which at any time, without provocation,
has attacked or shall attack a human being or another domestic pet, either
while upon or off the premises occupied by the person owning, keeping,
harboring or having the custody or possession of the attacking animal.
"Vicious animal" shall also mean and include any animal which has caused
any human being engaged in a lawful activity or occupancy to be fearful for
his own safety by chasing or snapping at such person without provocation.
§ 79-2. Animal Control Officer.
§ 79-3. License required.
No person shall keep or harbor or suffer the keeping or harboring within
the limits of the Borough of Chatham any dog or cat of licensing age without
first obtaining a license therefor to be issued by the Health Department of
the Borough of Chatham upon application by the owner or some person on
behalf of the owner and payment of the prescribed fee, and no person shall
keep or harbor any dog or cat in the Borough except in compliance with the
provisions for the control of animals contained in N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.1 through
4:19-15.29, and any amendments thereof.
§ 79-4. Application for license and registration tag.
A. The position of Animal Control Officer is hereby established under the
jurisdiction of the Department of Health.
B. The Duties of the Animal Control Officer shall be the enforcement of the
measures and provisions for the control of the animal contained in
N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.1 through 4:19-15.29, and any amendments thereof,
and the provisions of this chapter.
C. The Council of the Borough of Chatham is hereby empowered to
appoint an Animal Control Officer or may designate some other
authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
D. The Council shall also have the power to enter into a contract with one
or more persons, either individual or corporate, to exercise the duties of
Animal Control Officer in enforcing the provisions of this chapter.
E. All police officers of the Borough of Chatham, regular and special, and
the Animal Control Officer are hereby given full power and authority
and are charged with the duty to enforce this chapter.
F. Any person authorized to exercise the duties of Animal Control Officer
shall be a certified Animal Control Officer in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.16a.
A. Any person who shall own keep or harbor or suffer the keeping or
harboring of any dog of licensing age within the Borough of Chatham
shall, in the month of January and annually thereafter, apply for and
procure from the Health Department a license and official registration
tag for each such dog so owned, kept or harbored and shall place upon
§ 79-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 79-4
71:109
§ 79-5. Licensing requirements; exemptions.
each dog a collar or other device with the license number securely
fastened thereto or displayed thereon.
B. Any person who shall own, keep or harbor or suffer the keeping or
harboring of any cat of licensing age within the Borough of Chatham
shall, in the month of January and annually thereafter, apply for and
procure from the Health Department a license and official registration
tag for each such cat so owned, kept or harbored and shall place upon
such cat a collar or other device with the license number securely
fastened thereto or displayed thereon. Acceptable methods of
displaying license number shall include, but not be limited to,
breakaway or elastic collars. [Amended 10-24-2005 by Ord. No.
05-29]
A. The person applying for license and registration tag shall pay a fee for
each dog or cat as provided for in § 79-16 of this chapter.
B. The person applying for license and registration tag shall pay the fee
fixed or authorized. The fee for renewal of license and registration tag
shall be the same as for the original and said license, registration tag
and renewal thereof shall expire on January 31 in the following year.
C. Only one license and registration tag shall be required in any licensing
year for any dog or cat owned in Chatham Borough, and such license
and registration tag issued by any municipality in the State of New
Jersey shall be accepted as evidence of compliance of this section.
D. Any dog or cat owner or person harboring a dog or cat found by the
Borough Animal Control Officer or any other municipal official to have
an unlicensed dog on or after February 1 or an unlicensed cat on or
after July 1 shall be required to pay an additional delinquent fee as
established in § 79-16 plus the required license fee as provided in this
chapter for the animal license, together with any other fines due to
summons issued that may be imposed on him as provided in this
chapter for failure to obtain the animal license by January 31 for dogs
and June 30 for cats. The aforementioned fee shall not apply to animals
which have been acquired by the owner after February 1, provided that
said license is obtained within 10 days after acquisition and sufficient
proof is presented to establish the date the dog or cat is acquired.
E. Dogs used as guides for blind persons and commonly known as "Seeingeye"
dogs, dogs used to assist handicapped persons and commonly
known as "service dogs," or dogs used to assist deaf persons and
commonly known as "hearing ear" dogs shall be licensed and registered
as other animals herein above provided for, except that the owner or
keeper of such dog shall not be required to pay any fee therefor.
§ 79-4 CHATHAM CODE § 79-5
71:110
§ 79-6. Rabies vaccination required; exemption.
§ 79-7. Impoundment of certain animals; notice; disposition of
seized animals.
F. The owner of keeper of any newly acquired animal of licensing age shall
make application for such license and registration tag for such animal
within 10 days after such acquisition or age attainment.
G. Any owner or keeper of a licensed dog or cat whose current licensed tag
has been lost may obtain a replacement tag by applying to the Health
Department immediately. A charge as established in § 79-16 of this
chapter is made for replacement of this tag.
H. No person shall make use of, or have in his possession or under his
control, a stolen, counterfeit or forged dog or cat license receipt, animal
license registration tag or rabies vaccination certification or other
forms issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
I. Any person applying for a dog or cat license for a neutered dog or cat
must present to the licensing agent a veterinarian's certification that
said animal of reproductive age has had its reproductive capacity
permanently altered through sterilization.
A. All dogs and cats shall be vaccinated against rabies by a licensed
veterinarian in accordance with the latest "Compendium of Animal
Rabies Vaccines and Recommendations for Immunization" published by
the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians, except as
provided for in Subsection D of this section.
B. Any person applying for a dog or cat license and registration tag must
provide evidence to the Health Department that said animal has been
inoculated with a rabies vaccine of a type approved by and
administered in accordance with the recommendations of the United
States Department of Agriculture and the United States Department of
Human Services, or has been certified exempt as provided for by
Subsection D of this section. The rabies inoculation shall be
administered by a duly licensed veterinarian or by such other
veterinarian permitted by law to do the same. Such vaccine shall be
repeated at intervals as provided by regulations of the New Jersey State
Department of Health.
C. A certificate of vaccination shall be issued to the owner of each dog or
cat vaccinated on a form recommended by the State of New Jersey.
D. Any dog or cat may be exempt from the requirement of such vaccination
for a specified period of time by the Health Department upon
presentation of a veterinarian's certificate stating that because of an
infirmity or other physical condition or regimen of therapy, the
inoculation of such animal shall be deemed inadvisable.
§ 79-5 ALARM SYSTEMS § 79-7
71:111
A. Any person appointed for the purpose by the Borough of Chatham shall
take into custody and impound or cause to be taken into custody and
impounded, and thereafter destroyed or offered for adoption as
provided in this section:
(1) Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring said dog which said official or his agent or agents has
reason to believe is a stray dog;
(2) Any dog or cat off the premises of the owner or of the person
keeping or harboring said dog or cat without a current registration
tag on his collar;
(3) Any female dog in season off the premises of the owner or of the
person keeping or harboring said dog;
(4) Any dog or other animal which is suspected of being rabid;
(5) Any dog or other animal off the premises of the owner reported to,
or observed by, a certified Animal Control Officer to be ill, injured
or creating a threat to public health, safety or welfare, or otherwise
interfering with the enjoyment of property.
B. If any animal so seized wears a collar or harness having inscribed
thereon or attached thereto the name and address of any person or a
registration tag, or the owner or the person keeping or harboring said
animal is known, any person authorized by the Borough shall forthwith
serve on the person whose address is given on the collar, or on the
owner or person keeping or harboring said animal, if known, a notice in
writing stating that the animal has been seized and will be liable to be
destroyed or offered for adoption if not claimed within seven days after
the service of the notice.
C. A notice under this section may be served either by delivering it to the
person on whom it is to be served, or by leaving it at the person's usual
or last known place of abode, or at the address given on the collar, or by
forwarding it by post in a prepaid letter addressed to that person at his
usual or last known place of abode, or to the address given on the collar.
D. When any animal so seized has been detained for seven days after
notice, when notice can be given as above set forth, or has been
detained for seven days after seizure, when no notice has been given as
above set forth and if the person keeping or harboring said animal has
not claimed said animal and paid all expenses incurred by reason of its
detention, including maintenance, and if the animal be unlicensed at
the time the seizure and the owner or person keeping or harboring said
animal has not produced a license and registration tag for said animal,
any person authorized by the Borough may cause the animal to be
destroyed in a manner causing as little pain as possible and consistent
with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:22-19, and any amendments thereof.
§ 79-7 CHATHAM CODE § 79-8
71:112
§ 79-8. Right of entry on property for purposes of seizure.
Any officer or agent authorized or empowered to perform any duty under
this chapter is hereby authorized to go upon any premises to seize for
impounding any animal or animals which he may lawfully seize and impound
when such officer is in the immediate pursuit of such animal or animals,
except upon the premises of the owner of the animal if said owner is present
and forbids the same.
§ 79-9. Rabies control.
§ 79-10. Defiling or damaging property.
No person shall suffer, permit or allow any animal to injure or damage or
soil or defile any lawn or shrubbery or flowers or grounds, or any property,
either public or private, of any person other than that of its owner. No
person shall suffer, permit, or allow any dog to be upon any private or public
property other than the premises of the owner without the consent of the
owner or tenant of the private or public property or to permit the dog to run
unleashed off the premises of the owner.
§ 79-10.1. Dogs in public places. [Added 9-11-2018 by Ord. No.
18-10]
A. Whenever a dog, cat or other animal is affected by rabies or suspected
of being affected by rabies or has been bitten by an animal known or
suspected to be affected by rabies, the owner or person in charge of the
animal or any person having knowledge thereof shall forthwith notify
the Health Department of the place where the animal is located.
B. Whenever a dog, cat or other animal bites a person, the owner or
person in charge of the animal, the person bitten or parent or guardian
or the physician having professional attendance upon every person
bitten shall notify the Health Department of the name, age, sex, color,
and precise location of the person so bitten pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:4-78
through 26:4-95.
A. No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog shall suffer or permit
it to be upon the public streets or in any of the public places of the
Borough unless such dog is accompanied by a person and is securely
confined and controlled by an adequate leash not more than six feet
long, except for the area located in Shepard Kollock Park where dogs
are permitted off-leash. Attached hereto and incorporated herein as
Exhibit A is a map prepared by the Borough Engineer dated August 13,
2018, which has been marked to show the approximate boundaries
within Shepard Kollock Park where dogs are permitted off-leash.12
12.Editor's Note: Said Exhibit A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 79-8 ALARM SYSTEMS § 79-10.1
71:113
§ 79-11. Disposal of pet waste; exception.
§ 79-12. Vicious or potentially dangerous dogs.
Chapter 307 of the laws of the State of New Jersey, 1989 (N.J.S.A. 4:19-17
through 4:19-35 et seq.) and the amendments and supplements thereto,
pertaining to vicious and potentially dangerous dogs, are hereby adopted,
enacted and incorporated herein.
§ 79-13. Howling or barking dogs.
No person shall keep within the Borough any dog causing a nuisance and
disturbing the peace and quiet of the neighborhood in which it shall be kept
by chronically howling, barking and/or making and causing other sounds or
noises.13
§ 79-14. Kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds.
B. The Borough Administrator shall have the authority to promulgate rules
and regulations governing the fence-enclosed area located in Shepard
Kollock Park.
A. All pet owners and keepers are required to immediately and properly
dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited on any property, public or
private, not owned or possessed by that person.
B. Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability-assistance
animal shall be exempt from the provisions of this section while such
animal is being used for that purpose.
A. Any person who keeps or operates or proposes to establish a kennel, pet
shop, shelter or pound shall apply to the Health Department for a
license entitling him to keep or operate such establishment and shall
pay an annual fee as established in § 79-16 of this chapter. The
application shall describe the premises where the establishment is
located or is proposed to be located and the purpose for which it is to be
maintained.
B. All licenses issued for a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall expire
on the last day of January of each year, and be subject to revocation by
the Borough for failure to comply with rules and regulations governing
kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds pursuant to the New Jersey
Administrative Code, Title 8, Chapter 23, Subchapter 3, and this
chapter. Any person holding such license shall not be required to secure
individual licenses for animals owned by such licensee and kept at such
establishment; such licenses shall not be transferable to another owner
or a different premises.
13.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 184, Noise.
§ 79-10.1 CHATHAM CODE § 79-14
71:114
§ 79-15. Canvass of dogs and cats.
The Health Officer or any person appointed for the purpose, which person
may include the Chief of Police, shall annually cause a canvass to be made of
all dogs and cats owned, kept or harbored within the limits of the Borough,
and shall report on or before May 1 of each year to the licensing official
and to the Department of Health and to the New Jersey State Department of
Health the results thereof, setting forth in separate columns the names and
addresses of persons owning, keeping or harboring unlicensed dogs or cats,
the number of unlicensed dogs or cats owned, kept or harbored by each said
persons, together with a complete description of each of said unlicensed
animal.
§ 79-16. Fees.
The following fees shall be paid to the Borough of Chatham for compliance
of this chapter:
C. No animal kept in kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall be permitted
off the premises, except on a leash or in a crate or other method of safe
control.
D. Any person who keeps or operates a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound
shall be subject to such inspection or inspections as may be required to
comply with rules and regulations governing the sanitary operation of
kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds pursuant to the New Jersey
Administrative Code, Title 8, Chapter 23A, Subchapter 1, and this
chapter.
A. Dog and cat license and registration tag, annual: [Amended
3-26-2007 by Ord. No. 07-15]
(1) Neutered: $18.
(2) All others: $21.
B. Late charge for dog or cat license and registration tag, effective
February 1: $7. [Amended 10-24-2005 by Ord. No. 05-29]
C. Replacement dog or cat license and registration tag: $1.
D. Animal redemption fee: $25.
E. Pound maintenance, per day: $4.
F. Animal adoption, per animal: $15.
G. Disposal fees:
(1) Per dog: $80.
(2) Per cat: $20.
H. Kennel licenses, annual:
§ 79-14 ALARM SYSTEMS § 79-16
71:115
§ 79-17. Interfering with persons performing duties under chapter.
No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this chapter.
§ 79-18. Violations and penalties.
Except as provided in N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.19, any person violating or failing
to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, § 1-14. The continuation of
such violation for each successive day shall constitute a separate offense,
and the person or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the
violation may be punished as provided above for each separate offense,
except:
Chapter 83
AUCTIONS AND AUCTIONEERS
§ 83-1. License required. [Amended 5-28-2002 by Ord. No. 02-1314]
No personal property (goods, wares or merchandise) shall be sold at auction
in the Borough of Chatham except in compliance with the provisions of this
chapter. It shall be unlawful to sell or cause or permit to be sold at auction
any personal property (goods, wares or merchandise) in the Borough of
Chatham unless such sale is conducted by an individual who has applied to
the Borough Clerk and obtained an auctioneer's license from the Mayor and
Council.
§ 83-2. Issuance and revocation of license.15
(1) Ten or fewer dogs: $10.
(2) Greater than 10 dogs: $25.
I. Pet shop, annual: $10.
J. Animal trap deposit: $35.
K. Potentially dangerous dog license and registration tag, annually: $250.
A. For dogs running at large, the first offense shall be $50, the second
offense shall be $75, and the third and subsequent offenses shall be
$100.
B. Fines for unlicensed dogs and/or cats shall be $16 per animal plus $15
court cost per animal payable through the Violations Bureau.
[Amended 11-12-2007 by Ord. No. 07-29]
14.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
15.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 79-16 CHATHAM CODE § 83-2
83:116
A. The Mayor and Council are hereby authorized to grant or renew an
auctioneer's license for any period of time not exceeding one year to
any individual applying therefor on a form to be provided by the
Borough Clerk, upon payment by the applicant of the fees provided for
in § 83-3 of this chapter and the filing by the applicant of the bond
required by § 83-4 of this chapter.
B. The form on which application shall be made for an auctioneer's license
shall require the following information:
(1) Name of the applicant.
(2) Residence and business address of the applicant.
(3) The length of time for which an auctioneer's license is desired.
(4) A statement as to whether or not the applicant holds or has held an
auctioneer's license from any state, municipality, governing body or
licensing authority; a list of such licenses and a statement of the
time, place and by whom issued; a statement as to whether any
state, municipality, governing body or licensing authority has ever
refused to issue or to renew an auctioneer's license to the
applicant, together with a full and accurate statement as to the
reasons for any such refusals; and a statement as to whether any
state, municipality, governing body or licensing authority has ever
revoked an auctioneer's license held by the applicant, together
with a full and accurate statement as to the reasons for any such
revocation.
(5) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever been
convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal
ordinance, and if so, the nature of the offense and the punishment
or penalty assessed therefor.
(6) A photograph of the applicant taken within 60 days immediately
prior to the date of the filing of the application, which picture shall
be two inches showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a
clear and distinguishing manner, except that the Mayor and
Council may waive this requirement with respect to an application
for renewal of an auctioneer's license issued under this chapter to a
person who has, in a previous application under this chapter,
complied with the requirement.
(7) The fingerprints of the applicant and the names of at least two
reliable property owners of the Borough of Chatham, County of
Morris, State of New Jersey, who will certify as to the applicant's
good moral character and business responsibility, or in lieu of the
names of references, any other available evidence as to the good
moral character and business responsibility of the applicant as will
enable an investigator to properly evaluate such moral character
and business responsibility, except that the Mayor and Council may
waive this requirement with respect to an application for renewal
§ 83-2 AUCTIONS AND AUCTIONEERS § 83-2
83:117
of an auctioneer's license by any individual holding an unexpired
auctioneer's license issued under this chapter who has, in a
previous application under this chapter, complied with this
requirement.
C. Before issuing an auctioneer's license to any individual applying
therefor, the Borough Clerk shall refer the application to the Chief of
Police, who shall cause to be made such investigation of the applicant's
moral character and business responsibility as he deems necessary for
the protection of the public good, except that the Mayor and Council
may waive this requirement with respect to an application for renewal
of an auctioneer's license by any individual holding an unexpired
auctioneer's license issued under this chapter if an investigation of such
applicant's moral character and business responsibility has previously
been made under this section in connection with a prior application for
an auctioneer's license under this chapter. The Chief of Police shall
cause the investigation herein provided for to be made within a
reasonable time and shall certify to the Mayor and Council whether or
not the moral character and business responsibility of the applicant are
satisfactory.
D. An auctioneer's license may be revoked by the Mayor and Council or an
application for issuance or renewal of such license may be refused by
the Mayor and Council if they determine, after notice and hearing:
(1) That the applicant or license holder is not an individual of good
moral character and business responsibility; or
(2) That the application of the applicant or license holder contains any
false, fraudulent or misleading material statement; or
(3) That the applicant or license holder has made any false, fraudulent
or misleading material statement in the course of conducting an
auction sale of, or in offering for sale at auction, any real or
personal property (goods, wares or merchandise) in the Borough of
Chatham; or
(4) That the applicant or license holder has perpetrated a fraud upon
any person, whether or not such fraud was perpetrated in the
conduct of an auction in the Borough of Chatham; or
(5) That the applicant or license holder has violated any of the statutes
of the State of New Jersey relating to auctions or auctioneers; or
(6) That the applicant has been convicted of any crime or misdemeanor
involving moral turpitude; or
(7) That the applicant or license holder has conducted an auction sale
of, or offered for sale at auction, any real or personal property
(goods, wares or merchandise) in the Borough of Chatham in an
unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of
§ 83-2 CHATHAM CODE § 83-2
83:118
§ 83-3. License fees.
The fees for an auctioneer's license shall be as follows:
§ 83-4. Bond.
Every applicant for an auctioneer's license shall file with the Borough
Clerk a surety bond running to the Borough of Chatham in the amount of
$2,000, with surety acceptable to and approved by the Borough Attorney,
conditioned that the said applicant, if issued an auctioneer's license, will
comply fully with all the provisions of the ordinances of the Borough of
Chatham and the statutes of the State of New Jersey regulating and
concerning auctions and auctioneers, will render true and strict accounts
of all his sales to any person or persons employing him to make the same,
will not practice any fraud or deceit upon bidders or purchasers of property
from him at any auction sale or suffer or permit any person in his employ
to practice any such fraud or deceit, and will pay all damages which may
be sustained by any person by reason of any fraud, deceit, negligence or
other wrongful act on the part of the licensee, his agent or employees in the
conduct of any auction or in the exercise of the calling of auctioneer.
§ 83-5. Place of conducting auctions; special permit.
the peace or a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of
the public.
E. Notice of the hearing provided for in Subsection D above shall be given
in writing to the applicant or license holder, as the case may be. Such
notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the applicant or license
holder, as the case may be, at his last known address at least five days
prior to the date set for hearing. The applicant or license holder, as the
case may be, shall have the right to be represented at such hearing by
counsel.
A. Two hundred dollars for a period of one year.
B. Ten dollars per day for any period less than one year.
A. No auction sale of personal property (goods, wares or merchandise)
shall be conducted within the territorial limits of the Borough of
Chatham except within the business district on Main Street between
Hillside Avenue and Fairmount Avenue, and provided further that there
shall be private off-street parking available and under the direct control
of the operator of the auction to the extent that there shall be one
parking space for each 100 square feet of selling area.
B. Application for a special permit to conduct an auction sale of personal
property (goods, wares or merchandise) within other areas of the
Borough of Chatham shall be made to the Borough Clerk, for
consideration by the Mayor and Council, on a form to be provided by
the Borough Clerk upon which shall be stated the nature and quantity
§ 83-2 AUCTIONS AND AUCTIONEERS § 83-5
83:119
§ 83-6. Auctions prohibited on streets, sidewalks and public
property.
It shall be unlawful to conduct an auction sale of personal property (goods,
wares or merchandise) on any of the streets, sidewalks or public property
of the Borough of Chatham.16
§ 83-7. Provisions not applicable to certain sales.
of the goods to be sold and the number of days during which it is
desired to conduct such auction sale and the reason why such auction
cannot be conducted in conformance with Subsection A above,
whereupon the Mayor and Council may grant the special permit upon
the payment of a fee of $15, which fee shall be in addition to and not in
lieu of the fees and bond provided for in §§ 83-3 and 83-4, respectively,
of this chapter, upon the Mayor and Council's determination that there
is good and sufficient reason for the issuance of such special permit.
Such special permit shall specify the place or places to which it pertains
and the number of days for which such special permit is valid.
C. The Mayor and Council may refuse to issue or renew such special
permit or may revoke any special permit already issued if they
determine that there is good and sufficient reason for such refusal or
revocation.
D. No such special permit shall be issued to any individual except one to
whom an auctioneer's license has been issued under § 83-2 of this
chapter.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to auction sales
conducted by trustees or referees in bankruptcy, executors,
administrators, receivers or other public officers acting under judicial
process, nor to the sale of real property at auction.
B. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to auctions conducted on
the premises within the Borough of Chatham of any religious, fraternal
or charitable corporation, association or organization, the net proceeds
or profits of which auctions are devoted exclusively for religious,
charitable, educational, benevolent or eleemosynary purposes,
provided that notification of each such auction and of its purposes and
of the name and address of such auctioneer conducting the same is filed
by the sponsoring religious, fraternal or charitable corporation,
association or organization with the Chief of Police at least 10 days in
advance of such auction. [Added 5-28-2002 by Ord. No. 02-13]
16.Editor's Note: Former § 52-7, Night auctions of certain articles prohibited, which
immediately followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 83-5 CHATHAM CODE § 83-8
83:120
§ 83-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, § 1-14. The continuation of such violation for each successive day
shall constitute a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or
permitting the continuation of the violation may be punished as provided
above for each separate offense.
Chapter 94
(RESERVED)
Chapter 99
BUSINESS HOURS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Prohibited hours of sale of alcoholic
beverages — See Ch. 75.
Hours for sidewalk dining — See Ch. 221,
§ 221-7A(10).
Food-handling establishments — See Ch. 284.
Massage and bodywork establishments — See
Ch. 289.
Tanning booth establishments — See Ch. 307.
§ 99-1. Retail and wholesale establishments; exceptions.17
It shall be unlawful for any retail or wholesale establishment, other than
restaurants and food or beverage dispensing businesses for on-premises
consumption, to be operated and open to the public after 12:00 a.m. and
before 6:00 a.m., prevailing time.
§ 99-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, § 1-14. The continuation of such violation for each successive day
shall constitute a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or
permitting the continuation of the violation may be punished as provided
above for each separate offense.
Chapter 104
CHECKS, FRAUDULENT
17.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 83-8 BUSINESS HOURS § 104-1
99:121
§ 104-1. Service charge.
The Borough of Chatham, under the authority of Chapter 105, P.L. 1990
(N.J.S.A. 40:5-18), herewith imposes a service charge to be added to any
account owing to said municipality, if payment tendered on the account was
by check or other written instrument which was returned for insufficient
funds. The service is herewith established in the amount of $20 per check
or other written instrument which has been so returned.
§ 104-2. Inclusion with delinquent accounts.
In the event that the account owing to a municipality is for a tax or
special assessment, as provided by statute or ordinance, the service charge
authorized herein shall be included on and added to the list of delinquent
accounts which is prepared for the enforcement of the appropriate tax or
assessment lien.
§ 104-3. Collection; future payments.
Any service charge authorized by this chapter shall be collected in the same
manner prescribed by law for the collection of the account for which the
check or other written instrument was tendered. To the extent that a check
or other written instrument has been returned for insufficient funds, the
governing body shall have the right to require the person or entity issuing
said check or written instrument to tender all future payments in cash or by
certified or cashier's check.
Chapter 111
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building safety and habitability — See Ch. 94.
Uniform Fire Code — See Ch. 136.
Land development regulations — See Ch. 165.
§ 111-1. Establishment of enforcing agency.
There is hereby established in the Borough of Chatham a State Uniform
Construction Code enforcing agency, consisting of a Construction Official,
Building Subcode Official, Plumbing Subcode Official, Electrical Subcode
Official, Fire Protection Subcode Official and other subcode officials for
such additional subcodes as the Commissioner of the Department of
Community Affairs, State of New Jersey, shall hereafter adopt as part of
the State Uniform Construction Code. The Construction Official shall be the
chief administrator for the enforcement of the State Uniform Construction
Code and shall be within the Borough Department of Planning and Building.
All other subcode officials or other Borough employees or on-site inspection
§ 104-1 CHATHAM CODE § 111-1
104:122
services responsible for the enforcement of the Uniform Construction Code
within the Borough shall be employees of the Department of Planning and
Building.
§ 111-2. Qualifications of officials; qualified inspection agency.
Each official position created in § 111-1 shall be filled by a person qualified
for such position pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, as amended (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-119 et seq.) and N.J.A.C. 5:23, provided that, in lieu of any particular
subcode official, an on-site inspection agency may be retained by contract
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23. More than one such official position may be held
by the same person, provided that such person is qualified pursuant to
P.L. 1975, c. 217 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119), and N.J.A.C. 5:23 to hold each such
position.
§ 111-3. Public access to agency and officials.
The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency
at one office location within the Borough except for emergencies and
unforeseen or unavoidable circumstances. The Construction Official and all
subcode officials shall have regular office hours, the schedule of which shall
be made public and shall be posted with the Borough Clerk.
§ 111-4. Fees. [Amended 9-13-2010 by Ord. No. 10-25; 5-23-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-11]
A. No permit as required by the Building Code shall be issued until the fee
prescribed in this section shall have been paid. All applicable fees for a
construction permit shall be the sum of fees listed in Subsection A(1)
through (18) hereof and shall be paid before the permit is issued.
(1) The building subcode fee shall be:
(a) For all new construction: one- and two-family, $0.03 per cubic
foot of building or structure volume, provided that the
minimum fee shall be $150; and all others, $0.03 per cubic foot
of building or structure volume, provided that the minimum fee
shall be $150.
(b) For renovations, alterations and repairs: $20 per $1,000 of
estimated cost of the work, provided that the minimum fee
shall be $46.
(c) For additions: one- and two-family, $0.27 per cubic foot of
building or structure volume for the added portion, provided
that the minimum fee shall be $150; and all others, $0.20 per
cubic foot of building or structure volume for the added
portion, provided that the minimum fee shall be $150.
(d) For combinations of renovations and additions: the sum of the
fees are computed separately as renovations and additions.
§ 111-1 CHECKS, FRAUDULENT § 111-4
104:123
(e) For roofing and siding (one- or two-family): a flat fee of $46;
commercial and all others, $17 per $1,000 of estimated cost.
(2) The plumbing subcode fee shall be 100% of state fees, provided
that the minimum fee shall be $46.
(3) The electrical subcode fee shall be 100% of state fees, provided
that the minimum fee shall be $46.
(4) The fee for plan review shall be 20% of the amount charged for the
construction permit and shall be paid before the plans are
reviewed. The amount paid for this fee shall be credited toward the
amount of the fee to be charged for the construction permit.
(5) The fee for a permit for demolition of a building or structure shall
be $50 for accessory structures, $100 for one- and two-family
dwellings, and $200 for all other structures.
(6) The fee for a permit for the removal of a building or structure from
one lot to another or to a new location on the same lot shall be $20
per $1,000 of the sum of the estimated cost for moving, for new
foundations and for placement in a completed condition in the new
location, plus a demolition permit with a flat fee of $50.
(7) The fee for a permit to construct a sign shall be a flat fee of $46 per
sign.
(8) Certificates of occupancy:
(a) The fee for a certificate of occupancy shall be $50 for one- and
two-family residence use only.
(b) The fee for a certificate of occupancy shall be $100 for
commercial and all uses not mentioned in Subsection A(8)(a)
above.
(c) The fee for a certificate of continued occupancy shall be $100.
(d) The fee for a certificate of occupancy granted pursuant to a
change of use shall be $150.
(e) The fee for a multiple certificate of occupancy shall be $100 for
first certificate of occupancy and $50 for all others.
(9) The fee for a mechanical permit shall be $50.
(10) The fee for a variation shall be $100 each.
(11) The fee for a permit for installation of an elevator shall be state
regulated.
(12) The fee for inspection of an elevator shall be state regulated.
(13) The fee for asbestos abatement shall be state regulated.
§ 111-4 CHATHAM CODE § 111-4
104:124
(14) The fee for lead abatement shall be state regulated.
(15) The fire protection subcode permit fees shall apply to fire
protection and other hazardous equipment, as follows: sprinklers,
standpipes, detectors (smoke and heat), pre-engineered
suppression systems, gas- and oil-fired appliances not connected to
the plumbing system, kitchen exhaust systems, incinerators, and
crematoriums. The fire protection subcode permit fees are as
follows:
(a) The fee for 20 or fewer heads or detectors shall be $65; for 21
to and including 100 heads or detectors, the fee shall be $120;
for 101 to and including 200 heads or detectors, the fee shall
be $229; for 201 to and including 400 heads or detectors, the
fee shall be $594; for 401 to and including 1,000 heads or
detectors, the fee shall be $822; over 1,000 heads or detectors,
the fee shall be $1,050. In computing fees for heads and
detectors, the number of each shall be counted separately, and
two fees, one for heads and one for sprinklers, shall be
charged.
(b) The fee for each standpipe shall be $229.
(c) The fee for each pre-engineered system shall be $92.
(d) The fee for each gas- or oil-fired appliance not connected to the
plumbing system shall be $46.
(e) The fee for each kitchen exhaust system shall be $46.
(f) The fee for each incinerator shall be $400.
(g) The fee for each crematorium shall be $400.
(h) The fee for fire pump shall be $150.
(i) The fee for pre-action valves shall be $92.
(j) The fee for each smoke control system shall be $92.
(k) The fee for one through 12 alarm devices shall be $36; for each
additional 25, the fee shall be $12 .
(16) The plan review and inspection fee for mechanical systems shall be
10% of the amount of the building subcode fee.
(17) The fee for reinstatement of a lapsed permit shall be 1/2 the fee
charged originally, but not less than $25 per each subcode.
(18) All fees shall be rounded to the nearest dollar.
B. The Construction Official shall, with the advice of the subcode officials,
prepare and submit to the Borough Council once every two years a
report recommending a fee schedule based on the operating expenses
§ 111-4 CHECKS, FRAUDULENT § 111-4
104:125
§ 111-5. State permit surcharge fees.
of the agency and any other expenses of the municipality fairly
attributable to the enforcement of the State Uniform Construction Code
Act.
C. In order to provide for the training, certification and technical support
programs required by the Uniform Construction Code Act and the
regulations established by the Commissioner of the Department of
Community Affairs at N.J.A.C. 5:23, the enforcing agency shall collect,
in addition to the fees specified above, a surcharge fee (subject to
change) of $0.00265 per cubic foot of volume of new construction and
$1.35 per $1,000 cost of renovation/alteration work. Said surcharge fee
shall be remitted to the Construction Code Element, New Jersey
Department of Community Affairs, on a quarterly basis for the fiscal
quarters ending September 30, December 31, March 31 and June 30
and not later than one month next succeeding the end of the quarter for
which it is due. In the fiscal year in which the regulations first become
effective, said fee shall be collected and remitted for the third and
fourth quarters only.
A. Collection. In order to provide for the training and certification and
technical support programs required by the Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et
seq.), an enforcing agency, including the Department when acting as
the local agency, shall collect a surcharge fee to be based upon the
volume of new construction within the Borough. Said fee shall be
accounted for and forwarded to the Division of Codes and Standards in
the manner herein provided.
B. Amount. This fee shall be in the amount of $0.00265 per cubic foot
volume of new buildings and additions. Volume shall be computed in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.28. The fee for all other construction
shall be $1.35 per $1,000 of value of construction.
(1) No fee shall be collected for pre-engineered systems of commercial
farm buildings.
(2) No fee shall be collected for permits to perform asbestos
abatement or lead abatement.
(3) No fee shall be collected for permits for the construction or
rehabilitation of residential units that are to be legally restricted to
occupancy by households of low or moderate income, as defined in
N.J.A.C. 5:43-1.5.
(4) No fee shall be collected for demolition of buildings or structures.
(5) No fee shall be collected for work consequential to a natural
disaster when the local code enforcement agency is waiving its fee.
C. Remitting and reporting. The Borough shall remit fees to the Bureau on
a quarterly basis, in conjunction with report number R-840B State
§ 111-4 CHATHAM CODE § 111-5
104:126
Chapter 115
COOPERATIVE AND CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS
§ 115-1. Administrative officer designated; fees.
The Borough Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to act as the
administrative officer for the purposes as set forth in the New Jersey
Condominium Act and the Senor Citizens and Disabled Protected Tenancy
Act (N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.22 et seq.) and the rules and regulations enacted
pursuant thereto and is hereby authorized to charge the owners of a
building being converted a fee of $50 for each dwelling unit pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61-35, which fee shall accompany the notice of intention and
tenant list submitted to and processed by the Borough Clerk. This fee shall
apply to any and all applications completed after the effective date of this
chapter.
§ 115-2. Appeals.
Training Fee Report in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.5 (e). Fees
remitted shall be for the quarter. Checks shall be made payable to
"Treasurer, State of New Jersey."
A. Any person or party aggrieved by a determinations of said
administrative officer shall be entitled to an administrative hearing
before the Borough Attorney or his designee.
B. All notices of determinations issued by the Borough Clerk as said
administrative officer shall advise the recipient of his/her right to a
hearing and of the ten-day time limit for filing of an administrative
hearing request and shall give the name and address of the Borough
Attorney as the person to whom all applications for administrative
hearings are to be made.
C. Application for such administrative hearing shall be made in writing
and shall state the portions of the determination disagreed with and
shall be delivered to the Borough Attorney or his designee within 10
days after receipt by the aggrieved person or party of notice of such
determination. Each notice of appeal will be accompanied by a fee of
$125.
D. Administrative hearings shall be held within 10 days of the filing of the
application therefor, except that the Borough Attorney or his designee
may hold hearings at a later date due to extenuating circumstances at
the sole discretion of the officer hearing said appeal.
E. Notice of the date, time and place of each and every administrative
hearing shall be given by the Borough Attorney or his designee to all
known parties in interest, all of whom shall have the opportunity to
testify and present evidence and to examine adverse witnesses and
evidence, including, without limitation, application forms and
§ 111-5 COOPERATIVE AND CONDOMINIUM § 115-2
115:127
Chapter 119
DEVELOPMENT FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 111.
Fees — See Ch. 129.
Land development regulations — See Ch. 165.
§ 119-1. Purpose.
§ 119-2. Approval required.
supporting documentation previously submitted to either the Borough
Clerk as the administrative officer or the Borough Attorney or his
designee as the hearing officer.
F. A sound recording of the administrative hearing shall be made and a
transcript obtainable, at the expense of the requesting party, in
accordance with the rules applicable to municipal courts.
G. Within 10 days of the hearing, the Borough Attorney or his designee
shall issue a written final decision to all said parties in interest either
upholding or reversing the original determination, which decision shall
state the reasons therefor.
A. In Holmdel Builder's Association V. Holmdel Township, 121 N.J. 550
(1990), the New Jersey Supreme Court determined that mandatory
development fees are authorized by the Fair Housing Act of 1985 (the
"Act"), N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq., and the State Constitution, subject
to the Council on Affordable Housing's (COAH's) adoption of rules.
B. Pursuant to P.L. 2008, c.46 section 8 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.2) and the
Statewide Nonresidential Development Fee Act (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1
through 40:55D-8.7), COAH is authorized to adopt and promulgate
regulations necessary for the establishment, implementation, review,
monitoring and enforcement of municipal affordable housing trust
funds and corresponding spending plans. Municipalities that are under
the jurisdiction of the Council or court of competent jurisdiction and
have a COAH-approved spending plan may retain fees collected from
nonresidential development.
C. This chapter establishes standards for the collection, maintenance, and
expenditure of development fees pursuant to COAH's regulations and in
accordance with P.L. 2008, c.46, Sections 8 and 32 through 38. Fees
collected pursuant to this chapter shall be used for the sole purpose of
providing low- and moderate-income housing. This chapter shall be
interpreted within the framework of COAH's rules on development fees,
codified at N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.
§ 115-2 CHATHAM CODE § 119-2
115:128
§ 119-3. Definitions.
The following terms, as used in this chapter, shall have the following
meanings:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included in the
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and includes, but is not limited to,
an inclusionary development, a municipal construction project or a onehundred-
percent-affordable development.
COAH or the COUNCIL — The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing
established under the Act which has primary jurisdiction for the
administration of housing obligations in accordance with sound regional
planning consideration in the state.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT FEE — Money paid by a developer for the improvement of
property as permitted in N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.3.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The assessed value of a property divided
by the current average ratio of assessed to true value for the municipality in
which the property is situated, as determined in accordance with sections
1, 5, and 6 of P.L. 1973, c.123 (N.J.S.A. 54:1-35a through N.J.S.A. 54:1-35c).
GREEN BUILDING STRATEGIES — Those strategies that minimize the
impact of development on the environment, and enhance the health, safety
and well-being of residents by producing durable, low-maintenance,
resource-efficient housing while making optimum use of existing
infrastructure and community services.
§ 119-4. Residential development fees.
A. This chapter shall not be effective until approved by COAH pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:96-5.1.
B. The Borough of Chatham shall not spend development fees until COAH
has approved a plan for spending such fees in conformance with
N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.10 and N.J.A.C. 5:96-5.3.
A. Imposed fees.
(1) Within all residential zoning district(s), residential developers,
except for developers of the types of development specifically
exempted below, shall pay a fee of 1.5% of the equalized assessed
value for residential development, provided no increased density is
permitted.
(2) When an increase in residential density pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d(5) (known as a "d" variance) has been permitted,
developers may be required to pay a development fee of 6% of the
§ 119-2 COOPERATIVE AND CONDOMINIUM § 119-4
115:129
§ 119-5. Nonresidential development fees.
equalized assessed value for each additional unit that may be
realized. However, if the zoning on a site has changed during the
two-year period preceding the filing of such a variance application,
the base density for the purposes of calculating the bonus
development fee shall be the highest density permitted by right
during the two-year period preceding the filing of the variance
application. Example: If an approval allows four units to be
constructed on a site that was zoned for two units, the fees could
equal 1.5% of the equalized assessed value on the first two units;
and the specified higher percentage up to 6% of the equalized
assessed value for the two additional units, provided zoning on
the site has not changed during the two-year period preceding the
filing of such a variance application.
B. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for residential
development.
(1) Affordable housing developments, developments where the
developer is providing for the construction of affordable units
elsewhere in the municipality, and developments where the
developer has made a payment in lieu of on-site construction of
affordable units shall be exempt from development fees.
(2) Developments that have received preliminary or final site plan
approval prior to the adoption of a municipal development fee
ordinance shall be exempt from development fees, unless the
developer seeks a substantial change in the approval. Where a site
plan approval does not apply, a zoning and/or building permit shall
be synonymous with preliminary or final site plan approval for this
purpose. The fee percentage shall be vested on the date that the
building permit is issued.
(3) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing
structure undergoes a change to a more intense use, is demolished
and replaced, or is expanded, if the expansion is not otherwise
exempt from the development fee requirement. The development
fee shall be calculated on the increase in the equalized assessed
value of the improved structure.
(4) Developers of developments with one or two owner-occupied
dwelling units; and residential structures demolished and replaced
as a result of fire, flood, or natural disaster, shall be exempt from
paying a development fee.
A. Imposed fees.
(1) Within all zoning districts, nonresidential developers, except for
developers of the types of development specifically exempted, shall
pay a fee equal to 2.5% of the equalized assessed value of the land
§ 119-4 CHATHAM CODE § 119-5
115:130
and improvements, for all new nonresidential construction on an
unimproved lot or lots.
(2) Nonresidential developers, except for developers of the types of
development specifically exempted, shall also pay a fee equal to
2.5% of the increase in equalized assessed value resulting from any
additions to existing structures to be used for nonresidential
purposes.
(3) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing
structure is demolished and replaced. The development fee of 2.5%
shall be calculated on the difference between the equalized
assessed value of the preexisting land and improvement and the
equalized assessed value of the newly improved structure, i.e., land
and improvement, at the time final certificate of occupancy is
issued. If the calculation required under this section results in a
negative number, the nonresidential development fee shall be zero.
B. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for
nonresidential development.
(1) The nonresidential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or market
rate development shall be subject to the development fee of 2.5%
unless otherwise exempted below.
(2) The fee of 2.5% shall not apply to an increase in equalized assessed
value resulting from alterations, change in use within existing
footprint, reconstruction, renovations and repairs.
(3) Nonresidential developments shall be exempt from the payment of
nonresidential development fees in accordance with the
exemptions required pursuant to P.L. 2008, c.46, as specified in the
Form N-RDF, State of New Jersey Non-Residential Development
Certification/Exemption form. Any exemption claimed by a
developer shall be substantiated by that developer.
(4) A developer of a nonresidential development exempted from the
nonresidential development fee pursuant to P.L. 2008, c.46 shall be
subject to it at such time the basis for the exemption no longer
applies, and shall make the payment of the nonresidential
development fee, in that event, within three years after that event
or after the issuance of the final certificate of occupancy of the
nonresidential development, whichever is later.
(5) If a property which was exempted from the collection of a
nonresidential development fee thereafter ceases to be exempt
from property taxation, the owner of the property shall remit the
fees required pursuant to this section within 45 days of the
termination of the property tax exemption. Unpaid nonresidential
development fees under these circumstances may be enforceable
by the Borough of Chatham as a lien against the real property of
the owner.
§ 119-5 COOPERATIVE AND CONDOMINIUM § 119-6
115:131
§ 119-6. Collection procedures.
A. Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable approval
for a development, the applicable approving authority shall direct its
staff to notify the Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a
building permit.
B. For nonresidential developments only, the developer shall also be
provided with a copy of Form N-RDF, State of New Jersey Non-
Residential Development Certification/Exemption to be completed as
per the instructions provided. The developer of a nonresidential
development shall complete Form N-RDF as per the instructions
provided. The Construction Official shall verify the information
submitted by the nonresidential developer as per the instructions
provided in the Form N-RDF. The Tax Assessor shall verify exemptions
and prepare estimated and final assessments as per the instructions
provided in Form N-RDF.
C. The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a building
permit shall notify the local Tax Assessor of the issuance of the first
building permit for a development which is subject to a development
fee.
D. Within 90 days of receipt of that notice, the municipal Tax Assessor,
based on the plans filed, shall provide an estimate of the equalized
assessed value of the development.
E. The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy notifies the local Assessor of any and all
requests for the scheduling of a final inspection on property which is
subject to a development fee.
F. Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a final
inspection, the Municipal Assessor shall confirm or modify the
previously estimated equalized assessed value of the improvements of
the development; calculate the development fee; and thereafter notify
the developer of the amount of the fee.
G. Should the Borough of Chatham fail to determine or notify the
developer of the amount of the development fee within 10 business days
of the request for final inspection, the developer may estimate the
amount due and pay that estimated amount consistent with the dispute
process set forth in Subsection b of Section 37 of P.L. 2008, c.46
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.6).
H. Fifty percent of the development fee shall be collected at the time of
issuance of the building permit. The remaining portion shall be
collected at the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The developer
shall be responsible for paying the difference between the fee
calculated at building permit and that determined at issuance of
certificate of occupancy.
§ 119-6 CHATHAM CODE § 119-6
115:132
§ 119-7. Affordable housing trust fund.
I. Appeal of development fees.
(1) A developer may challenge residential development fees imposed
by filing a challenge with the County Board of Taxation. Pending a
review and determination by the Board, collected fees shall be
placed in an interest-bearing escrow account by the Borough of
Chatham. Appeals from a determination of the Board may be made
to the Tax Court in accordance with the provisions of the State Tax
Uniform Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days
after the date of such determination. Interest earned on amounts
escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
(2) A developer may challenge nonresidential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the Director of the Division of
Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the Director,
which shall be made within 45 days of receipt of the challenge,
collected fees shall be placed in an interest-bearing escrow account
by the Borough of Chatham. Appeals from a determination of the
Director may be made to the Tax Court in accordance with the
provisions of the State Tax Uniform Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1
et seq., within 90 days after the date of such determination.
Interest earned on amounts escrowed shall be credited to the
prevailing party.
A. There is hereby created a separate, interest-bearing housing trust fund
to be maintained by the Chief Financial Officer for the purpose of
depositing development fees collected from residential and
nonresidential developers and proceeds from the sale of units with
extinguished controls.
B. The following additional funds shall be deposited in the affordable
housing trust fund and shall at all times be identifiable by source and
amount:
(1) Payments in lieu of on-site construction of affordable units;
(2) Developer-contributed funds to make 10% of the adaptable
entrances in a townhouse or other multistory attached
development accessible;
(3) Rental income from municipally operated units;
(4) Repayments from affordable housing program loans;
(5) Recapture funds;
(6) Proceeds from the sale of affordable units; and
(7) Any other funds collected in connection with the Borough of
Chatham's affordable housing program.
§ 119-6 COOPERATIVE AND CONDOMINIUM § 119-7
115:133
§ 119-8. Use of funds.
C. Within seven days from the opening of the trust fund account, the
Borough of Chatham shall provide COAH with written authorization, in
the form of a three-party escrow agreement between the municipality,
the bank, and COAH, to permit COAH to direct the disbursement of the
funds as provided for in N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.13(b).
D. All interest accrued in the housing trust fund shall only be used on
eligible affordable housing activities approved by COAH.
A. The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a spending plan approved
by COAH. Funds deposited in the housing trust fund may be used for
any activity approved by COAH to address the Borough of Chatham's
fair share obligation and may be set up as a grant or revolving loan
program. Such activities include, but are not limited to preservation or
purchase of housing for the purpose of maintaining or implementing
affordability controls, rehabilitation, new construction of affordable
housing units and related costs, accessory apartment, market to
affordable, or regional housing partnership programs, conversion of
existing nonresidential buildings to create new affordable units, green
building strategies designed to be cost saving and in accordance with
accepted national or state standards, purchase of land for affordable
housing, improvement of land to be used for affordable housing,
extensions or improvements of roads and infrastructure to affordable
housing sites, financial assistance designed to increase affordability,
administration necessary for implementation of the Housing Element
and Fair Share Plan, or any other activity as permitted pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.7 through 5:97-8.9 and specified in the approved
spending plan.
B. Funds shall not be expended to reimburse Borough of Chatham for past
housing activities.
C. At least 30% of all development fees collected and interest earned shall
be used to provide affordability assistance to low- and moderate-income
households in affordable units included in the municipal Fair Share
Plan. One-third of the affordability assistance portion of development
fees collected shall be used to provide affordability assistance to those
households earning 30% or less of median income by region.
(1) Affordability assistance programs may include down payment
assistance, security deposit assistance, low-interest loans, rental
assistance, assistance with homeowners' association or
condominium fees and special assessments, and assistance with
emergency repairs.
(2) Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less of
median income may include buying down the cost of low- or
moderate-income units in the municipal Fair Share Plan to make
§ 119-7 CHATHAM CODE § 119-8
115:134
§ 119-9. Monitoring.
The Borough of Chatham shall complete and return to COAH all monitoring
forms included in monitoring requirements related to the collection of
development fees from residential and nonresidential developers, payments
in lieu of constructing affordable units on site, funds from the sale of
units with extinguished controls, barrier-free escrow funds, rental income,
repayments from affordable housing program loans, and any other funds
collected in connection with the Borough of Chatham's housing program,
as well as to the expenditure of revenues and implementation of the plan
certified by COAH. All monitoring reports shall be completed on forms
designed by COAH.
§ 119-10. Ongoing collection of fees.
The ability for the Borough of Chatham to impose, collect and expend
development fees shall expire with its substantive certification unless the
Borough of Chatham has filed an adopted Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan with COAH, has petitioned for substantive certification, and has
received COAH's approval of its development fee ordinance. If the Borough
of Chatham fails to renew its ability to impose and collect development
fees prior to the expiration of substantive certification, it may be subject to
forfeiture of any or all funds remaining within its municipal trust fund. Any
funds so forfeited shall be deposited into the New Jersey Affordable Housing
Trust Fund established pursuant to section 20 of P.L. 1985, c.222 (N.J.S.A.
them affordable to households earning 30% or less of median
income.
(3) Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site and funds
from the sale of units with extinguished controls shall be exempt
from the affordability assistance requirement.
D. The Borough of Chatham may contract with a private or public entity to
administer any part of its Housing Element and Fair Share Plan,
including the requirement for affordability assistance, in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:96-18.
E. No more than 20% of all revenues collected from development fees may
be expended on administration, including, but not limited to, salaries
and benefits for municipal employees or consultant fees necessary to
develop or implement a new construction program, a Housing Element
and Fair Share Plan, and/or an affirmative marketing program. In the
case of a rehabilitation program, no more than 20% of the revenues
collected from development fees shall be expended for such
administrative expenses. Administrative funds may be used for income
qualification of households, monitoring the turnover of sale and rental
units, and compliance with COAH's monitoring requirements. Legal or
other fees related to litigation opposing affordable housing sites or
objecting to the Council's regulations and/or action are not eligible uses
of the affordable housing trust fund.
§ 119-8 COOPERATIVE AND CONDOMINIUM § 119-10
115:135
52:27D-320). The Borough of Chatham shall not impose a residential
development fee on a development that receives preliminary or final site
plan approval after the expiration of its substantive certification or
judgment of compliance, nor shall the Borough of Chatham retroactively
impose a development fee on such a development. The Borough of Chatham
shall not expend development fees after the expiration of its substantive
certification or judgment of compliance.
Chapter 122
DRUG-FREE ZONES
§ 122-1. Map adopted.18
§ 122-2. Official finding and record.
The Drug-Free School Zone Map and the Public Property Zone Map
approved and adopted and amended pursuant to § 122-1 of this chapter
shall continue to constitute an official finding and record as to the location
and boundaries of areas on or within 1,000 feet of property owned by or
leased to any elementary or secondary school or School Board which is
used for school purposes until such time, if any, that this chapter shall be
amended to reflect any additions or deletions with respect to the location
and boundaries of School Boards and drug-free school zones. The same
A. In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of P.L. 1988, c. 44
(N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7), the Drug-Free School Zone Map (DFSZM) produced
on February 21, 2005, by Joaquim Fernandes, P.E., the Borough of
Chatham Engineer, entitled “Borough of Chatham, Morris County, New
Jersey, Drug-Free and Public Facility Zone Map,” is hereby approved
and adopted as an official finding and record of the location and areas
within the Borough of Chatham of property which is used for school
purposes and which is owned by or leased to any elementary or
secondary school or School Board and of the areas on or within 1,000
feet of such school property.
B. In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of P.L. 1997, c. 327,
Section 1 (N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1), the Drug-Free School Zone Map shall
include and also be considered the Public Property Zone Map (PPZM)
produced on February 21, 2005, by Joaquim Fernandes, P.E., the
Borough of Chatham Engineer, entitled "Borough of Chatham, Morris
County, New Jersey, Drug-Free and Public Facility Zone Map," and is
hereby approved and adopted as an official finding and record of the
location and areas within the Borough of Chatham of property which is
used as a public housing facility, public park or a public building and of
areas on or within 500 feet of such public property.
18.Editor's Note: The map cited in this section is on file in the Clerk's office. A copy is also
available at the official website of the Borough of Chatham at www.chathamborough.org.
Click on “Municipal Ordinances.”
§ 119-10 CHATHAM CODE § 122-2
122:136
map aforesaid shall also constitute an official finding and record as to
the location and boundaries of areas on or within 500 feet of property
comprising a public housing facility, a public park or a public building until
such time, if any, that this chapter shall be amended to reflect any additions
or deletions with respect to the location and boundaries of public property
and drug-free public property zones.
§ 122-3. Notification of changes.
The School Board, or the chief administrative officer, in the case of any
private or parochial school, is hereby directed and shall have the continuing
obligation to promptly notify the Borough of Chatham's Engineer and the
Borough of Chatham's Attorney of any changes or contemplated changes
in the location and boundaries of any property owned by or leased to
any elementary or secondary school or School Board and which is used
for school purposes. Likewise, the Borough Engineer in the case of public
property shall have the continuing obligation to promptly notify the Mayor
and Council of any changes or contemplated changes in the location and
boundaries of any public property which would require an amendment to
the Drug-Free School Zone Map and Public Property Map.
§ 122-4. Titled map on file; copies made available.
The Clerk of the Borough of Chatham is hereby directed to receive and
to keep on file the original of the map approved and adopted pursuant to
§ 122-1 of this chapter and any amended original maps and to provide at
reasonable cost a true copy thereof to any person or agency or court which
may, from time to time, request such a copy, along with a certification that
each copy is a true copy of the map approved and adopted herein and
kept on file and is hereby further directed that a true copy of such map as
amended and this chapter as amended shall be provided without cost to the
County Clerk and to the office of the Morris County Prosecutor.
§ 122-5. Additional matters.
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
A. It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 122-1
of this chapter was prepared and is intended to be used as evidence in
prosecutions arising under the criminal laws of this state and that,
pursuant to state law, such map shall constitute prima facie evidence of
the following:
(1) The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
Borough of Chatham.
(2) The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to
such schools or School Boards.
§ 122-2 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 122-5
122:137
(3) That such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes.
(4) The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000
feet of such school property.
(5) The location of public housing facilities, public parks and public
buildings within the Borough of Chatham.
(6) The boundaries of the real property which is owned or leased for
the purposes of public property.
(7) That such public property is and continues to be used for public
purposes.
(8) The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 500
feet of such public property.
B. Except as is otherwise expressly noted on the face of the approved and
adopted map or amended map, all the property depicted on the map
approved and adopted herein as school property and public property
was owned by or leased to a school or School Board or is utilized as
public property and was being used for school purposes or public
purposes as of July 9, 1987, that being the effective date of P.L. 1987, c.
101 (N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7) and January 9, 1998, that being the effective date
of P.L. 1997, c. 327, Section 1 (N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1), respectively, and that
by amendment the originally adopted map has been amended for both
school purposes and public property purposes to depict both property
owned or leased to a school or School Board and for school purposes
and property being used for public purposes as of the date of the
revised map.
C. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7 and N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1(e),
the prosecutor is not precluded from introducing or relying upon any
other evidence or testimony to establish a violation of the offense
defined in that statute, including use of a map or diagram other than the
one approved and adopted pursuant to § 122-1 of this chapter. Failure
of the map approved herein to depict the location and boundaries of any
property which is, in fact, used for school purposes or public purposes
which is owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or
School Board or is public property, whether the actions of such
depiction is the result of inadvertent omission or the result of any
changes in location and boundaries of such property which have not
been incorporated into a revised approved map, shall not be deemed to
be an official finding and record as such property is not owned by or
leased to a school or a School Board, that such property is not used for
school purposes or is not public property or that such property is not
used for public purposes.
D. All the requirements set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7 concerning the
preparation, approval and adoption of a Drug-Free School Zone Map
§ 122-5 CHATHAM CODE § 122-5
122:138
Chapter 129
FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Development fees – See Ch. 119. Board of Health fees – See Ch. 280.
and N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1 concerning the preparation, approval and
adoption of a Public Property Map have been complied with.
§ 122-5 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 122-5
122:139

ARTICLE I
Affordable Housing Fees
[Adopted 5-11-1998 by Ord. No. 8-98 (Ch. 69 of the 1975 Code)]
§ 129-1. Purpose.
In Holmdel Builder's Association vs. Holmdel Township, 121 N.J. 550 (1990),
the New Jersey Supreme Court determined that mandatory development
fees are authorized by the Fair Housing Act of 1985, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et
seq., and the State Constitution, subject to the imposition of rules by COAH.
The purpose of this article is to establish standards for the collection,
maintenance and expenditure of development fees pursuant to COAH'S
adopted rules. Fees collected pursuant to this article shall be used for the
sole purpose of providing low- and moderate-income housing. This article
shall be interpreted within the framework of COAH's rules on development
fees.
§ 129-2. Definitions.
The following definitions shall control:
BOROUGH — Shall refer to the Borough of Chatham.[Added 3-28-2005 by
Ord. No. 05-04]
COAH — The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing.
DEVELOPMENT FEES — Money paid by an individual, person, partnership,
association, company or corporation for the improvement of property as
permitted in COAH's rules.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The value of a property determined by
the Municipal Tax Assessor through a process designed to ensure that all
property in the municipality is assessed at the same assessment ratio or
ratios required by law. Estimates at the time of issuance of a building permit
may be obtained by the Tax Assessor utilizing estimates for construction
cost. Final equalized assessed value will be determined at project
completion by the Municipal Tax Assessor.
SUBSTANTIVE CERTIFICATION — A determination of COAH approving a
municipality's housing element and fair share plan in accordance with the
provisions of the Act and the rules and criteria as set forth herein. A grant of
substantive certification shall be valid for a period of six years in accordance
with the terms and conditions contained therein.
§ 129-3. Determination of fees. [Amended 3-28-2005 by Ord. No.
05-04]
A. Residential zones.
(1) In all residential zones, a developer shall pay residential
development fees which will be a maximum of 1.5% of the
equalized assessed value for residential development, the coverage
of the homeowner warranty document of a for-sale unit or the
§ 129-1 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 129-3
122:141
appraised value on the document utilized for construction financing
for a rental unit, provided that no increased density is permitted.
[Amended 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 08-24]
(2) When the Borough approves an increase in residential density
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d(5) (known as a “d” variance), the
Borough may impose a development fee upon the developer of up
to 6% of either the equalized assessed value for each additional
unit that may be realized, the coverage amount on the homeowner
warranty document for each additional for-sale unit or the
appraised value on the document utilized for construction financing
for each additional rental unit. (Example: If an approval allows four
units to be constructed on a site that was zoned for two units, the
fees could equal 1% of either the equalized assessed value, the
coverage amount on the homeowner warranty document or the
appraised value on the document utilized for construction financing
on the first two units; and 6% of either the equalized assessed
value, the coverage amount on the homeowner warranty document
or the appraised value on the document utilized for construction
financing for the two additional units.) However, if the zoning on a
site has changed during the two-year period preceding the filing of
such a variance application, the density for the purposes of
calculating the bonus development fee shall be the highest density
permitted by right during the two-year period preceding the filing
of the variance application.
B. Nonresidential zones.
(1) In all nonresidential zones, a developer shall pay nonresidential
development fees which shall be 2.5% of either the equalized
assessed value for nonresidential development or the appraised
value. The Borough may also utilize any recognized industry
standard to establish values of nonresidential development that is
acceptable to both the Borough and COAH. [Amended
11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 08-24]
(2) When the Borough approves an increase in floor area pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d (4) (known as a “d” variance), the Borough may
impose a development fee of up to 6% on the additional floor area
realized. However, if the zoning on a site has changed during the
two-year period preceding the filing of such a variance application,
the base floor area for the purposes of calculating the bonus
development fee shall be the highest floor area permitted by right
during the two-year period preceding the filing of the variance
application.
(3) The imposition of payments in lieu of development fees pursuant to
a development fee ordinance approved by COAH pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:93-8 shall not be construed as a condition of preliminary
or final site plan approval or as a stipulation included in a
§ 129-3 CHATHAM CODE § 129-3
122:142
§ 129-4. Eligible exaction; ineligible exaction; exemptions from
development fees.
§ 129-5. Collection of fees.
§ 129-6. Housing Trust Fund. [Amended 4-25-2005 by Ord. No.
05-09]
developer’s agreement for the purposes of calculating growth
exclusions pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:94-2.4(a)5.
A. Developers of low- and moderate-income units shall be exempt from
paying development fees.
B. Developers that expand an existing nonresidential structure or expand
a residential structure where it results in additional dwelling units shall
pay a development fee. The development fee shall be calculated based
on the increase in the equalized assessed value of the improved
structure.
C. Developers that have received preliminary or final approval prior to the
effective date of this article shall be exempt from paying a development
fee unless the developer seeks a substantial change in the approval.
D. Developers of any church, library, school, college, governmental facility,
hospital for humans or nursing home shall be exempt from paying a
development fee.
A. Developers shall pay 50% of the calculated development fee to the
Borough of Chatham at the issuance of building permits. The
development fee shall be estimated by the Tax Assessor prior to the
issuance of building permits.
B. Developers shall pay the remaining fee to the Borough of Chatham at
the issuance of the certificates of occupancy. At the issuance of the
certificates of occupancy, the Tax Assessor shall calculate the equalized
assessed value and the appropriate development fee. The developer
shall be responsible for paying the difference between the fee
calculated at the certificate of occupancy and the amount paid at
building permit.
A. There is hereby created an interest-bearing Housing Trust Fund to be
maintained at a bank approved by the Mayor and Borough Council for
the purpose of receiving development fees from residential and
nonresidential developers. All development fees paid by the developers
pursuant to this article shall be deposited in this fund. No money shall
be expended from the Housing Trust Fund unless the expenditure
conforms to a spending plan approved by COAH.
B. If COAH determines that the Borough of Chatham is not in conformance
with COAH's rules on development fees, COAH is authorized to direct
the manner in which all development fees collected pursuant to this
§ 129-3 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 129-6
122:143
§ 129-7. Use of funds.
§ 129-8. Expiration.
This article shall expire if:
article shall be expended. Such authorization is pursuant to this article,
COAH's rules on development fees and the written authorization from
the governing body to the bank.
A. Money deposited in the Housing Trust Fund may be used for any
activity approved by COAH for addressing the Borough of Chatham's
low- and moderate-income housing obligation. Such activities may
include, but are not necessarily limited to, housing rehabilitation, new
construction, regional contribution agreements, the purchase of land
for low- and moderate-income housing sites, extensions and/or
improvements of roads and infrastructure to low- and moderate-income
housing sites, assistance designed to render units more affordable to
low- and moderate-income households and administrative costs
necessary to implement the Borough of Chatham's housing element.
The expenditure of all money shall conform to a spending plan approved
by COAH.
B. At least 30% of the revenues collected shall be devoted to render units
more affordable. Examples of such activities include, but are not limited
to, down payment assistance, low interest loans and rental assistance.
C. No more than 20% of the revenues collected from development fees
shall be expended on administration, including but not limited to
salaries and benefits for municipal employees or consultant fees
necessary to develop or implement a rehabilitation program; a new
construction program; a regional contribution agreement; a housing
element; and an affirmative marketing program.
(1) Administrative funds may be used for income qualifications of
households; monitoring the turnover of sale and rental units; and
compliance with Council monitoring requirements. Development
fees shall not be used to defray the cost of existing staff.
D. Development fee revenues shall not be expended to reimburse the
Borough of Chatham for housing activities that preceded substantive
certification.
A. COAH dismisses or denies the Borough of Chatham's petition for
substantive certification.
B. COAH revokes substantive certification or its certification of this
article.
C. Substantive certification expires prior to the Borough of Chatham's
filing an adopted housing element with COAH, petitioning for
substantive certification or receiving COAH's approval of this article.
§ 129-6 CHATHAM CODE § 129-8
122:144
ARTICLE II
Miscellaneous Borough Fees
[Adopted 5-28-2002 by Ord. No. 02-11]
§ 129-9. Recreation Department fees. [Amended 9-8-2003 by Ord.
No. 03-19; 6-24-2013 by Ord. No. 13-15]
§ 129-10. Mulch Area charges.
Registration rules and fees and charges required to be paid by landscapers
for the Borough of Chatham Mulch Area of the Department of Public Works
shall be established and designated by Council by resolution.
§ 129-11. Main Street banner. [Added 4-25-2005 by Ord. No. 05-09]
There will be a fee due and payable to the Borough of Chatham upon
submission of the banner application to the Borough Clerk's office. Fees and
charges required to be paid to cover the cost of the installation and removal
of a Route 124 Main Street Banner shall be established and designated by
Council by resolution.
A. The Council shall annually establish, by resolution, a field usage fee for
use of Borough fields based on the number of participants per season
per sport.
B. The Council shall annually establish, by resolution, membership fees for
the Chatham Borough tennis court and/or the Chatham Borough
municipal pool.
C. The Council may set a usage fee schedule for use of camps, parks,
picnic areas, and other Borough facilities from time to time by
resolution.
D. All fees established pursuant to this section shall be collected by the
Director of Recreation or his/her designee.
§ 129-9 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 129-11
122:145

ARTICLE III
Public Records and Documents
[Adopted 4-25-2005 by Ord. No. 05-12]
§ 129-12. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this article is to establish a procedure for implementation
of the Open Public Records Act (N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq.) and provides for a
schedule of charges to inspect and to reproduce government records by the
public.
§ 129-13. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACTUAL COST — The actual cost of duplicating the government record in
terms of cost of materials and supplies used to make a duplicate.[Added
6-28-2010 by Ord. No. 10-18; amended 9-13-2010 by Ord. No. 10-22]
PUBLIC RECORDS — Generally includes those records determined to be
public in accordance with N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1. The term does not include
employee personnel files, police investigation records, public assistance
files or other matters in which there is a right of privacy or confidentiality or
which is specifically exempted by law.[Amended 6-28-2010 by Ord. No.
10-18; 9-13-2010 by Ord. No. 10-22]
SPECIAL SERVICE CHARGE — A charge, in addition to the actual cost
of duplicating the government record(s), which shall reflect the expense
associated with the extensive use of Borough information technology or
resources, or the extensive clerical or supervisory assistance by Borough
personnel necessary to provide access to the record(s), pursuant to the
provisions of the Open Public Records Act (N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et
seq.).[Amended 6-28-2010 by Ord. No. 10-18; 9-13-2010 by Ord. No.
10-22]
§ 129-14. Policy and procedures.
The Borough's policy and procedures under the Open Public Records Act
(N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et. seq.) shall be established and implemented by Council
by resolution.
§ 129-15. Fees for copies of particular records and documents.
[Amended 6-28-2010 by Ord. No. 10-18; 9-13-2010 by Ord. No.
10-22]
Fees shall be charged as indicated for copies of the following records and
documents:
A. Large-sized documents and maps.
§ 129-12 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 129-15
122:147
(1) Zoning Map, 17 inches by 21 inches: $0.07 per copy or cost to the
Borough.
(2) Borough Map, two feet by three feet: $0.07 per copy or cost to the
Borough.
(3) Tax Maps, two feet by three feet: $0.07 per copy or cost to the
Borough.
(4) Tax Maps, 11 inches by 17 inches: $0.07 per copy or cost to the
Borough.
(5) Maps, other categories, two feet by three feet: $0.07 per copy or
cost to the Borough.
(6) Maps larger than two feet by three feet: cost to Borough per square
foot.
(7) Contour maps (as available): $0.07 each or cost to the Borough.
(8) Site plans: cost to the Borough.
(9) Subdivision plats: cost to the Borough.
(10) Engineering plans: cost to the Borough.
B. Tax records.
(1) Assessment search: $10.
(2) Assessment search continuation: $2.
(3) Tax search: $10.
(4) Continuation search, per calendar year: $2.
C. Municipal Court discovery, police reports, related documents,
insurance requests, and photographs.
(1) All requests for discovery in matters pending in the Borough of
Chatham Municipal Court shall be submitted through the Borough
Prosecutor.
(2) The following fees shall be payable by the requestor to the Borough
of Chatham for the discovery provided:
(a) Starting with the first page: $0.05 per page.
(b) Actual postage for any discovery sent by mail.
(c) For the envelope for any discovery sent by mail: $0.92 for
manila envelope of at least 8 1/2 inches by 11 inches size or
$0.62 for smaller size manila envelope.
§ 129-15 CHATHAM CODE § 129-15
122:148
(d) Photographs will be photocopied at the rates established
herein. If requests are made for duplicate photographs, the
actual cost of making the photographs shall be charged.
(e) Duplication of VHS videotapes: $1 per VHS videotape.
(f) On any item that cannot be photocopied on the Borough copy
machine or not otherwise provided for in this schedule, the
actual cost incurred in making the copy shall be charged.
(g) Copies of Police Department DVDs or CDs: $0.56 per DVD or
$0.38 per CD.
(h) Audio copies of police communication on CD: $0.38 per CD.
(i) Copies of police mobile DVDs: $0.56 per DVD.
(3) Where the discovery must be obtained from an entity other than
the Borough of Chatham, e.g., another Police Department, the
actual costs paid to the other entity shall be paid by the requestor.
D. General records.
(1) Unless otherwise specified by law, the fees for all records in printed
form in standard size up to 8 1/2 inches by 11 inches in size which
are available pursuant to law shall be as follows: $0.05 per page,
starting with the first page. Unless otherwise specified by law, the
fees for all records in printed form in standard size from 8 1/2
inches by 14 inches in size or larger which are available pursuant
to law shall be as follows: $0.07 per page, starting with the first
page.
(2) Certifications of any record: $0.50 each, in addition to cost of
copies as set forth herein.
(3) Press proofs of ordinances (if available): $0.05 per page, starting
with the first page.
(4) List of property owners: $0.25 per name or $10, whichever is more.
E. Brochures and preprinted documents not listed in any ordinance.
(1) Master Plan: $40.
(2) Environmental Resource Inventory: $25 each.
(3) Master Plan Reexamination Report: $10 each.
(4) Open Space and Recreation Plan (OSRP): $30 each.
(5) "Images of America — Chatham" by John Cunningham: $16.99.
(6) "Design Guidelines for Rehabilitation and New Construction in The
Main Street Historic District" by the Chatham Borough Historic
Preservation Commission: $5 each.
§ 129-15 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 129-15
122:149
§ 129-16. Fees for mailing tax sale notices to property owner.
The fee for mailing a tax sale notice in lieu of publication to the property
owner by regular mail or by certified mail pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-26 shall
be $25 for each set of notices for a particular property.
§ 129-17. Records not subject to examination or copying.
§ 129-18. Extraordinary special service charges and electronic
records. [Amended 6-28-2010 by Ord. No. 10-18; 9-13-2010 by Ord.
No. 10-22]
F. Code of the Borough of Chatham: cost to Borough.
G. Land Use Ordinance (Chapter 165 of the Code of the Borough of
Chatham): cost to Borough.
H. Supplementation as prepared by General Code, LLC: cost to Borough.
A. Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, where it shall appear
that the record or records which are sought to be examined and of
which copies are requested is forbidden under the Open Public Records
Act (N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq.) or is otherwise expressly forbidden by
statute, proclamation or regulation, or is otherwise exempt from the
requirement that copies thereof be furnished upon request, the request
for the same may be refused or denied.
B. The requestor may challenge the decision to refuse or to deny the
request to examine and/or for copies to be made by either instituting a
proceeding by filing an action in the Superior Court of New Jersey or in
lieu of filing an action in Superior Court, filing a complaint with the
Department of Community Affairs, Government Records Council, as
provided by N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq.
A. Extraordinary service charges of $40 per hour for clerical and $60 per
hour for supervisory shall be applied for any extensive use of
information technology, or for the labor cost of personnel providing the
service that is actually incurred by the Borough or attributable to the
agency for the programming, clerical and supervisory assistance
required to provide a government record in the medium requested if it
is not a medium routinely used by the Borough or not routinely
developed or maintained by the Borough or requiring a substantial
amount of manipulation or programming of information.
B. Color copies (single-sided): $0.12 per page.
C. Copy fee for forms of electronic media:
(1) Reproduction of electronic records, including, but not limited to
VHS videotape, CD, and DVD, or conversion of paper records to
electronic format: actual cost. Mailing cost, if any, is additional.
§ 129-15 CHATHAM CODE § 129-18
122:150
§ 129-19. Special service charges for voluminous requests.
§ 129-20. Special charge for information technology services.
(2) Reformatted tape or conversion of electronic files from one form of
electronic media or software product to another form of electronic
media or software product: $75 or cost to the Borough.
Transportation and handling cost is additional and must be paid
when ordering said copy.
(3) Printouts of computer-generated records: $0.05 per printout of
each computer screen.
(4) For security reasons, the use of a floppy disk, CD, DVD, or external
memory drive or form of storage medium provided by the requestor
of records is prohibited.
(5) Microfilm: actual cost.
A. Whenever the nature, format, manner of collation, or volume of a
government record embodied in the form of printed matter to be
inspected, examined or copied is such that the record cannot be
reproduced by ordinary document-copying equipment in ordinary
business size, or involves an extraordinary expenditure of time and
effort to accommodate the request, a reasonable special service charge
will be added for said services as set forth hereinbelow. Included within
the types of work for which charges shall be made are the compilation
of presently available technical information requiring substantial
amounts of time and preparation of calculations, reports, memoranda,
and other documents of a technical nature.
B. The cost of said services shall be paid to the Borough of Chatham at the
following rates:
(1) For all services performed by employees of the Borough: $60 per
hour supervisor/nonsupervisor, $40 per hour special service
charge, plus expenses.
(2) For all services performed by the Borough's paid professional
consultants: the rate paid by the Borough for said services.
C. The person requesting duplication of the records shall have the
opportunity to review and object to the charge prior to it being
incurred. A copy of the invoice for the actual direct cost will be included
with the records.
A. If a request is made for a record in a medium not routinely used by the
Borough, or in a medium not routinely developed or maintained by the
Borough, or requiring a substantial amount of manipulation or
programming of information technology, the Borough will charge an
additional reasonable special charge for any extensive use of
information technology and/or the labor cost of personnel actually
§ 129-18 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 129-20
122:151
incurred or attributable for the programming, clerical, and supervisory
assistance. Extraordinary service charges of $40 per hour for clerical
and $60 per hour for supervisory shall be applied.
B. The person requesting preparation of the records shall have the
opportunity to review and object to the charge prior to it being
incurred. A copy of the invoice for the actual direct cost will be included
with the records.
§ 129-20 CHATHAM CODE § 129-20
122:152
Chapter 130
FERTILIZER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental Commission — See Ch. 11.
Land development regulations — See Ch. 165.
Storm sewer system — See Ch. 237.
§ 130-1. Purpose.
A chapter to regulate the outdoor application of fertilizer so as to reduce
the overall amount of excess nutrients entering waterways, thereby helping
to protect and improve surface water quality.
§ 130-2. Basis and background.
Elevated levels of nutrients, particularly phosphorus, in surface water
bodies can result in excessive and accelerated growth of algae and aquatic
plants (eutrophication). Excessive plant growth can result in diurnal
variations and extremes in dissolved oxygen and pH, which, in turn, can
be detrimental to aquatic life. As algae and plant materials die off, the
decay process creates a further demand on dissolved oxygen levels. The
presence of excessive plant matter can also restrict use of the affected
water for recreation and water supply. While healthy vegetated areas are
protective of water quality by stabilizing soil and filtering precipitation,
when fertilizers are applied to the land surface improperly or in excess of
the needs of target vegetation, nutrients can be transported by means of
stormwater to nearby waterways, contributing to the problematic growth
of excessive aquatic vegetation. Most soils in New Jersey contain sufficient
amounts of phosphorus to support adequate root growth for established
turf. Over time, it is necessary to replenish available phosphorus, but
generally not at the levels commonly applied. Other target vegetation, such
as vegetable gardens and agricultural/horticultural plantings, will have a
greater need for phosphorus application, as will the repair or establishment
of new lawns or cover vegetation. A soils test and fertilizer application
recommendation geared to the soil and planting type is the best means
to determine the amount of nutrients to apply. Timing and placement of
fertilizer application is also critical to avoid transport of nutrients to
waterways through stormwater runoff. Fertilizer applied immediately prior
to a runoff-producing rainfall, outside the growing season or to impervious
surfaces is most likely to be carried away by means of runoff without
accomplishing the desired objective of supporting target vegetation growth.
Therefore, the management of the type, amount and techniques for
fertilizer application is necessary as one tool to protect water resources.
§ 129-20 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 130-3
122:153
§ 130-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
BUFFER — The land area, 25 feet in width, adjacent to any water body.
FERTILIZER — A fertilizer material, mixed fertilizer or any other substance
containing one or more recognized plant nutrients, which is used for its
plant nutrient content, which is designed for use or claimed to have value in
promoting plant growth, and which is sold, offered for sale, or intended for
sale.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer of
material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water. This term shall
be used to include any highway, street, sidewalk, parking lot, driveway, or
other material that prevents infiltration of water into the soil.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PHOSPHORUS FERTILIZER — Any fertilizer that contains phosphorus,
expressed as P2O5, with a guaranteed analysis of greater than zero; except
that it shall not be considered to include animal (including human) or
vegetable manures, agricultural liming materials, or wood ashes that have
not been amended to increase their nutrient content.
SOILS TEST — A technical analysis of soil conducted by an accredited
soil testing laboratory following the protocol for such a test established by
Rutgers Cooperative Research and Extension.
WATER BODY — A surface water feature, such as a lake, river, stream,
creek, pond, lagoon, bay or estuary.
§ 130-4. Prohibited conduct.
No person may do any of the following:
A. Apply fertilizer when a runoff-producing rainfall is occurring or
predicted and/or when soils are saturated and a potential for fertilizer
movement off site exists.
B. Apply fertilizer to an impervious surface. Fertilizer inadvertently
applied to an impervious surface must be swept or blown back into the
target surface or returned to either its original or another appropriate
container for reuse.
C. Apply fertilizer within the buffer of any water body.
§ 130-3 CHATHAM CODE § 130-4
122:154
§ 130-5. Phosphorus fertilizer application.
No person may do the following:
§ 130-6. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by a prompt investigation
made by the appropriate personnel of the Borough of Chatham of any
person or entity believed to be in violation of this chapter. The Code
Enforcement Officer of the Borough of Chatham is hereby designated as the
Enforcement Officer for the purposes of enforcement of the provisions of
this chapter. All members of the Chatham Borough Police Department are
hereby designated as assistant enforcement officers for the purposes of the
enforcement of this chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to
preclude the Borough's right, pursuant to any applicable statute, to initiate
legal proceedings under this chapter in Municipal Court. The violation
of any section or subsection of this chapter shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense independent of the violation of any other section or
subsection, or of any order pursuant to this chapter. Each day a violation
continues shall be considered a separate offense.
§ 130-7. Violations and penalties.
D. Apply fertilizer more than 15 days prior to the start of or at any time
after the end of the recognized growing season (The Borough of
Chatham is in Zone 6b.) between March 1 and November 15.
A. Apply phosphorus fertilizer in outdoor areas except as demonstrated to
be needed for the specific soils and target vegetation in accordance
with a soils test and the associated annual fertilizer recommendation
issued by Rutgers Cooperative Research and Extension.
B. Exceptions:
(1) Application of phosphorus fertilizer needed for:
(a) Establishing vegetation for the first time, such as after land
disturbance, provided the application is in accordance with the
requirements established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
(b) Reestablished or repairing a turf area.
(2) Application of phosphorus fertilizer that delivers liquid or granular
fertilizer under the soils surface, directly to the feeder roots.
(3) Application of phosphorus fertilizer to residential container
plantings, flowerbeds, or vegetable gardens.
A. Any person violating any part of this chapter shall be punishable as
provided in Chapter 1, § 1-14. However, where the penalty for such
§ 130-4 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 130-7
122:155
Chapter 131
FILMING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Indemnification — See Ch. 28.
Noise — See Ch. 184.
Street and sidewalk encumbrances — See Ch.
240.
§ 131-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANT — For the intent and purpose of this
Chapter 131 of the Code of the Borough of Chatham, the "Administrative
Assistant" shall be defined as such Borough employee whose job description
as set forth in the Borough of Chatham's Personnel Policies includes "to
serve as Downtown Manager"; and who is further defined as a "liaison
to the tenants and owners in the commercial or business district" as set
forth in § 131-3C(2), and as a "coordinator and liaison between the Borough
departments and the tenants and property owners in the commercial
district affected" by the issuance of a permit for filming, as set forth in
§ 131-3C(3) of this chapter. Notwithstanding the foregoing to the contrary,
such other duties of the Administrative Assistant as described in the
Borough of Chatham's Personnel Policies that do not pertain to this chapter
shall remain in full force and effect.
FILMING — The taking of still or motion pictures, either on film, videotape,
digital or similar recording medium, for commercial purposes intended
for viewing on video receivers, television, in theaters, the Internet or for
institutional use. Filming performed by one individual using a hand-held
camera without assistance from others, or filming conducted by educational
institutions for educational purposes, including student filmmakers, shall be
excluded from this chapter.
PUBLIC LANDS — Any and every public street, highway, sidewalk, square,
public right-of-way, public park or playground, public building and property
or other public place within the Borough, which is within the jurisdiction
and control of the Borough of Chatham.
§ 131-2. Permit required; application; duration of filming.
offense may be limited by a state statute, then such limitation shall be
applicable notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter.
B. Each and every violation of this chapter for each and every day that any
provision of this chapter shall be violated shall be construed as a
separate and distinct violation.
§ 130-7 CHATHAM CODE § 131-2
122:156
A. No person, firm or corporation shall film or permit filming within the
Borough of Chatham without:
(1) Obtaining an application for permit therefor;
(2) Obtaining the required approvals; and
(3) Filing the completed/approved permit, together with the applicable
permit fee to the Borough at least ten (10) calendar days prior to
the first date that filming is to take place.
B. Chatham Borough filming permit applications may be obtained from the
office of the Borough Clerk during normal business hours. Application
for such permits shall be in a form approved by the Borough
Administrator and shall be accompanied by a permit fee in the amount
established by ordinance of the Borough of Chatham.
C. The following information shall be included in the permit application:
(1) Locations of filming;
(2) Proposed duration of filming, including date(s) and hours; subject
to the final approval of the Administrative Assistant as to the final
filming schedule within the Borough;
(3) Amount of space required on public streets/highways/sidewalks,
etc.; and
(4) Contact information of applicant, including the on-site person.
D. Duration of time authorized.
(1) One permit shall be sufficient to authorize filming on two calendar
days within a period of not more than five calendar days beginning
on the date of issuance of the permit, provided that each such date
on which filming is to take place shall be specified in the permit.
(2) Permission for filming in excess of five days as described in
§ 131-2D(1) may be granted by the Borough Council upon filing of a
request with the Borough Clerk seven calendar days in advance of
the Borough Council meeting at which the matter is to be
considered. A copy of the permit application shall be attached to
the request. See also § 131-3J.
E. If a permit is issued and due to inclement weather or other good cause
filming does not, in fact, take place on the dates specified, the Borough
Administrator may, at the request of the applicant and with proper
notice given by the applicant or agent of the applicant previously
authorized by the approving authorities to act as an agent of the
applicant to approving authorities and any affected property owners/
tenants as determined by approving authorities, issue a new permit for
filming on other dates subject to full compliance with all other
§ 131-2 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 131-2
122:157
§ 131-3. Issuance of permits; insurance coverage; filming
restrictions; appeals; exceptions to limitations.
provisions of this chapter. No additional fee shall be paid for this
permit.
A. A permit shall be limited to no more than five calendar days per project.
B. No more than two permits shall be issued by the Borough of Chatham
for filming that will take place in any residential zone without a waiver
pursuant to § 131-3J.
C. Issuance of permits.
(1) No permit shall be issued by the Borough Administrator unless a
completed application is filed with the Office of the Borough Clerk
at least 10 calendar days prior to the first date filming is to take
place; and, where the filming is to take place in any commercial or
business district, a copy of the application is filed with the Borough
Clerk at least 10 calendar days prior to the first date filming is to
take place. However, the Borough Administrator may waive the tencalendar-
day period if, in the judgment of the Borough
Administrator, the applicant has obtained all required approvals
and adjacent property owners or tenants do not need to be notified.
(2) Where the filming is to take place in any commercial or business
district of the Borough of Chatham, the Administrative Assistant
shall act as liaison to the tenants and owners in the commercial or
business district. In that regard, the applicant shall:
(a) Distribute relevant information regarding the proposed filming
to the property owners and merchants in the commercial or
business district that may be affected;
(b) Provide to the Police Department, and such other municipal
departments as may be necessary, written comments from the
property owners and tenants in the commercial or business
district;
(c) Contact the Chatham Police Department and any other
relevant departments to coordinate the information with the
property owners and tenants in the commercial district; and
(3) Upon issuance of a permit by the Borough Administrator, the
Administrative Assistant shall be the coordinator and liaison
between the Borough departments and the tenants and property
owners in the commercial district affected.
(4) No permit shall be issued for filming upon public lands unless the
applicant shall provide the Borough with satisfactory proof of the
following:
§ 131-2 CHATHAM CODE § 131-3
122:158
(a) Proof of insurance coverage, pursuant to the requirement that
the applicant shall maintain with insurance carriers rated at a
minimum A- (A minus) by A.M. Best's Insurance Rating Guide
insurance, as follows:
[1] General liability, including premises/operations, blanket
contractual, bodily injury (including death resulting
therefrom), property damage and personal injury with
limits not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence subject to
an aggregate of $3,000,000;
[2] In the event motor vehicles are in use as a means to arrive
and depart from filming operations or during filming
operations, automobile liability for owned, hired and
nonowned vehicles with limits not less than $1,000,000
combined single limit;
[3] Workers' compensation insurance (including employer's
liability), which must, at minimum, comply with all
statutory regulations in the governmental jurisdiction
where filming work is being performed;
[4] Media (professional) liability coverage at a minimum limit
of $5,000,000 per claim and in the aggregate;
[5] The applicant will name the Borough of Chatham and its
directors, officers, employees and agents as additional
insureds under the general liability and automobile
liability policies outlined above. In addition, the applicant
shall be solely responsible for maintaining, and requiring
its subcontractors and agents (if any) to maintain the same
coverage as outlined herein. The applicant's insurance
coverage shall be primary above all other valid and
collectable policies in force, and the Administrator of the
Borough of Chatham shall be provided 30 days' advance
notice of cancellation or reduction in coverage or limits.
Policies shall contain waivers of subrogation by
endorsement or otherwise. The Borough of Chatham shall
be provided with the applicable certificates of insurance or
evidence of coverage before filming commences; and
[6] In the event the above requirements are not met, the
Borough of Chatham reserves the right, at its option, to
either purchase the above insurance and bill same to the
applicant or revoke any previously issued permit with no
obligation to refund any permit fees.
(b) An agreement, in writing, in a form approved by the Borough
Attorney, whereby the applicant agrees to indemnify and save
harmless the Borough of Chatham, its officers, employees and
agents, from any and all liability, expense, claim or damages
resulting from the use of public lands;
§ 131-3 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 131-3
122:159
(c) The posting of a cash bond of $500, or a maintenance bond of
$1,000, running in favor of the Borough and protecting and
insuring that the location utilized will be left, after filming, in a
satisfactory condition, free of debris, rubbish and equipment,
and that all Borough ordinances, rules and regulations will be
followed. Within two business days of the completion of the
filming, the Borough will return the bond if there has been no
damage to public property or public expense caused by the
filming;
(d) A contractual agreement with the Chatham Police Department
for paid police coverage during the time indicated in the
permit;
(e) Proof of service provided by the applicant of written
notification of proposed dates and lands to be used for
production activities to any and all tenants and property
owners who will be directly affected by the filming and its site
location, as determined by the approving authorities, and
simultaneously said tenants and property owners shall be
informed that objections may be filed with the Borough Clerk.
Such notification is to take place at least three business days
prior to the requested shooting date, with proofs submitted to
the Borough Clerk prior to issuance of the permit; and
(f) A written approval from the Chatham Police Department
authorizing issuance of the permit and providing any traffic
control requirements and public safety conditions.
D. The applicant shall take all reasonable steps to minimize interference
with the free passage of pedestrians and traffic over public lands and
shall comply with all lawful directives issued by the Chatham Police
Department with respect thereto.
E. The applicant shall conduct filming in such a manner as to minimize the
inconvenience or discomfort to adjoining property owners attributable
to such filming and shall, to the extent practicable, abate noise and park
vehicles associated with such filming off the public streets. The holder
shall avoid any interference with previously scheduled activities upon
public lands and limit to the extent possible any interference with
normal public activity on such public lands.
F. The applicant shall take all reasonable steps to minimize the creation
and spread of debris and rubbish during filming and shall be
responsible for removing all equipment, debris and other rubbish from
the filming location upon the completion of filming or the expiration of
the permit, whichever comes first.
G. Filming, including setup and final cleanup, shall be permitted Monday
through Friday between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
§ 131-3 CHATHAM CODE § 131-3
122:160
H. The Borough Administrator may refuse to issue a permit whenever he/
she determines, on the basis of objective facts and after a review of the
application and a written report thereon by the Chatham Police
Department and by other Borough departments involved with the
proposed filming site, that filming at the location and/or the time set
forth in the application would violate any law or ordinance or would
unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment of adjoining
properties, or in the opinion of the Chatham Police Department would
unreasonably impede the free flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic or
otherwise endanger the public's health, safety or welfare. Further, the
Borough reserves the right to require one or more on-site police officers
in situations where the proposed production may impede the proper
flow of traffic, the cost of said officers to be borne by the applicant as a
cost of production.
I. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Borough Administrator or
the Borough of Chatham denying or revoking a permit or a person
requesting relief pursuant to § 131-3J herein may appeal to the Borough
Council. A written notice of appeal setting forth the reasons for the
appeal shall be filed with the Borough Clerk no later than 10 calendar
days from the date of the denial or revocation of the permit. The
Borough Council shall set the matter down for a hearing within 30
calendar days of the day on which the notice of appeal was filed. The
decision of the Borough Council shall be in the form of a resolution. A
resolution supporting the decision of the Borough Administrator or
granting relief pursuant to § 131-3J shall be adopted by the Borough
Council at the first regularly scheduled public meeting of the Borough
Council after the hearing on the appeal, unless the appellant agrees in
writing to a later date for the decision.
J. The Borough Council may authorize a waiver of any of the requirements
or limitations of this chapter, and may authorize filming on other public
property not defined as public lands and may authorize filming other
than during the hours herein described or may extend the duration of a
permit beyond five calendar days or may permit filming at a particular
location in a residential zone on more than two occasions during any
one calendar year or may waive any other limitation or requirement of
this chapter whenever it determines that strict compliance with such
limitations will pose an unreasonable burden upon the applicant and
that such a permit may be issued without endangering the public's
health, safety and welfare.
K. Copies of the approved permit will be sent by the Borough Clerk to the
Police Department, Fire Department, Downtown Manager, the
Department of Public Works, and the Board of Health. Copies shall be
sent to any appropriate New Jersey state agencies, including the New
Jersey Film Commission.
L. The applicant shall notify the Police Department, the Fire Department,
Downtown Manager and the Board of Health, 24 hours before filming
takes place and shall permit the Police Department, the Fire
§ 131-3 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 131-3
122:161
§ 131-4. Fees.
The schedule of fees for the issuance of permits authorized by this chapter
are as follows:
§ 131-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating this chapter or these rules and regulations, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000 per day
or by imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days, or
both. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 131-6. Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
Department, the Board of Health or other Borough inspectors to inspect
the site and the equipment to be used. The applicant shall comply
with all safety instructions issued by Borough inspectors, including the
Police Department, the Fire Department and the Board of Health.
M. In addition to any other fees or costs mentioned in this chapter, the
applicant shall reimburse the Borough for any lost revenue or repairs to
public property.
N. The applicant will abide by all Rules, Regulations and Protocols adopted
by New Jersey Transit, if applicable.
A. Permit:
(1) Basic filming for for-profit applicants: $100.
(2) Basic filming for nonprofit applicant's filming for educational,
noncommercial use: $25.
B. Daily filming fee payable in addition to the basic filming permit fee:
(1) Five hundred dollars per day, except as set forth in § 131-4A(2)
hereof.
A. The filming of news stories within the Borough of Chatham by
individuals and/or legitimate entities or organizations for purposes of
journalism or news reporting;
B. Filming by one individual using a hand-held camera without the
assistance of other persons, or filming by one or more individuals for
weddings, religious occasions, and other family or social private
parties, occasions, events, or functions;
C. Waiver of fees for student. The fees set forth in § 131-4 shall be waived
when filming is done by a student in grade school, middle school, high
school, college, university or other bona fide educational institution
§ 131-3 CHATHAM CODE § 131-6
122:162
§ 131-7. Severability.
If any sentence, section, clause, or other portion of this chapter or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance shall for any reason be
adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment
shall not affect, impair, or repeal the remainder of this chapter.
Chapter 133
FIREARMS AND WEAPONS
§ 133-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Chatham in the County of Morris.
FIREARM — Any gun, shotgun, rifle, pistol, revolver, or other device from
which a bullet, shot, ball, slug, pellet, solid projectile or other missile is
propelled by means of a cartridge or shell or by the action, explosion or
ignition of flammable or explosive substances.
PERSON — An individual, firm, partnership, corporation or association of
persons.
WEAPON — Any firearm, air rifle, bow, sling shot, spring gun or similar
device or instrument in the nature of a weapon in which the propelling force
is a spring, elastic band, carbon dioxide, compressed or other gas, vapor or
compressed air, or which is discharged by compressed air, and ejecting a
bullet or missile with sufficient force to injure a person.
§ 133-2. Prohibited activities on private property.
No person shall enter or go upon any private property within the Borough
carrying any firearm or weapon, and no person shall use or discharge any
firearm or weapon upon or into any private property in the Borough, unless
such person:
upon receipt by the Borough Clerk of a written certification from a
teacher or administrator at the school attended by the student stating
that the filming is for educational purposes only and is not intended for
commercial use.
D. Filming for authorized Chatham Borough municipal government
purposes as may be authorized by the Chatham Borough Council or the
Borough Administrator.
A. Is the owner, or a member of the immediate family (within two degrees
of consanguinity) of the owner, or a tenant of the private property.
B. Is a law enforcement officer identified in N.J.S.A. 2C:39 in the
performance of his or her duties.
§ 131-6 FIREARMS AND WEAPONS § 133-3
133:163
§ 133-3. Prohibited activities on public property.
§ 133-4. Compliance with state laws and regulations required.
No provision of this chapter shall be interpreted as relieving any person
from full compliance with all state laws, rules and regulations relating to
firearms, weapons, and hunting.
§ 133-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who commits a violation of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to the penalties in Chapter 1, § 1-14.
Chapter 136
FIRE CODE, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 15.
Alarm systems — See Ch. 71.
Building safety and habitability — See Ch. 94.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 111.
Fire-related offenses — See Ch. 144.
Fire zones — See Ch. 148.
§ 136-1. Provisions of state code accepted; enforcement;
interpretation.
A. No person shall discharge any firearm or weapon or cast an arrow upon
or across any state, county, or Borough road or highway, park,
playground, school property or other public property within the
Borough unless such person is a law enforcement officer identified in
N.J.S.A. 2C:39-6 in the performance of his or her duties.
B. No person shall carry a loaded firearm or weapon or drawn bow within
450 feet of any school property or public playing field unless such
person is a law enforcement officer identified in N.J.S.A. 2C:39-6 in the
performance of his or her duties.19
A. This chapter shall be enforced by the local enforcing agency in
accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-192 et seq.; P.L. 1983, c. 383), and the interpretations thereof
contained in the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code (N.J.A.C. 5:70.1 et seq.).
B. The local enforcing agency shall be the Borough of Chatham Bureau of
Fire Safety which hereinafter shall be known as the "local enforcing
agency."
19.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 133-3 CHATHAM CODE § 136-2
136:164
§ 136-2. Definitions. [Amended 5-29-2007 by Ord. No. 07-20]
§ 136-3. Duties.
§ 136-4. Organization of enforcing agency.
§ 136-5. Appointment and qualifications of Fire Official, inspectors
and other employees of enforcing agency.
A. As used in this chapter, words and terms shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in Title 5, Chapter 70, of the New Jersey
Administrative Code.
B. For the purposes of this chapter, certain phrases and words are herein
defined as follows:
BUSINESS — Business occupancy includes, among others, the use of
a building or structure, or a portion thereof, for office, professional or
service-type transactions, including storage of records and accounts.
Business occupancies shall include, but not be limited to, businesses
listed in Section 304 "Business Group B" of the International Building
Code, New Jersey Edition, as amended.
A. The local enforcing agency shall enforce the Uniform Fire Code in all
buildings, structures, and premises within the established boundaries
of the Borough of Chatham other than one- and two-unit owneroccupied
dwellings used exclusively for dwelling purposes and
buildings, structures, and premises owned or operated by the federal
government, interstate agencies or the state. Detailed duties of the Fire
Official and Fire Inspectors shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:71-3.3.
B. The local enforcing agency shall faithfully comply with all the pertinent
requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety Act and the Uniform Fire Code.
A. The local enforcing agency shall be under the direct supervision and
control of a Fire Official who shall report to the Borough Administrator.
B. The local enforcing agency shall have at least one paid inspector.
A. Appointment and qualifications of the Fire Official. The Fire Official
shall be certified by the state and appointed by the governing body from
a list of candidates submitted by the Borough Administrator.
B. Appointment and qualifications of inspectors and other employees.
Inspectors and other employees of the enforcing agency shall be
appointed by the governing body upon recommendation of the Fire
Official. All life hazard use inspectors shall be certified by the state.
C. Term of office. The Fire Official shall serve for a term of a minimum of
one year. Any vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term.
§ 136-2 FIRE CODE, UNIFORM § 136-5
136:165
§ 136-6. Life-hazard uses.
The local enforcing agency shall carry out the periodic inspections of lifehazard
uses required by the Uniform Fire Code on behalf of the
Commissioner of the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
§ 136-7. Non-life-hazard uses.
D. Removal from office. The Fire Official, inspectors and other employees
of the agency shall be subject to removal consistent with Borough
personnel practices.
A. In addition to the registrations required by the Uniform Fire Code, the
following non-life-hazard uses shall register with the local enforcing
agency. These uses shall be inspected by the local enforcing agency and
pay an annual registration fee, effective January 1, 2004, as follows.
Businesses, Storefronts, Common Areas and Basements
Square Feet of Occupancy Fee
500 or less $35.00
501 to 1,000 $45.00
1,001 to 5,999 $70.00
6,000 to 9,999 $100.00
10,000 or more $125.00
Apartments
Number of Units Fee
3 - 5 $35.00
6 - 15 $45.00
16 - 25 $70.00
26 - 35 $100.00
36 or more $125.00
B. Any business that is required to apply for a permit pursuant to Chapter
71, entitled "Alarm Systems," and that has a fire and/or burglar alarm
system currently registered with the Borough of Chatham is exempt
from paying the fees referenced above. [Amended 5-29-2007 by Ord.
No. 07-20]20
20.Editor's Note: See Ch. 71, Alarm Systems.
§ 136-5 CHATHAM CODE § 136-7
136:166
Chapter 139
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking in fire zones — See Ch. 148.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 173, Art. III.
Licensing of taxicabs — See Ch. 250.
Motorized vehicles — See Ch. 263.
§ 136-7 FIRE CODE, UNIFORM § 136-7
136:167

Part 1
General Traffic And Parking Regulations
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 139-1. Title.
This chapter may be known and cited as "Chapter 139 of the Code of the
Borough of Chatham," or as the "Traffic Ordinance."
§ 139-2. Definitions.
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meaning
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases
used herein.
§ 139-3. Repealer.
All former traffic ordinances of the Borough of Chatham are hereby
repealed, except that this repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution
or punishment of any person for any act done or committed in violation of
any ordinance hereby repealed prior to the taking effect of this chapter.
§ 139-4. Severability.
If any part or parts of this chapter for any reason are held to be invalid,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter.
§ 139-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-25-2005 by Ord. No.
05-09]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute or
otherwise provided for in the Borough Code or unless the penalty is
expressly set forth in the Local Supplemental Violations Bureau Schedule of
the Borough of Chatham, every person convicted of a violation of a provision
of this chapter or any supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not
more than $100 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 139-1 FIRE CODE, UNIFORM § 139-5
136:169

ARTICLE II
Parking
§ 139-6. Regulations not exclusive.
The provisions of this article imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other and more restrictive
provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles as set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any other New Jersey statute or as
hereinafter provided.
§ 139-7. Parking prohibited at all times.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule I attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 139-7.1. Parking prohibited during state of emergency. [Added
4-26-2004 by Ord. No. 04-13]
§ 139-8. Parking prohibited during certain hours.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule II
of any day, except Sundays and public holidays, upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described in said Schedule II attached to and made a part
of this chapter.
A. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
streets or sections of streets where temporary emergency no-parking
signs are displayed. The Chief of Police or, in his absence, the ranking
police officer is authorized to declare an emergency and to direct the
posting of said emergency no-parking signs when weather conditions,
accidents, fires or public celebrations dictate or require the avoidance
of hazards or other conditions which interfere with the free flow of
traffic. Notification that the emergency no-parking signs are being or
will be posted shall be given to the operator or owner of any vehicle
which has been parked prior to the posting of the signs.
B. The effectiveness of this section is contingent upon the signs being
erected as required by law.
C. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this section
shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper
regulation of traffic and any police officer may provide for the removal
of such vehicle. The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal
and storage which may result from such removal, before regaining
possession of the vehicle.
§ 139-6 FIRE CODE, UNIFORM § 139-9
136:171
§ 139-9. Stopping or standing prohibited during certain hours.
[Amended 8-9-1976 by Ord. No. 11-76]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle between the hours specified in
Schedule III of any day upon any of the streets or parts of streets described
in said Schedule III attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 139-10. Parking time limited. [Amended 11-12-1984 by Ord. No.
15-84; 3-14-1988 by Ord. No. 1-88; 11-25-2013 by Ord. No. 13-22]
A. Except as set forth herein, no person shall park a vehicle for longer than
the time limit shown in Schedule IV, as may be amended by Borough
Council from time to time, of any day as listed in said Schedule IV, upon
any of the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule IV attached
to and made a part of this chapter. The Borough Council may by
resolution relax the time limits on street parking restrictions contained
herein and in § 139-26, Schedule IV: Time Limit Parking, when it deems
necessary for holidays, emergencies, construction or for other good
cause. [Amended 11-11-2019 by Ord. No. 19-15]
B. Residents parking a vehicle in front of his/her own home with a valid,
properly affixed residential parking decal shall be exempt from the time
limit parking restrictions set forth in Schedule IV.
C. Residents of 49 South Passaic Avenue (Block 118, Lot 37) with a valid,
properly affixed residential parking decal may park along South Passaic
Avenue from 6:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. in accordance with Schedule IV.
[Added 2-25-2019 by Ord. No. 19-0521]
D. Caregiver parking permits may be issued to residents who require ongoing
medical care. A vehicle bearing a valid caregiver parking permit
shall be exempt from the time limit parking restrictions set forth in
Schedule IV.
E. The parking of a vehicle which is necessary for the completion of any
service or construction work being performed within the immediate
vicinity of where the vehicle is parked shall be exempt from the time
limit parking restrictions set forth in Schedule IV.
F. The fees required for any permit or decal under this chapter shall be set
annually by resolution of the Borough Council.
G. Application for residential parking or caregiver parking decals or
permits under this chapter may be made in writing on forms provided
by the Borough Clerk or his/her designee. The Borough Administrator is
hereby authorized to establish reasonable rules and procedures as
necessary for the issuance and control of permits pursuant to this
chapter. [Added 2-25-2019 by Ord. No. 19-05]
21.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections C through G as
Subsections D through H.
§ 139-9 CHATHAM CODE § 139-10
136:172
§ 139-11. Handicapped parking. [Added 6-9-1986 by Ord. No. 8-86;
amended 5-11-1987 by Ord. No. 4-87; 4-25-2005 by Ord. No. 05-09]
H. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to permit overnight
parking on any Borough street in violation of § 195-15.
A. The areas listed herein and on Schedule V of § 139-27 are hereby
designated as handicapped parking spaces for the exclusive use of
persons who have been issued special identification cards or plates or
placards by the Division of Motor Vehicles, or a temporary placard
issued by the Chief of Police.
B. Handicapped parking spaces shall be not less than 12 feet wide and not
less than 20 feet long in parking yards and not less than 22 feet long on
streets.
C. Handicapped parking spaces shall be so located so as to allow room for
individuals in wheelchairs or individuals on braces, canes, or crutches
to get in and out of either side of an automobile.
D. Removal of snow and ice; time limit; violations and penalties.
(1) Owners of premises, whether public or private, having parking
spaces reserved for handicapped drivers must clear said
handicapped parking spaces and access thereto of snow and/or ice
(2) No owner or operator of premises, whether public or private,
having parking spaces reserved for handicapped drivers and no
tenant, contractor or other person may block access to such
parking stalls reserved for handicapped drivers by the plowing,
piling or placement of snow or ice in such spaces.
(3) Handicapped parking spaces must be cleared of snow and ice
within 12 hours after the same shall fall or form thereon.
E. Violations and penalties. The penalty for violating this section shall be a
fine of $250 for the first offense and a fine of at least $250 plus a
maximum of 90 days of community service for all subsequent offenses.
§ 139-10 FIRE CODE, UNIFORM § 139-11
136:173

ARTICLE III
Vehicle Exclusions
[Amended 6-9-1986 by Ord. No. 8-86; 5-11-1987 by Ord. No. 4-87]
§ 139-12. Vehicles in excess of four tons.
Vehicles with a registered or posted gross weight in excess of four tons are
hereby excluded from the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule
VI except for the pickup or delivery of materials on such streets, said
Schedule VI being attached to or made a part of this chapter.
§ 139-12.1. (Reserved)
§ 139-12.2. (Reserved)
§ 139-12 FIRE CODE, UNIFORM § 139-12.2
136:175

ARTICLE IV
One-Way Streets
§ 139-13. One-way streets designated.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VII attached to and
made a part of this chapter are hereby designated as one-way streets in the
directions indicated.
§ 139-13 FIRE CODE, UNIFORM § 139-13
136:177

ARTICLE V
Stop and Yield Intersections
§ 139-14. Through streets designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule VIII attached to and made a part of this
chapter are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be
installed on the near right side of each street intersecting the through
street, except where yield signs are provided for in the designations.
§ 139-15. Stop intersections designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
in Schedule IX attached to and made a part of this chapter are hereby
designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided
therein.
§ 139-16. Yield intersections designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
in Schedule X attached to and made a part of this chapter are hereby
designated as yield intersections. Yield signs shall be installed as provided
therein.
§ 139-14 FIRE CODE, UNIFORM § 139-16
136:179

ARTICLE VI
Special Zones and Areas
§ 139-17. Loading zones designated.
The locations described in Schedule XI attached to and made a part of this
chapter are hereby designated as loading zones.
§ 139-18. Taxi stands designated.
The locations described in Schedule XII attached to and made a part of this
chapter are hereby designated as taxi stands.
§ 139-19. Bus stops designated.
(Reserved)
§ 139-17 FIRE CODE, UNIFORM § 139-19
136:181

ARTICLE VII
Turn Prohibitions
§ 139-20. Left-turn prohibitions.
No person shall make a left turn at any of the locations described in
Schedule XIV attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 139-21. U-turn prohibitions.
(Reserved)
§ 139-22. All turns prohibited.
(Reserved)
§ 139-20 FIRE CODE, UNIFORM § 139-22
136:183

ARTICLE VIII
Schedules
§ 139-23. Schedule I: No Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 139-7, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Access driveway across
Memorial Park
Both Entire length
Bowers Lane Both Entire length
Center Place North Entire length
Chatham Street North From Fairmount Avenue to Lafayette
Avenue
Chatham Street [Added
7-11-1983 by Ord. No
14-83]
South From the easterly curbline of
Washington Avenue to a point 100 feet
east thereof
Commerce Street
[Added 4-12-1999 by
Ord. No. 3-99]
West From northerly curbline of Watchung
Avenue to a point 175 feet north thereof
Elmwood Avenue
[Added 7-11-1983 by
Ord. No. 14-83]
East From the northerly curbline of Main
Street to a point 130 feet north thereof
Elmwood Avenue
[Amended 2-26-2007
by Ord. No. 07-11]
West Within 408 feet of Main Street
Fairmount Avenue East From the southerly curbline of Main
Street to a point 32 feet south thereof
Fairmount Avenue East From a point 95 feet south of southerly
curbline of Main Street to a point 232
feet south of southerly curbline of Main
Street
Fairmount Avenue East From a point 10 feet north of driveway
to Fish and Game Protective Association
Clubhouse to a point 10 feet south of
said driveway.
Fairmount Avenue West From the southerly curbline of Main
Street to a point 32 feet south thereof
Front Street [Amended
6-14-1982 by Ord. No
6-82; 3-14-1983 by
Ord. No. 1-83]
Both Full length
§ 139-23 FIRE CODE, UNIFORM § 139-23
136:185
Name of Street Side Location
Garden Avenue Both From the northerly curbline of Main
Street to northerly curbline of Garden
Place
Girard Avenue [Added
3-11-1985 by Ord. No.
3-85]
West From the southerly curbline of
Watchung Avenue to a point 600 feet
south thereof
Hillside Avenue Both From the southerly curbline of Main
Street to a point 125 feet south thereof
Hillside Avenue [Added
7-12-1976 by Ord. No.
10-76]
Both From the southerly curbline of
Watchung Avenue to a point 200 feet
south thereof
Hillside Avenue [Added
7-12-1976 by Ord. No.
10-76]
Both From the northerly curbline of
Watchung Avenue to a point 200 feet
north thereof
Kings Road Both From Lafayette Avenue to a point 380
feet west thereof
Lafayette Avenue Both From Main Street to Kings Road
Lafayette Avenue West From Kings Road to Woodland Road
Lum Avenue East Entire length
Main Street (State Route
No. 24) [Added
6-14-1982 by Ord. No.
682; repealed
3-14-1983 by Ord. No.
1-83]
North Hillside Avenue Both From the northerly curbline of Main
Street to a point 250 feet north thereof
North Passaic Avenue
[Added 7-9-2012 by
Ord. No. 12-11]
East From Main Street north to Memorial
Drive (library driveway)
North Passaic Avenue
[Added 7-9-2012 by
Ord. No. 12-11]
East From a point 460 feet north of Memorial
Drive (library driveway) north to Weston
Avenue
North Passaic Avenue
[Added 3-27-1995 by
Ord. No. 2-95]
East From Yale Street to Princeton Avenue
North Summit Avenue Both From the northerly curbline of Main
Street to a point 125 feet north thereof
Oliver Street North Entire length
Orchard Road South From Fairmount Avenue to Washington
Avenue
§ 139-23 CHATHAM CODE § 139-23
136:186
Name of Street Side Location
Parking Lot No. 4 Access
Road [Added 6-14-1982
by Ord. No. 6-82;
amended 3-14-1983 by
Ord. No. 1-83]
Both Full length of access road which is north
of United States Post Office property
Parrott Mill Road
[Added 9-28-2015 by
Ord. No. 15-13]
Both Along the cul-de-sac. For purposes of
this section, "cul-de-sac" is defined as
that portion of the roadway extending
beyond the point at which the road edge
or curbline cease to be parallel.
Parrott Mill Road East From Main Street to Henderson Road
Passaic Avenue East From Main Street to Weston Avenue
Passaic Avenue
[Repealed 6-9-1980 by
Ord. No. 18-80]
River Road [Amended
12-9-1991 by Ord. No.
12-91]
East From the southerly curbline of
Watchung Avenue to the Borough line
River Road [Added
2-25-2019 by Ord. No.
19-04]
West From the southerly curbline of
Watchung Avenue to a point 150 feet
south thereof
Roosevelt Avenue
[Added 8-26-1996 by
Ord. No. 9-96]
East From Main Street to Taft Avenue
Second Street North Entire length
South Passaic Avenue East From a point 400 feet south of the
southerly curbline of Main Street to a
point 860 feet south of the southerly
curbline of Main Street
South Passaic Avenue West From Second Street south to terminus
of South Passaic Avenue
Summit Avenue [Added
12-9-1991 by Ord. No.
12-91]
East From the southerly curbline of Main
Street (Route No. 24) to a point 90 feet
south thereof
Summit Avenue [Added
9-8-2008 by Ord. No.
08-1822]
South From the Chatham Borough-City of
Summit corporate line to a point 650
feet north thereof
Tallmadge Avenue East Entire length
22.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that unless another penalty is expressly provided
by New Jersey Statute, every person convicted of a violation of this ordinance or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $1,250 or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both.
§ 139-23 FIRE CODE, UNIFORM § 139-23
136:187
Name of Street Side Location
Van Doren Avenue Both From the northerly curbline of Main
Street to a point 200 feet north thereof
Ward Place [Added
12-9-1991 by Ord. No.
12-91]
East From the northerly curbline of Main
Street (Route No. 24) to a point 125 feet
north thereof
Washington Avenue
[Added 7-11-1983 by
Ord. No. 14-83]
East From the northerly curbline of Chatham
Street to a point 50 feet north thereof
Washington Avenue
[Added 7-11-1983 by
Ord. No. 14-83]
East From the southerly curbline of Chatham
Street to a point 80 feet south thereof
Washington Avenue East From Watchung Avenue to Longwood
Avenue
Washington Avenue
[Added 7-12-1976 by
Ord. No. 10-76]
East From the northerly curbline of
Watchung Avenue to a point 150 feet
north thereof
Washington Avenue
[Added 7-12-1976 by
Ord. No. 10-76]
West From the southerly curbline of
Watchung Avenue to a point 150 feet
south thereof
Washington Avenue West From Cherry Lane to Watchung Avenue
Washington Avenue West From Main Street to Cherry Lane
Watchung Avenue
[Amended 4-9-1984 by
Ord. No. 5-84]
North From Lafayette Avenue to Passaic River
Bridge, where not otherwise restricted
Watchung Avenue
[Added 7-12-1976 by
Ord. No. 10-76]
South From the easterly curbline of Hillside
Avenue to a point 200 feet east thereof
Watchung Avenue
[Added 7-12-1976 by
Ord. No. 10-76]
South From the westerly curbline of Hillside
Avenue to a point 200 feet west thereof
Watchung Avenue
[Added 7-12-1976 by
Ord. No. 10-76;
repealed 4-9-1984 by
Ord. No. 5-84]
Watchung Avenue
[Added 7-12-1976 by
Ord. No. 10-76]
South From the westerly curbline of
Washington Avenue to a point 150 feet
west thereof
§ 139-23 CHATHAM CODE § 139-24
136:188
§ 139-24. Schedule II: No Parking Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 139-8, no person shall park a vehicle
between the hours listed upon any of the following described streets or
parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
All streets,
except as set
forth in Schedule
IV [Added
3-27-1995 by
Ord. No. 2-95;
amended
2-25-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-05]
Both 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Entire length
Coleman Avenue East-west 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Entire length
Coleman Avenue West-east 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Entire length
Elmwood Avenue
[Added
2-26-2007 by
Ord. No. 07-10]
West 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday,
except
holidays,
September 1
through June
30
From a point 408 feet north
of the northerly curbline of
Main Street to a point 880
feet north thereof
Fairmount
Avenue
East 7:00 a.m. to
8:30 a.m. and
4:00 p.m. to
7:00 p.m.
From a point 32 feet south
of the southerly curbline of
Main Street to a point 100
feet south of the southerly
curbline of Main Street
Fairview Avenue
[Added
2-10-1997 by
Ord. No. 1-97]
Both 7:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m. and
2:00 p.m. to
4:00 p.m. on
school days
From the Chatham
Township line to the
intersection of Washington
Avenue
Orchard Road
[Added
12-30-1996 by
Ord. No. 13-96]
North 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
From the intersection of
Washington Avenue to a
point 200 feet east thereof
Summit Avenue West and
south
8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From Main Street to Passaic
River Bridge
§ 139-24 FIRE CODE, UNIFORM § 139-24
136:189
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Vine Street
[Added
9-8-2008 by
Ord. No.
08-1823]
Both 7:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
From the northerly curbline
of Summit Avenue to a point
200 feet north thereof
Washington
Avenue [Added
12-30-1996 by
Ord. No. 13-96]
East 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
A distance of 50 feet from
each side of the intersection
of Orchard Road
Willow Street South 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From Hillside Avenue to
River Road
§ 139-25. Schedule III: No Stopping or Standing.24
In accordance with the provisions of § 139-9, no person shall stop or stand a
vehicle between the hours listed upon any of the following described streets
or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Brooklake Road East All times From Main Street to a point
80 feet north thereof
Coleman Avenue
[Added
8-26-1996 by
Ord. No. 9-96]
West All times From Main Street to a point
100 feet north thereof
Coleman Avenue
East [Added
7-10-2006 by
Ord. No. 06-15]
Both 7:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Monday
through
Friday
From the easterly curbline of
Coleman Avenue, north to a
point 250 feet thereof
23.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that unless another penalty is expressly provided
by New Jersey Statute, every person convicted of a violation of this ordinance or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $1,250 or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both.
24.Editor's Note: By Regulation RP-75-29, effective 10-2-1975, the Department of
Transportation established the following no stopping or standing zones: A. Along the
eastbound side of Route 24: (1) From the easterly curbline of Division Avenue to the
westerly curbline of Railroad Plaza North. (2) From the easterly curbline of Minton
Avenue to the Chatham Borough-City of Summit corporate line. B. Along the westbound
side of Route 24: (1) From the Millburn Township-Chatham Borough corporate line to
the easterly curbline of Roosevelt Avenue. (2) From a point 110 feet west of the westerly
curbline of North Summit Avenue to the easterly curbline of North Hillside Avenue. (3)
From the westerly curbline of Center Street to the easterly curbline of Elmwood Avenue.
(4) From the westerly curbline of Coleman Avenue to the easterly curbline of Brooklake
Road.
§ 139-24 CHATHAM CODE § 139-25
136:190
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Coleman Avenue
West [Added
7-10-2006 by
Ord. No. 06-15]
Both 7:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Monday
through
Friday
From the westerly curbline of
Coleman Avenue, north to a
point 250 feet thereof
Dellwood Avenue
[Added
9-12-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-08]
East 8:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
and 3:00
p.m. to 4:00
p.m., school
days
From the Chatham Township-
Chatham Borough corporate
line to a point 320 feet north
thereof
Dellwood Avenue
[Added
9-12-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-08]
West 8:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
and 3:00
p.m. to 4:00
p.m., school
days
From the Chatham Township-
Chatham Borough corporate
line to a point 244 feet north
thereof
Division Avenue East All times From Main Street to a point
80 feet south thereof
Elm Place [Added
5-9-2004 by Ord.
No. 04-15]
Both 7:30 am to
9:00 am 2:30
p.m. to 4:00
p.m. school
days
Entire length
Elmwood Avenue
[Added
2-26-2007 by
Ord. No. 07-12]
East 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.
Monday
through
Friday,
except
holidays,
September 1
through June
30
From a point 408 feet north
of the northerly curbline of
Main Street to Weston
Avenue
Elmwood Avenue
[Added
4-12-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-12]
East 11:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Monday
through
Friday,
except
holidays,
September 1
through June
30
Weston Avenue to Milton
Avenue
§ 139-25 FIRE CODE, UNIFORM § 139-25
136:191
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Fairmount Avenue
[Added
7-12-1976 by
Ord. No. 10-76;
amended
4-9-1984 by Ord.
No. 5-84]
Both All times From the northerly curbline
of Watchung Avenue to the
southerly curbline of Orchard
Road
Fairmount Avenue
[Added
7-12-1976 by
Ord. No. 10-76;
amended
4-9-1984 by Ord.
No. 5-84]
East All times From the southerly curbline
of Watchung Avenue to a
point 255 feet south
therefrom
Fairmount Avenue
[Added 4-9-1984
by Ord. No. 5-84]
West All times From the southerly curbline
of Watchung Avenue to a
point 280 feet south
therefrom
Fairmount Avenue
[Added
10-14-1997 by
Ord. No. 12-97]
West 8:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
Monday
through
Friday,
except
holidays
From the northerly curbline
of Orchard Road to a point
150 feet north thereof
Lafayette Avenue
[Added
7-12-1976 by
Ord. No. 10-76]
Both All times From the northerly curbline
of Watchung Avenue to a
point 200 feet north thereof
Lincoln Avenue
[Added
8-26-1996 by
Ord. No. 9-96;
amended
11-10-1997 by
Ord. No. 13-97]
Both 7:30 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.,
2:30 p.m. to
3:30 p.m.,
school days
From Orchard Road to
Chatham Street
Milton Avenue South 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
Monday
through
Friday
From Center Avenue to
Elmwood Avenue
§ 139-25 CHATHAM CODE § 139-25
136:192
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Orchard Road
[Added
8-26-1996 by
Ord. No. 9-96;
amended
11-10-1997 by
Ord. No. 13-97]
Both 7:30 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.,
2:30 p.m. to
3:30 p.m.,
school days
From Board of Education
property to Lafayette Avenue
Orchard Road
[Added
10-14-1997 by
Ord. No. 12-97]
North 8:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
Monday
through
Friday,
except
holidays
From the westerly curbline of
Fairmount Avenue to a point
150 feet west thereof
Passaic Avenue
[Added 6-9-1980
by Ord. No.
18-80]
West All times From the northerly curbline
of Main Street to a point 150
feet north thereof
South Passaic
Avenue [Added
2-25-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-05]
East All times From Second Street to a
point 20 feet south thereof
South Passaic
Avenue [Added
10-9-1979 by
Ord. No. 9-79;
amended
5-12-1980 by
Ord. No. 15-80]
East All times From the southerly curbline
of Main Street (Route 24) to a
point 55 feet southerly
therefrom
South Passaic Avenue [Amended 10-9-1979 by Ord. No. 9-79;
5-12-1980 by Ord. No. 15-80; repealed 3-27-1995 by Ord. No. 2-95]
Summit Avenue
[Added 9-8-2008
by Ord. No.
08-1825]
Both All times From the Chatham Borough-
City of Summit corporate line
to a point 650 feet north
thereof
Van Doren Avenue
[Added 2-9-2004
by Ord. No.
04-01]
East 7:30 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
From the northerly curbline
of Martin Place to the
southerly curbline of Vincent
Street
25.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that unless another penalty is expressly provided
by New Jersey Statute, every person convicted of a violation of this ordinance or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $1,250 or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both.
§ 139-25 FIRE CODE, UNIFORM § 139-25
136:193
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Van Doren Avenue
[Added 2-9-2004
by Ord. No.
04-01]
West 7:30 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
From a point 420 feet north
of the northerly curbline of
Main Street to a point 605
feet north of the northerly
curbline of Main Street
Watchung Avenue
[Added
7-12-1976 by
Ord. No. 10-76]
Both All times From the easterly curbline of
Lafayette Avenue to a point
200 feet east thereof
Watchung Avenue
[Added
7-12-1976 by
Ord. No. 10-76;
amended
4-9-1984 by Ord.
No. 5-84]
Both All times From the westerly curbline of
Fairmount Avenue to the
easterly curbline of
Washington Avenue
Watchung Avenue
[Added
7-12-1976 by
Ord. No. 10-76;
amended
4-9-1984 by Ord.
No. 5-84]
North All times From the easterly curbline of
Fairmount Avenue to a point
238 feet east thereof
Watchung Avenue
[Added 4-9-1984
by Ord. No. 5-84]
South All times From the easterly curbline of
Fairmount Avenue to a point
218 feet east thereof
§ 139-26. Schedule IV: Time Limit Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 139-10, no person shall park a vehicle
for longer than the time limit shown upon any of the following streets or
parts of streets. The Borough Council may by resolution relax the time limits
on street parking restrictions contained herein when it deems necessary for
holidays, emergencies, construction or for other good cause.
Name of
Street Sides Hours
Maximum
Time
(minutes) Location
All streets [Repealed 3-27-1995 by Ord. No. 2-95]
Bartow Lane Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday
180 Entire length
§ 139-25 CHATHAM CODE § 139-26
136:194
Name of
Street Sides Hours
Maximum
Time
(minutes) Location
Bridge Street
[Added
10-10-1989 by
Ord. No.
20-89]
Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except
Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
180 From the northerly
curbline of Watchung
Avenue to the
southerly curbline of
Overlook Road
Carmine Street Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday
180 Entire length
Center Avenue Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday
180 From Center Place to
Weston Avenue
Center Place South 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday
60 Entire length
Center Street
[Amended
11-25-2013 by
Ord. No.
13-22]
Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday
90 From a point 50 feet
north of Main Street
to Center Place
Charles Place
[Added
10-10-1989 by
Ord. No.
20-89]
Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except
Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
180 Entire length
Chatham
Street
South 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday
180 From Fairmount
Avenue to Lafayette
Avenue
Cherry Lane Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday
180 Entire length
§ 139-26 FIRE CODE, UNIFORM § 139-26
136:195
Name of
Street Sides Hours
Maximum
Time
(minutes) Location
Coleman
Avenue
[Amended
8-26-1996 by
Ord. No. 9-96]
West 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday
120 From a point 100 feet
north of Main Street
to Weston Avenue
Coleman
Avenue, East
[Added
8-26-1996 by
Ord. No. 9-96]
Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday
120 Entire length
Coleman
Avenue, West
[Added
8-26-1996 by
Ord. No. 9-96]
Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday
120 Entire length
Dellwood
Avenue [Added
8-26-1996 by
Ord. No. 9-96]
Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday
180 Entire length
Dempster Road Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday
180 Entire length
Dunbar Street Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday
180 Entire length
Edgehill
Avenue [Added
3-14-1988 by
Ord. No. 1-88]
Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except
Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
180 From the southerly
curbline of Watchung
Avenue to a point 525
feet south thereof
Ellers Drive Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday
180 Entire length
§ 139-26 CHATHAM CODE § 139-26
136:196
Name of
Street Sides Hours
Maximum
Time
(minutes) Location
Elmwood
Avenue
[Amended
7-11-1983 by
Ord. No.
14-83;
2-26-2007 by
Ord. No.
07-12]
East 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
Monday
through
Saturday,
except
holidays, July
1 through
August 31
180 From a point 408 feet
north of the northerly
curbline of Main
Street to Weston
Avenue
Elmwood
Avenue [Added
7-11-1983 by
Ord. No.
14-83;
amended
2-26-2007 by
Ord. No.
07-10]
West 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
Monday
through
Saturday,
except
holidays, July
1 through
August 31
180 From a point 408 feet
north of the northerly
curbline of Main
Street to a point 880
feet north thereof
Elmwood
Avenue [Added
2-26-2007 by
Ord. No.
07-10]
West 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
Monday
through
Saturday,
except
holidays
180 From a point 880 feet
north of the northerly
curbline of Main
Street to Weston
Avenue
Fairmount
Avenue
Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday
180 From Red Road to
Watchung Avenue
Fairmount
Avenue
East 8:30 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
15 From a point 32 feet
south of the southerly
curbline of Main
Street to a point 100
feet south of the
southerly curbline of
Main Street
Fairmount
Avenue
[Amended
11-25-2013 by
Ord. No.
13-22]
East 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except
Sundays and
holidays
90 From a point 232 feet
south of the southerly
curbline of Main
Street to Red Road
§ 139-26 FIRE CODE, UNIFORM § 139-26
136:197
Name of
Street Sides Hours
Maximum
Time
(minutes) Location
Fairmount
Avenue
West 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except
Sundays and
holidays
60 From a point 35 feet
south of the southerly
curbline of Main
Street to Red Road
Front Street
[Repealed
6-14-1982 by
Ord. No. 6-82;
3-14-1983 by
Ord. No. 1-83]
Fuller Avenue Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday
180 Entire length
Garden Avenue Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday
180 Entire length
Garden Place Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday
180 Entire length
Hedges Avenue
[Added
11-12-1984 by
Ord. No.
15-84]
Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except
Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
180 From the northerly
curbline of Main
Street to a point 300
feet north thereof
Henderson
Road [Added
11-12-1984 by
Ord. No.
15-84]
Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except
Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
180 Entire length
Hillside Avenue Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday
180 From Main Street to
Watchung Avenue
§ 139-26 CHATHAM CODE § 139-26
136:198
Name of
Street Sides Hours
Maximum
Time
(minutes) Location
Hillside Avenue
[Added
3-14-1988 by
Ord. No. 1-88]
Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except
Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
180 From a point 200 feet
from the southerly
curbline of Watchung
Avenue to the
southerly curbline of
Lafayette Place
Hillside Avenue
[Added
3-14-1988 by
Ord. No. 1-88]
Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except
Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
180 From a point 200 feet
from the northerly
curbline of Watchung
Avenue to the
northerly curbline of
Raymond Street
Inwood Circle
[Added
3-14-1988 by
Ord. No. 1-88]
Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except
Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
180 From the easterly
curbline of
Washington Avenue to
a point 200 feet east
thereof
Inwood Road
[Added
3-14-1988 by
Ord. No. 1-88]
Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except
Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
180 Entire length
Lafayette
Avenue
North 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday
180 From Woodland Road
to Watchung Avenue
Lafayette
Avenue
South 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday
180 From Kings Road to
Watchung Avenue
Lafayette Place
[Added
10-10-1989 by
Ord. No.
20-89]
Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except
Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
180 Entire length
Lincoln Avenue Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday
180 Entire length
§ 139-26 FIRE CODE, UNIFORM § 139-26
136:199
Name of
Street Sides Hours
Maximum
Time
(minutes) Location
Lloyds Lane Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday
180 Entire length
Lum Avenue West 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday
120 Entire length
Main Street
(State Route
No. 24)
[Amended
6-10-2013 by
Ord. No.
13-13]
Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except
Sundays and
holidays
90 All locations not
affected by state
regulations
Martin Place Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday
180 Entire length
Meadow Road Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday
180 Entire length
Minton Avenue
[Added
11-12-1984 by
Ord. No.
15-84]
Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except
Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
180 From the southerly
curbline of Main
Street to a point 300
feet south thereof
North Passaic
Avenue [Added
7-9-2012 by
Ord. No.
12-12]
East All times 180 From Memorial Drive
to a point 460 feet
north as designated
North Passaic
Avenue
[Amended
11-25-2013 by
Ord. No.
13-22]
West 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday
90 From a point 150 feet
north of the northerly
curbline of Main
Street to Weston
Avenue
§ 139-26 CHATHAM CODE § 139-26
136:200
Name of
Street Sides Hours
Maximum
Time
(minutes) Location
North Summit
Avenue [Added
11-12-1984 by
Ord. No.
15-84]
Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except
Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
180 From a point 125 feet
north of the northerly
curbline of Main
Street to a point 300
feet north thereof
Oliver Street South 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday
180 Entire length
Orchard Road
[Added
3-14-1988 by
Ord. 1-88]
Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except
Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
180 From the easterly
curbline of Lafayette
Avenue to a point 300
feet east thereof
Orchard Park North 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday
180 Entire length
Overlook Road
[Added
12-9-1991 by
Ord. No.
12-91]
Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except
Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
180 Entire length
Parrott Mill
Road [Added
11-12-1984 by
Ord. No.
15-84]
West 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except
Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
180 From the southerly
curbline of Main
Street to a point 300
feet north thereof
Parrott Mill
Road [Added
4-12-1999 by
Ord. No. 3-99]
West 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
180 From the southerly
curbline of Main
Street to northerly
curbline of Chaucer
Place
Red Road Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday
180 Entire length
§ 139-26 FIRE CODE, UNIFORM § 139-26
136:201
Name of
Street Sides Hours
Maximum
Time
(minutes) Location
River Road
[Added
3-14-1988 by
Ord. No. 1-88;
amended
12-9-1991 by
Ord. No.
12-91]
West 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except
Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
180 From the southerly
curbline of Watchung
Avenue to a point
directly opposite the
northeast corner of
Bonnell Street
Second Street South 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday
60 Entire length
South Passaic
Avenue
[Amended
11-25-2013 by
Ord. No.
13-22]
East 8:00 a.m. to
4:30 p.m.
90 From a point 80 feet
south of the southerly
curbline of Main
Street to a point 180
feet south of the
southerly curbline of
Main Street
South Passaic
Avenue
[Amended
11-25-2013 by
Ord. No.
13-22]
East 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday
90 From a point 210 feet
south of the southerly
curbline of Main
Street to a point 420
feet south of the
southerly curbline of
Main Street
South Passaic
Avenue [Added
2-25-2019 by
Ord. No.
19-05]
East All times 180 From a point 20 feet
south of Second
Street to road
terminus
South Passaic
Avenue
[Amended
9-13-1976 by
Ord. No.
14-76;11-25-2013
by Ord. No.
13-22]
West 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday
90 From a point 50 feet
south of the southerly
curbline of Main
Street to a point 412
feet south of the
southerly curbline of
Main Street
§ 139-26 CHATHAM CODE § 139-26
136:202
Name of
Street Sides Hours
Maximum
Time
(minutes) Location
South Passaic
Avenue [Added
9-13-1976 by
Ord. No.
14-76]
West 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday
180 From a point 480 feet
south of the southerly
curbline of Main
Street to a point 794
feet south of the
southerly curbline of
Main Street
South Passaic
Avenue [Added
2-25-2019 by
Ord. No.
19-05]
West 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except
Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
180 From Second Street
to the Railroad rightof-
way
South Passaic
Avenue [Added
2-25-2019 by
Ord. No.
19-05]
West 6:00 p.m. to
8:00 a.m. with
residential
parking decal
issued
pursuant to §
139-10C
No limit From Second Street
to the railroad rightof-
way
Summit Avenue
[Added
11-12-1984 by
Ord. No.
15-84]
East 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except
Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
180 From the southerly
curbline of Main
Street to a point 300
feet south thereof
Tallmadge
Avenue [Added
11-12-1984 by
Ord. No.
15-84]
West 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except
Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
180 From the southerly
curbline of Main
Street to a point 300
feet south thereof
University
Avenue [Added
11-12-1984 by
Ord. No.
15-84]
Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except
Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
180 From the northerly
curbline of Main
Street to a point 300
feet north thereof
Van Doren
Avenue
Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday
180 From Main Street to
Weston Avenue
§ 139-26 FIRE CODE, UNIFORM § 139-26
136:203
Name of
Street Sides Hours
Maximum
Time
(minutes) Location
Vincent Street Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday
180 Entire length
Walnut Street Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday
180 Entire length
Washington
Avenue
East 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday
180 From Main Street to
Watchung Avenue
Watchung
Avenue Weston
South 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday
180 From Hillside Avenue
to Lafayette Avenue
Weston Avenue Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday
180 Entire length
§ 139-27. Schedule V: Handicapped Parking. [Added 6-9-1986 by
Ord. No. 8-86; amended 5-11-1987 by Ord. No. 4-87; 4-25-2005 by
Ord. No. 05-09]
In accordance with the provisions of § 139-11, no person shall park a vehicle
in the following locations unless it is being used to transport a person
who has been issued special identification cards or plates or placard by
the Division of Motor Vehicles or a temporary placard issued by the Chief
of Police with evidence of the issuance of such card displayed thereon in
accordance with law:
Name of Street or Lot Location
Chatham Condos [Added
5-9-2011 by Ord. No. 11-08]
45 South Passaic Avenue (Block 118,
Lot 38)
Chatham Library 214 Main Street (Block 56, Lot 15)
Law Office of Mark Seymour 331 Main Street (Block 85, Lot 6)
Main Street Post Office 219 Main Street (Block 121, Lot 7)
Parking Lot No. 2 Plaza South
Parking Lot No. 3 Bowers lane lot
Parking Lot No. 5 Municipal building lot
§ 139-26 CHATHAM CODE § 139-27
136:204
Name of Street or Lot Location
Serenade Restaurant 6-8 Roosevelt Avenue (Block 53, Lot
33, Qualifier: C-014
United Methodist Church 464 Main Street (Block 33, Lot 2)
Washington Avenue [Added
11-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16-15]
At a point approximately 144 feet from
the southerly curbline of Chatham
Street.
§ 139-28. Schedule VI: Trucks Over Four Tons Restricted.26 [Added
5-11-1987 by Ord. No. 4-87]
In accordance with the provisions of § 139-12, vehicles with registered or
posted gross vehicle weight in excess of four tons are hereby excluded from
the following described streets or parts of streets, except for the pickup or
delivery of material on such streets:
Name of Street Location
Bridge Street Entire length
Broadview Terrace [Added
6-12-1995 by Ord. No. 6-95]
Entire length
Center Street [Added 6-12-1995
by Ord. No. 6-95]
Entire length
Chandler Road [Added
6-12-1995 by Ord. No. 6-95]
Entire length
Chatham Street [Added
3-11-2019 by Ord. No. 19-06]
Lafayette Avenue to dead end
Chestnut Street [Added
6-12-1995 by Ord. No. 6-95]
Entire length
Coleman Avenue Entire length
Dunbar Street [Amended
3-11-2019 by Ord. No. 19-06]
Entire length
East Coleman Avenue [Added
3-11-2019 by Ord. No. 19-06]
Entire length
Edgehill Avenue [Added
6-12-1995 by Ord. No. 6-95]
Entire length
Edgewood Road [Added
6-12-1995 by Ord. No. 6-95]
Entire length
Elmwood Avenue Entire length
Essex Road [Added 3-11-2019
by Ord. No. 19-06]
Entire length
26.Editor's Note: Former § 139-28, Schedule VI: Trucks Over Ten Tons Excluded, was repealed
6-9-1986 by Ord. No. 8-86.
§ 139-27 FIRE CODE, UNIFORM § 139-28
136:205
Name of Street Location
Fairview Avenue [Added
6-12-1995 by Ord. No. 6-95]
Entire length
Fern Avenue [Added 6-12-1995
by Ord. No. 6-95]
Entire length
Girard Avenue [Added
6-12-1995 by Ord. No. 6-95]
Entire length
Hedges Avenue Entire length
Hillside Avenue [Amended
10-10-1989 by Ord. No. 19-89;
repealed 3-11-2019 by Ord. No.
19-06]
Hillside Avenue [Added
3-11-2019 by Ord. No. 19-06]
From Ogden Street to Watchung
Avenue
Hillside Avenue [Added
3-11-2019 by Ord. No. 19-06]
From Watchung Avenue to Borough
line
Inwood Road [Added 6-12-1995
by Ord. No. 6-95]
Entire length
Kings Road [Added 4-8-1991
Ord. No. 1-91]
From Lafayette Avenue to Division
Avenue
Lackawanna Avenue [Added
6-12-1995 by Ord. No. 6-95]
Entire length
Lafayette Avenue [Repealed
3-11-2019 by Ord. No. 19-06]
Longwood Avenue [Added
3-11-2019 by Ord. No. 19-06]
Entire length
Maple Street [Added 6-12-1995
by Ord. No. 6-95]
Entire length
Meadowbrook Road [Added
3-11-2019 by Ord. No. 19-06]
Entire length
Minton Avenue [Added
6-12-1995 by Ord. No. 6-95]
Entire length
Myrtle Avenue [Added
3-11-2019 by Ord. No. 19-06]
Entire length
North Hillside Avenue Entire length
North Summit Avenue Entire length
Oak Drive [Added 6-12-1995 by
Ord. No. 6-95]
Entire length
Oliver Street [Added 6-12-1995
by Ord. No. 6-95]
Entire length
Orchard Road [Added 6-12-1995
by Ord. No. 6-95]
Entire length
§ 139-28 CHATHAM CODE § 139-28
136:206
Name of Street Location
Overlook Road Entire length
Raymond Street Entire length
Red Road From Hillside Avenue to Philman Place
Rose Terrace [Added 3-11-2019
by Ord. No. 19-06]
Entire length
South Passaic Avenue [Added
6-12-1995 by Ord. No. 6-95]
Entire length
Summit Avenue [Amended
10-10-1989 by Ord. No. 19-89]
From Main Street (Route No. 24) to
Borough line
Van Doren Avenue Entire length
Vine Street [Added 6-12-1995
by Ord. No. 6-95]
Entire length
Washington Avenue [Added
3-11-2019 by Ord. No. 19-06]
From Main Street to Longwood
Avenue
West Coleman Avenue [Added
3-11-2019 by Ord. No. 19-06]
Entire length
Weston Avenue Entire length
Willow Street [Added 6-12-1995
by Ord. No. 6-95]
Entire length
Woodland Road [Added 4-8-1991
by Ord. No. 1-91]
From Lafayette Avenue to the
Chatham Borough - Chatham Township
corporate line
§ 139-28.1. (Reserved)27
§ 139-28.2. (Reserved)28
§ 139-29. Schedule VII: One-Way Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 139-13, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as one-way streets in the
directions indicated:29
27.Editor's Note: Former § 139-28.1, Schedule VI(1): Commercial Vehicles With Three or
More Axles, added 6-9-1986 by Ord. No. 8-86, was repealed 5-11-1987 by Ord. No. 4-87.
28.Editor's Note: Former § 139-28.2, Schedule VI(2): All Commercial Vehicles, added
6-9-1986 by Ord. No. 8-86, was repealed 5-11-1987 by Ord. No. 4-87.
29.Editor's Note: The sketches referred to in the “Limits” column of Schedule VII are on file
in the Clerk's office.
§ 139-28 FIRE CODE, UNIFORM § 139-29
136:207
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Limits
Duchamp Place South From Milton Avenue to Weston
Avenue (8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.,
school days only)
Elmwood Avenue
[Added 5-22-2006 by
Ord. No. 06-13]
South From Milton Avenue to Weston
Avenue (8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.,
school days)
Elmwood Avenue [Repealed 6-14-1982 by Ord. No. 6-82; 3-14-1983
by Ord. No. 1-83]
Elmwood Avenue [Repealed 6-14-1982 by Ord. No. 6-82]
Milton Avenue West From Center Avenue to Elmwood
Avenue (8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.,
school days only)
Milton Avenue [Added 6-14-1982 by Ord. No. 6-82; repealed
3-14-1983 by Ord. No. 1-83]
Parking Lot No. 4 south
driving lane [Added
6-14-1982 by Ord.
No. 6-82; amended
3-14-1983 by Ord.
No. 1-83]
East Entire length as indicated on the
sketch attached to and made part of
this chapter
Parking Lot No. 4
access road [Added
6-14-1982 by Ord.
No. 6-82; amended
3-14-1983 by Ord.
No. 1-83]
West Entire length as indicated on the
sketch attached to and made part of
this chapter
Parking Lot No. 4 north
lane driving lane
[Added 6-14-1982 by
Ord. No. 6-82;
amended 3-14-1983
by Ord. No. 1-83]
West Entire length as indicated on the
sketch attached to and made part of
this chapter
Washington Avenue to
Longwood Avenue
South From Watchung Avenue
§ 139-30. Schedule VIII: Through Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 139-14, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as through streets. Stop
signs shall be installed on the near right side of each street intersecting
the through street except where yield signs are provided for in the
designations:
§ 139-29 CHATHAM CODE § 139-30
136:208
Name of Street Limits
Coleman Avenue From the northerly side of Main Street
to the southerly side of Jackson
Avenue
Dunbar Street From the northerly side of Main Street
to the southerly side of Clark Street
Fairmount Avenue From the southerly side of Main Street
to the northerly side of Watchung
Avenue
Fairmount Avenue From the southerly side of Watchung
Avenue to the Borough boundary line
Hillside Avenue From the southerly side of Main Street
to the northerly side of Watchung
Avenue
Hillside Avenue From the southerly side of Watchung
Avenue to the Borough boundary line
Lafayette Avenue From the southerly side of Main Street
to the northerly side of Watchung
Avenue
Longwood Avenue [Added
10-11-1977 by Ord. No. 7-77]
From the westerly side of Fairmount
Avenue to the Borough boundary line
North Hillside Avenue From the southerly side of Cornell
Place to the southerly side of Rutgers
Street
North Passaic Avenue From the northerly side of Main Street
to the Borough boundary line
River Road From Watchung Avenue to the
Borough of Chatham-City of Summit
boundary line
Rowan Road From the southerly side of Clark
Street to the southerly side of Jackson
Avenue
South Passaic Avenue Entire length
Summit Avenue From the southerly side of Main Street
to the Passaic River Bridge
Van Doren Avenue From the northerly side of Main Street
to the southerly side of Kimball Avenue
Washington Avenue From the southerly side of Main Street
to the northerly side of Watchung
Avenue
Washington Avenue From the southerly side of Watchung
Avenue to the northerly side of
Longwood Avenue
§ 139-30 FIRE CODE, UNIFORM § 139-30
136:209
Name of Street Limits
Watchung Avenue From the bridge at the Passaic River to
the Borough boundary line of
Lafayette Avenue
Weston Avenue From the westerly side of Passaic
Avenue to the easterly side of Coleman
Avenue
§ 139-31. Schedule IX: Stop Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 139-15, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections:30
Stop Sign on At Intersection of
Amherst Road Fairview Avenue
Center Place Center Avenue
Chaucer Place [Added
12-29-1997 by Ord. No. 16-97]
Parrott Mill Road
Cherry Lane [Added 6-14-1982 by Ord. No. 6-82; repealed 3-14-1983
by Ord. No. 1-83]
Coleman Avenue, West Coleman Avenue
Dellwood Avenue Fairview Avenue
Duchamp Place [Added
6-14-1982 by Ord. No. 6-82;
amended 3-14-1983 by Ord.
No. 1-83]
Milton Avenue
Fuller Avenue Red Road
Girard Avenue [Added
6-11-1990 by Ord. No. 8-90]
Willow Street
Harvard Street Center Avenue
Highland Avenue Fairview Avenue
Lincoln Avenue [Amended
6-14-1982 by Ord. No. 6-82;
3-14-1983 by Ord. No. 1-83]
Chatham Street
Lincoln Avenue [Added
3-14-1983 by Ord. No. 1-83]
Cherry Lane
Lum Avenue Chatham Street
Lum Avenue [Added 5-14-1990
by Ord. No. 7-90]
Front Street
Maple Street [Added 9-8-1997
by Ord. No. 10-97]
Willow Street
30.Editor's Note: The sketches referred to in Schedule IX are on file in the Clerk's office.
§ 139-30 CHATHAM CODE § 139-31
136:210
Stop Sign on At Intersection of
Milton Avenue Center Avenue
Milton Avenue [Added 6-14-1982 by Ord. No. 6-82; repealed
3-14-1983 by Ord. No. 1-3]
Parking Lot No. 3 [Added
6-14-1982 by Ord. No. 6-82;
amended 3-14-1983 by Ord.
No. 1-83]
Bowers Lane as indicated on the
sketch attached to and made a part of
this chapter
Parking Lot No. 4 access drive
[Added 6-14-1982 by Ord. No.
6-82; amended 3-14-1983 by
Ord. No. 1-83]
Parking Lot No. 4, north driving lane
as indicated on the sketch attached to
and made a part of this chapter
Parking Lot No. 4 south driving
lane [Added 6-14-1982 by Ord.
No. 6-82; amended 3-14-1983
by Ord. No. 1-83]
Parking Lot No. 4, southeast exit drive,
as indicated on the sketch attached to
and made a part of this chapter
Rose Terrace [Added 6-11-1990
by Ord. No. 8-90]
Woodland Road
Rowan Road Van Doren Avenue
Schindler Court [Added
9-8-1997 by Ord. No. 10-97]
Willow Street
Yale Street Center Avenue
§ 139-32. Schedule X: Yield Intersections. [Amended 8-13-1990 by
Ord. No. 14-90]
In accordance with the provisions of § 139-16, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as yield intersections:
Yield Sign on At Intersection of
Myrtle Avenue Minton Avenue
§ 139-33. Schedule XI: Loading Zones.31
(Reserved)
§ 139-34. Schedule XII: Taxi Stands.
In accordance with the provisions of § 139-18, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as taxi stands:
31.Editor's Note: By regulation RP-75-28, effective 10-2-1975, the Department of
Transportation designated the following no-parking zones for designated curb loading
zones: along the eastbound side of Route 24 from a point 101 feet west of the westerly
curbline of South Passaic Avenue to a point 151 feet west of the westerly curbline of South
Passaic Avenue.
§ 139-31 FIRE CODE, UNIFORM § 139-34
136:211
Street Side Location
Railroad Plaza North South In front of the railroad station
§ 139-35. Schedule XIII: Bus Stops.
(Reserved)
§ 139-36. Schedule XIV: Left-Turn Prohibitions.32 [Amended
12-10-1979 by Ord. No. 11-79]
In accordance with the provisions of § 139-20, no person shall make a left
turn at any of the following locations:
Street Direction of Travel
Bowers Lane North on Bowers Lane to west on Main
Street
Center Street South on Center Street to east on
Main Street
Coleman Avenue [Added 8-26-1996 by Ord. No. 9-96; repealed
2-26-2007 by Ord. No. 07-09]
Coleman Avenue [Added
8-26-1996 by Ord. No. 9-96]
Exiting 322 Main Street
Elmwood Avenue [Added
2-26-2007 by Ord. No. 07-08;
amended 3-26-2007 by Ord.
No. 07-16; 2-11-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-01]
South on Elmwood Avenue to east on
Main Street, Monday through
Saturday 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
Lackawanna Avenue [Added
8-26-1996 by Ord. No. 9-96]
South on Lackawanna Avenue to east
on River Road
Lafayette Avenue [Added
8-13-2001 by Ord. No. 01-15]
South on Lafayette Avenue, at the
Commerce Bank site entrance
River Road [Added 8-26-1996 by
Ord. No. 9-96]
East on River Road to north on
Lackawanna Avenue
Roosevelt Avenue [Added 2-24-1986 by Ord. No. 1-86; repealed
9-14-2009 by Ord. No. 09-15]
Tallmadge Avenue [Added 2-24-1986 by Ord. No. 1-86; repealed
9-14-2009 by Ord. No. 09-15]
§ 139-37. Schedule XV: Right-Turn Prohibitions.
No person shall make a right turn at any of the following locations:
32.Editor's Note: By Regulation NLT-75-1, effective 11-6-1975, the Department of
Transportation prohibited left turns on Route 24 as follows: east on Route 24 to north on
Center Street.
§ 139-34 CHATHAM CODE § 139-37
136:212
Street/Location Direction of Travel
118 Main Street [Added 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 08-22; repealed
9-14-2009 by Ord. No. 09-14]
§ 139-38. Schedule XVI: U-Turn Prohibitions.
(Reserved)
§ 139-39. Schedule XVII: All Turns Prohibited.
(Reserved)
§ 139-37 FIRE CODE, UNIFORM § 139-39
136:213

ARTICLE IX
Snow Emergencies
§ 139-40. (Reserved)
§ 139-41. (Reserved)
§ 139-42. (Reserved)
§ 139-43. (Reserved)
§ 139-40 FIRE CODE, UNIFORM § 139-43
136:215

ARTICLE X
Speed Limits
[Added 3-10-1986 by Ord. No. 4-86]
§ 139-44. Limits established.
The speed limit for both directions of traffic along the streets or part of
streets listed below is hereby established as follows:
Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
River Road 30 From the southerly side of Watchung Avenue
southerly to the Borough line
§ 139-44.1. Limits established in school zone. [Added 2-27-2012 by
Ord. No. 12-02]
The speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour in both directions of Watchung
Avenue (County Road 646) from the westerly Chatham Borough Line to the
easterly Chatham Borough Line (Passaic River), except for 20 miles per
hour when passing through the Washington Avenue School Zone, from 50
feet east of Washington Avenue to 100 feet west of Washington Avenue,
during recess or while children are going to or leaving school during
opening, lunchtime or closing hours.
§ 139-45. Posting of signs.
Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits as authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 139-46. When effective.
The speed limits established by this article shall take effect immediately
upon approval by the Department of Transportation.
§ 139-44 FIRE CODE, UNIFORM § 139-46
136:217

ARTICLE XI
Traffic Control Signals
[Amended 7-12-1976 by Ord. No. 9-76]
§ 139-47. Traffic signals established.
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the following
intersections:
Intersection
Watchung Avenue and Hillside Avenue
Watchung Avenue and Fairmount Avenue
Watchung Avenue and Washington Avenue
Watchung Avenue and Lafayette Avenue
§ 139-48. Installation.
All traffic signal installations shall be in accordance with the provisions of
An Act Concerning Motor Vehicles and Traffic Regulations (Subtitle 1 of
Title 39 of the Revised Statutes) shall conform to the design and shall be
maintained in operation as authorized by the Department of Transportation
of the State of New Jersey.
§ 139-47 FIRE CODE, UNIFORM § 139-48
136:219

ARTICLE XII
No-Passing Zones
§ 139-49. No-passing zones established. [Added 6-14-1982 by Ord.
No. 6-82]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the streets or parts of
streets described below are hereby designated as no-passing zones:
Name of Street Location
Hillside Avenue [Repealed 3-14-1983 by Ord. No. 1-83]
§ 139-49 FIRE CODE, UNIFORM § 139-49
136:221

ARTICLE XIII
Parking Meters
§ 139-50. (Reserved)
§ 139-51. (Reserved)
§ 139-52. (Reserved)
§ 139-53. (Reserved)
§ 139-54. (Reserved)
§ 139-55. (Reserved)
§ 139-56. (Reserved)
§ 139-57. (Reserved)
§ 139-58. (Reserved)
§ 139-50 FIRE CODE, UNIFORM § 139-58
136:223

Part 2
Off-Street Parking Regulations
ARTICLE XIV
Borough Parking Lots
§ 139-59. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OPERATOR — The person who is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
PARKING LOT NO. 1 or PLAZA NORTH — All the municipally owned land
and area lying north of the railroad right-of-way and south of Main Street
and bounded on the east by Fairmount Avenue and on the west by Lot
8, Block 104, as shown on the current Tax Maps of the Borough of
Chatham.[Amended 5-10-1976 by Ord. No. 7-76]
PARKING LOT NO.2 or PLAZA SOUTH — All the municipally owned land
and area lying south of the railroad right-of-way and north of the property of
the Board of Education extending from Fairmount Avenue to Front Street.
PARKING LOT NO.3 or BOWERS LANE LOT — All the municipally owned
land and area extending from Bowers Lane to the rear of properties
bordering on Passaic Avenue and from the southerly side of the United
States Post Office property to the northerly side of the railroad right-of-way.
PARKING LOT NO. 4 or PASSAIC AVENUE LOT — All the municipally owned
land and area extending from the United States Post Office property to
Passaic Avenue.
PARKING LOT NO. 5 or MUNICIPAL BUILDING LOT — All the municipally
owned land and area adjacent to the Municipal Building.[Amended
12-9-1985 by Ord. No. 22-85]
PARKING LOT NO. 6 or CENTER STREET LOT — All the municipally owned
land and area fronting on the east side of Center Street.
PARKING LOT NO. 7 or FIREHOUSE PLAZA LOT — All the municipally
owned land and area lying north of the railroad right-of-way and south of
Main Street and bounded on the east by Passaic Avenue and on the west by
Fairmount Avenue.[Added 5-10-1976 by Ord. No. 7-76]
PARKING LOT NO. 8 or CENTER STREET LOT WEST — All the municipally
owned land and area fronting on the west side of Center Street.[Added
7-11-1983 by Ord. No. 14-83]
PARKING LOT NO. 9 or PARK AND RIDE LOT — All the municipally leased
land on the PSE&G right-of-way adjacent to Division Avenue.[Added
11-9-1987 by Ord. No. 14-87]
PARKING LOT NO. 10 or FIREMEN’S FIREHOUSE PLAZA LOT — Bounded
on the east by Passaic Avenue and adjacent easterly to the
Firehouse.[Added 9-10-2007 by Ord. No. 07-27]
§ 139-59 FIRE CODE, UNIFORM § 139-59
136:225
PARKING LOT NO. 11 or LIBRARY OF THE CHATHAMS LOT — All the
municipally owned land located behind the Library of the Chathams
bounded to the east by St. Paul's Church.[Added 9-28-2015 by Ord. No.
15-12]
PERSON — Natural persons, firms, copartnerships, associations and
corporations.
VEHICLE — Any device in, upon or by which a person or property is or may
be transported upon a highway, excepting devices moved by human power
or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
§ 139-60. Administration of parking lots. [Amended 12-9-1985 by
Ord. No. 22-85]
For the purpose of implementing the provisions of this article, the Police
Committee of the Borough Council, through the Chief of Police and the
Police Department, is charged with the responsibility of developing
entrances and exits, marking off the parking spaces, the installation of
collection devices and signs and generally working out the details of setting
up and maintaining the parking lots referred to hereinafter so as to secure
the maximum number of parking spaces consistent with safety and the
orderly flow of traffic.
§ 139-61. Fee parking spaces. [Amended 12-9-1985 by Ord. No.
22-85; 11-9-1987 by Ord. No. 14-87; 12-12-1988 by Ord. No. 23-88;
10-10-1989 by Ord. No. 20-89; 11-12-1990 by Ord. No. 16-90;
12-9-1996 by Ord. No. 18-96; 11-8-1999 by Ord. No. 14-99;
2-24-2003 by Ord. No. 03-02]
§ 139-62. Parking by permit. [Amended 12-14-1981 by Ord. No.
19-81]
A. Parking fees required to be paid in parking lots or areas hereinafter
designated fee parking, and when signs are erected, as well as rules
and regulations governing the sale of parking tokens and parking
permits, shall be established and designated by Council by resolution.
B. All fee parking areas shall be served by a collection device or devices.
Each such device shall collect and retain the parking fee for each
parking space it serves. Each fee parking space shall be identified and
related by number or otherwise, and such identification shall be
registered when paying the daily parking fee.
C. All persons using a fee parking space shall deposit the daily fee in the
parking device, entering the number of the space parked in, by United
States coin, the amount of the fee as established or such other form as
may be authorized by Council resolution.
A. Parking by permit may be allowed in the parking lots specified in
§ 139-63. The Council shall designate by resolution such areas in such
of said parking lots as it deems appropriate for permit parking. The
§ 139-59 CHATHAM CODE § 139-62
136:226
§ 139-63. Designation of parking space. [Amended 5-10-1976 by
Ord. No. 7-76; 7-11-1983 by Ord. No. 14-83; 12-9-1985 by Ord. No.
22-85; 11-9-1987 by Ord. No. 14-87; 3-27-1995 by Ord. No. 2-95;
11-13-2006 by Ord. No. 06-25; 11-25-2013 by Ord. No. 13-22;
9-10-2007 by Ord. No. 07-27; 9-28-2015 by Ord. No. 15-12;
11-11-2019 by Ord. No. 19-15]
The parking lots listed below are to be regulated as indicated below when
signs are erected giving clear indication of such regulations. The Borough
Council may by resolution relax the time limits on parking in these parking
lots by resolution when it deems necessary for holidays, emergencies,
construction or for other good cause.
procedure for the issuance of parking permits, the classes of persons
eligible for permits, the number of spaces to be set aside for permit
use, the number of permits to be issued, the lots for which issued,
the charge to be made for such permits, the method of identifying
the permit holders, the frequency of the issuance of permits and the
method of distributing permits likewise shall be designated by
resolution.
B. No vehicle shall be parked in a parking space reserved for permit
parking as indicated by signs erected for that purpose unless a valid
permit for that lot is properly affixed to the vehicle.
C. The number of parking permits issued shall be reasonably related to the
number of spaces designated for permit parking, but possession of a
valid parking permit shall not constitute a guarantee of a parking space
nor excuse or justify illegal parking.
D. Only permits issued by the Borough of Chatham to Borough residents
shall be valid. A violation of this article shall exist if the permit is
displayed on any vehicle other than a vehicle on file in the Borough
Clerk's office. [Added 11-8-1999 by Ord. No. 14-99]
A. Parking Lot No. 1: fee parking, permit parking and time limit parking
where designated.
B. Parking Lot No. 2: fee parking and permit parking where designated.
C. Parking Lot No. 3: free parking with a maximum limit of three hours, fee
parking and permit parking where designated.
D. Parking Lot No. 4: free parking with a maximum limit of three hours,
except the four spaces closest to the Post Office Building, which shall
have a maximum limit of 15 minutes.
E. Parking Lot No. 5: free parking with a maximum limit of two hours.
F. Parking Lot No. 6: free parking with a maximum limit of three hours,
Monday through Saturday from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., and fee and
permit parking where designated.
§ 139-62 FIRE CODE, UNIFORM § 139-63
136:227
§ 139-63.1. Designation of RIDEPROVIDE parking space. [Added
7-14-2008 by Ord. No. 08-14]
§ 139-64. Violations; removal of vehicles.
G. Parking Lot No. 7: free parking on the northerly side line of the lot with
a maximum limit of 90 minutes between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. and a maximum limit of three hours between the hours of 6:00 p.m.
and 8:00 a.m.; however, no parking shall be permitted at any time on
the southerly side line of the lot.
H. Parking Lot No. 8: free parking with a maximum limit of three hours,
Monday through Saturday from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., and fee and
permit parking where designated.
I. Parking Lot No. 9 or Park and Ride Lot: free parking with a maximum
limit of two hours; permit parking where designated.
J. Parking Lot No. 10 at Firemen’s Firehouse Plaza Lot: free parking for
members of the Chatham Borough Volunteer Fire Department only, in
accordance with procedures to be established by the Fire Chief of the
Borough of Chatham. Parking by the public is strictly prohibited and
will be strictly enforced in accordance with § 139-64 entitled
"Violations; removal of vehicles."
K. Parking Lot No. 11 at Library of the Chathams: free parking with a
maximum limit of three hours.
A. A parking space shall be created at the Division Avenue Park and Ride
to be utilized exclusively for RIDEPROVIDE and waiving any and all
fees associated with parking at this location.
B. The effectiveness of this section is contingent upon a sign being erected
as required by municipal ordinance.
C. Unless another penalty is expressly provided under New Jersey statute,
any vehicle and/or person who violates the provision of this section or
any supplement thereto may be liable for a penalty of not more than
$50.
A. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for anyone to use any
portion of the parking lots referred to herein in any fashion other than
is permitted herein.
B. In addition to issuing a summons for the violation of this article, the
Police Department may move or cause to be moved from any parking lot
herein described any unattended vehicle parked or standing in any
portion of any parking lot not designated as a parking space or any
unattended vehicle parked or standing in a designated parking space
which has remained there for a period of 10 hours after a summons has
been issued charging a violation hereunder. When a vehicle is so
removed from a parking lot, the owner of said vehicle shall pay, before
§ 139-63 CHATHAM CODE § 139-64
136:228
§ 139-64.1. Use of parking spaces. [Added 12-9-1985 by Ord. No.
22-85]
§ 139-65. Damaging or tampering with collection devices or signs.
[Amended 12-9-1985 by Ord. No. 22-85]
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to deface,
impair, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the
usefulness of any collection device or sign installed under the provisions of
this article.
§ 139-66. Authority to enforce provisions.
The Police Department of the Borough of Chatham is herewith charged with
the responsibility for the enforcement of the provisions of this article. The
Chief of Police shall assign such personnel as he shall deem necessary to
properly maintain control of the parking lots and enforce the provisions of
this article. For this purpose all police officers of the Borough of Chatham,
both regular and special, are hereby given full power and authority to
enforce the various provisions of this article.
§ 139-67. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-10-1986 by Ord. No.
2-86; 11-8-1999 by Ord. No. 14-99; 11-25-2013 by Ord. No. 13-22]
Unless a different penalty is expressly provided by this Code or the Borough
Local Supplemental Violations Bureau Schedule, any person who is found
guilty of violating or failing to comply with any provision of this article shall
be punishable by a fine not exceeding $500 or by imprisonment for a period
not exceeding 30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, to be at the
discretion of the Judge of the Municipal Court of the Borough of Chatham.
being entitled to the recovery or possession of said vehicle, all
reasonable charges for towing, storage and other expenses incurred in
removal of said vehicle.
A. All persons using a fee or permit parking space shall park their vehicles
within the space designated by the white line markings with the front of
the vehicle facing to the front of the space or "head-in," as that term is
commonly understood. Vehicles unable to fit within the confines of such
white line markings are prohibited from vehicle, all reasonable charges
for towing, storage and other expenses incurred in removal of said
vehicle. Parking in such space and will be in violation of this article even
though the required fee has been paid or permit obtained.
B. No one shall use any fee or permit parking space for stopping or waiting
except on payment of the fee or with a proper permit, as the case may
be.
§ 139-64 FIRE CODE, UNIFORM § 139-67
136:229

ARTICLE XV
Parking on Board of Education Property
§ 139-68. Definitions.
§ 139-69. Compliance with regulations required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform
any act required in this article.
§ 139-70. Limited use driveways. [Amended 11-14-1988 by Ord. No.
21-88]
The driveways, entranceways and exitways of the Chatham Middle School,
Milton Avenue School and Washington Avenue School are restricted to use
for entrance to and exit from the respective school buildings and grounds,
and the use thereof as throughways or thoroughfares is prohibited.
§ 139-71. Parking prohibited at certain locations.
When signs or barricades are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall
park a vehicle at any time upon any of the driveways, exitways, roadways,
parking lots or parking areas or in areas the entrances to which have been
barricaded.
§ 139-72. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted
of a violation of any provision of this article shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $50 or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding 15 days, or
both, in the discretion of the Judge before whom conviction may be had.
A. Words and phrases used in this article, unless other meaning is clearly
apparent from the language or context, shall have the same meaning as
the words and phrases used in Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New
Jersey.
B. All hourly times mentioned herein shall refer to the prevailing time
lawfully in effect.
C. For the purposes of this article, the following word shall have the
meaning indicated:
PARKING — The standing or waiting of a vehicle on a street, driveway,
parking lot or other area usable by motor vehicles when not actually
engaged in receiving or discharging passengers or merchandise unless
in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals.
§ 139-68 FIRE CODE, UNIFORM § 139-72
136:231

Part 3
[AddedM2is-c1e1l-l2a0n0e2ouBsy POrordvi. sNioon. s02-02]
ARTICLE XVI
Work Zone Regulations
§ 139-73. Findings and purpose.
The Mayor and Council hereby find and declare that problems of traffic
control occur when traffic must be moved through or around street
construction, maintenance operation, and utility work, above- and below
ground which requires blocking the roadway and obstructing the normal
flow of traffic; and that such obstructions are or can become dangerous
when not properly controlled. In order to better promote the public health,
safety, peace and welfare, it is necessary to establish controls and
regulations directed to the safe and expeditious movement of traffic through
construction and maintenance zones and to provide safety for the work
force performing these operations.
§ 139-74. Adoption of state manual.
The Borough of Chatham, in the County of Morris, State of New Jersey,
does hereby adopt the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
for Streets and Highways, hereafter known as MUTCD, except as hereby
supplemented and amended, as it controls and regulates whenever
construction maintenance operations of utility work obstructs the normal
flow of traffic. Any person, contractor, or utility who fails to comply with the
provisions of the MUTCD while performing such work is in violations of this
article.
§ 139-75. Pre-construction meetings.
It shall be the responsibility of the person, contractor, or in the case of
a public utility as required under the public utility agreement, wishing to
conduct work on, under or above the roadway to contact the Chatham
Borough Police Department in order to arrange a pre-construction meeting
to submit plans for the safe movement of traffic during such period of
construction activity. Any person, contractor or utility who fails to comply
with this section prior to the start of such work or whose plans are not
approved by the Chatham Borough Police Department is in violation of this
article.
§ 139-76. Hazardous conditions.
The person, contractor, or utility, prior to the start of any work, shall provide
the Chatham Borough Police Department with at least two emergency
contact phone numbers to be called in case of emergency problems at the
construction or maintenance site. If for any reason emergency contacts
cannot be reached, or if the emergency contact person does not respond to
the call from the Police Department to correct such hazardous condition,
§ 139-73 FIRE CODE, UNIFORM § 139-76
136:233
the Borough may respond to correct such hazardous condition. The
reasonable fees for such emergency service by the Borough shall be
charged to the person, contractor, or utility responsible for conditions.
§ 139-77. Hours.
There shall be no construction, maintenance operations, or utility work on
any roadway in the Borough before the hour of 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m.
This time limit may be adjusted to permit work prior to 9:00 a.m. or after
4:00 p.m. by the Chatham Borough Police Department officer in charge. If it
is determined by the officer in charge that the construction or maintenance
operations prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. would substantially delay
traffic or cause a safety or health hazard, the work shall then be permitted
only between 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
§ 139-78. Road closings and detours.
Road closings and/or traffic detours and diversions shall not be permitted
unless approved by the Chatham Borough Police Department.
§ 139-79. Traffic directors.
Traffic directors shall be posted at all construction or maintenance sites
when determined by the Chatham Borough Police Department that same is
necessary to provide for the safe and expeditious movement of traffic.
§ 139-80. Stop work.
The Chatham Borough Police Department shall have the authority to stop
work, including the removal of equipment and vehicles, stored material
within the street right-of-way, backfilling of open excavations and/or other
related work, in order to abate any nuisance and/or safety hazard or for any
violation of the article.
§ 139-81. Site preparation.
It is to be expressly understood that no materials, vehicles or equipment are
to be placed in the roadway or sidewalk area until all construction, signs,
lights, devices, and pavement markings are installed.
§ 139-82. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person, contractor or utility who commits a violation of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof for a first offense pay a fine of not less
than $100 nor more than $500 and/or be imprisoned in the county jail
for a term not exceeding 90 days. For a second offense, upon conviction
thereof, pay a fine of not less than $250 and/or be imprisoned in the
county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days. For a third offense, upon
conviction thereof, pay a fine of not less than $500 and/or be
imprisoned in the county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days.
§ 139-76 CHATHAM CODE § 139-82
136:234
B. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 139-82 FIRE CODE, UNIFORM § 139-82
136:235
Chapter 144
FIRE-RELATED OFFENSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform Fire Code — See Ch. 136. Fire zones — See Ch. 148.
§ 144-1. Driving over fire equipment.
No person or persons shall willfully, during a fire or at any other time,
drive, any vehicle over any hose or other apparatus belonging to the Fire
Department.
§ 144-2. Opening hydrants.33
No person, unless duly authorized so to do by the Borough Council, other
than a member of the Fire Department when acting in the discharge of his
duty as such fire fighter, shall open or tamper with any water hydrant.
§ 144-3. Violations and penalties.
The penalty for violation of any provision of this chapter shall be as set forth
in Chapter 1, § 1-14.
Chapter 148
FIRE ZONES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Other parking restrictions — See Ch. 139.
§ 148-1. Authority to establish.
In order to protect the public health, safety and welfare and to provide
access to buildings for fire-fighting equipment and other emergency
vehicles the Chief of the Chatham Borough Fire Department is authorized
to establish fire zones pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-53.
§ 148-2. Fire zones designated.
The areas set forth in Schedule I attached to and made a part of this
chapter have been established by the Chief of the Chatham Borough Fire
Department as fire zones. The Chief of the Chatham Borough Fire
33.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 139-82 CHATHAM CODE § 148-2
144:236
Department may from time to time designate additional areas as fire zones,
which fire zones, when made a part of Schedule I of this chapter according
to law in such cases made and provided, shall also be subject to the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 148-3. Posting of signs.
Appropriate no-parking signs shall be erected by the Borough in accordance
with the provisions of Title 39, Chapter 4, of the Revised Statutes of New
Jersey, as amended and supplemented, designating the areas described in
§ 148-5.
§ 148-4. Obstruction prohibited.
All fire zones described in Schedule I shall be free of all obstructions.
Parking of motor vehicles in said fire zones is strictly prohibited at all times,
except that attended commercial vehicles may stop temporarily to load and
unload in designated loading areas.
§ 148-5. Fire zones established and described.
In accordance with the provisions of § 148-2, the following areas are
established as fire zones:
§ 148-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who is found guilty of violating or failing to comply with any
provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
§ 1-14.
Chapter 154
A. The areas designated as fire zones, including loading areas, on the
drawing entitled "Acme Shopping Center Fire Zones, Block 31, Lots 18,
19, 20, 21, 22, 38, 39, 40 and 41," dated February 20, 1976, a copy of
which drawing is annexed hereto and made a part hereof.34
B. The areas designated as fire zones on the drawing entitled "Chatham
Methodist Church Fire Zones, Block 34, Lot 31-1," dated February 20,
1976, a copy of which drawing is annexed hereto and made a part
hereof.1
C. The areas designated as fire zones on the drawing entitled “Chatham
Train Station Improvements – Signing & Striping Plan - Fire Zone Map”
for Block 91, Lot 1, dated November 21, 2012, a copy of which is
annexed hereto and made a part hereof.35 [Added 6-10-2013 by Ord.
No. 13-14]
34.Editor's Note: The drawings referred to are attached to Ord. No. 5-76, as adopted, and are
on file in the Borough offices.
35.Editor's Note: The drawing is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 148-2 GARAGE SALES § 148-6
154:237
GARAGE SALES
§ 154-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARAGE SALE — All general sales open to the public conducted from or
on a residential premises for the purpose of disposing, by sale, barter or
otherwise, personal property, including but not limited to all sales entitled
"garage," "lawn," "yard," "attic," "porch," "room," "backyard," "patio," or
"estate". This definition shall not include a situation where no more than
five specific items are held out for sale and all advertisements of such sale
specifically name those items to be sold.
GARAGE SALE SIGN — A temporary sign no larger than two feet by two feet
indicating the location, time and date of a garage sale within the Borough.
PERSON — Includes natural persons, corporations, charitable or religious
institutions or nonprofit corporations, homeowners' associations,
unincorporated associations and family and neighborhood groups.
PERSONAL PROPERTY — Property which is owned, utilized and maintained
by an individual or members of his or her residence and acquired in the
normal course of living or in maintaining that residence.
§ 154-2. Permit required.
Whenever a garage sale is to be conducted a permit must be first secured
from the Borough. In the case of a multi-neighbor sale each neighbor
involved must be listed on the permit application, and said sale will count
as one of the two annual sales permitted for each resident.
§ 154-3. Number and length of sales.
§ 154-4. Fees.
The fee for a permit pursuant to this chapter shall be set forth from time
to time by resolution of the Borough Council. Such fee shall be paid to the
Borough at the time of submission of the application for such permit.
§ 154-5. Application for permit.
For the purposes of this chapter, any person desiring to secure a permit
to conduct a garage sale, shall, at least one week prior to the date and
A. No resident or single address shall conduct more than two garage sales
per year.
B. No sale shall continue for more than three consecutive days.
C. No sale shall be conducted before 8:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m. Monday
through Saturday, or before 12:00 p.m. or after 3:00 p.m. Sundays.
§ 148-6 CHATHAM CODE § 154-5
154:238
time set for such sale, complete and submit to the Borough Clerk an
application for the issuance of a permit and shall pay the required fee. Said
application shall be in such form as the Borough may establish and contain
the following information:
§ 154-6. Issuance of permit.
The Borough Clerk shall receive the application and accept the required
filing fee and, if upon review of the application the same is in compliance
with the requirements of this chapter and any regulations promulgated
hereunder, shall issue the permit, and said Clerk shall number the
applications and permits in chronological order.
§ 154-7. Nontransferability of permit.
No permit issued by the Borough shall be transferable by the permittee
to any other person, nor shall the place of the sale be changed without
cancellation of the permit and issuance of a new permit upon application
and payment of the required fee for the new location.
§ 154-8. Signs.
§ 154-9. Miscellaneous regulations.
A. The location of the proposed garage sale.
B. The dates and times of such proposed sale.
C. The names of owners of premises on which the proposed garage sale is
to be conducted.
D. The name or names of person or persons and their addresses and phone
numbers if other than the owners, who will be participating in said
proposed garage sale.
A. No more than three garage sale signs may be posted off of the property
where the sale is to be held.
B. Signs shall not be attached to trees, utility poles or traffic regulation
signs.
C. Signs shall not be posted prior to the day of the sale.
D. Signs shall be two feet by two feet or less in size.
E. Failure to remove any signs posted to direct people to the sale within 24
hours of the end of the sale shall be a violation of this chapter.
A. Sales shall not impede nor disrupt motoring traffic or neighborhood
parking regulations.
B. All unsold sale items must be removed from the premises or stored
away at the end of the sale.
§ 154-5 GARAGE SALES § 154-9
154:239
§ 154-10. Enforcement.
§ 154-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person, family group, corporation or other entity conducting any such
sale or similar activity without being properly permitted therefor or who
shall violate or fail to comply with any of the terms and provisions of this
chapter or any other rules, regulations or provisions adopted or approved
by the Council shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and shall be
punishable as provided in Chapter 1, § 1-14, and each day that such sale or
violation continues without being permitted shall be considered and shall
constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 157
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES
C. No goods may be sold at a garage sale that are new, unused, and in
original retail packaging.
A. This chapter shall be enforced by the Chatham Borough Police
Department.
B. The permit is hereby made responsible for the maintenance of good
order and decorum on the premises during the hours of such garage
sale.
C. No permit shall permit any loud or boisterous conduct on the premises
where the sale is being held or permit vehicles to impede passage of the
traffic on any roads or streets in the area of the premises where the sale
is being conducted.
§ 154-9 CHATHAM CODE § 154-11
154:240
ARTICLE I
Reimbursement for Cleanup Costs
[Adopted 10-15-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1836]
§ 157-1. Purpose.
This chapter provides for the reimbursement to the Borough of any and
all costs expended in connection with the remediation of a discharge of
hazardous substances, as those terms are defined by state environmental
laws and regulations, including petroleum and petroleum-based products.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to apply to any ongoing
remediation in compliance with state law.
§ 157-2. Authorization for remediation.
The Borough of Chatham Fire Department, Police Department, Board of
Health and Department of Public Works, as well as the Borough's approved
agents and/or contractors, are authorized, but not required, to mitigate the
effects of any hazardous substance unlawfully discharged upon or into any
property, waters, facility, building, structure, installation, equipment, pipe
or pipeline, well, pit, pond, impoundment, ditch, storage container, or motor
vehicle within the Borough. In the event that the Borough undertakes any
remediation or mitigative measures, it shall not be a person responsible for
conducting the remediation as that term is defined by state environmental
laws and regulations.
§ 157-3. Parties responsible for costs.
Any person who has discharged a hazardous substance or who has failed
to report a discharge or who "is in any way responsible for a discharged
hazardous substance" as that term is defined by state environmental laws
and regulations shall be liable, strictly, jointly and severally, without regard
to fault, for all cleanup and removal costs incurred by the Borough.
§ 157-4. Borough supervision.
In the event that any person undertakes, either voluntarily or upon order
of a Borough official or other authority having jurisdiction, to remediate
the effects of any hazardous substance unlawfully discharged upon or into
any property, waters, facility, building, structure, installation, equipment,
pipe or pipeline, well, pit, pond, impoundment, ditch, storage container, or
motor vehicle within the Borough, the Borough may take such action as
is necessary to supervise or verify the adequacy of the remediation. All
persons described above shall be strictly liable to the Borough for all costs
incurred as a result of such supervision or verification.
36.Editor's Note: This ordinance was originally adopted as Ch. 205 but was renumbered to
maintain the organizational structure of the Code.
§ 157-1 GARAGE SALES § 157-5
154:241
§ 157-5. Costs.
Costs incurred by the Borough shall include, but shall not necessarily be
limited to, the following: actual labor costs of Borough personnel, including
benefits and administrative overhead; costs of equipment operation,
maintenance and repair; costs to repair any Borough equipment, vehicles,
tools, machines or other personal property; costs of any contract labor and
material; and attorney's fees and consultant's fees.
§ 157-6. Period for payment.
A. Any person and/or entity responsible for any discharge of a hazardous
substance shall reimburse the Borough the full price of expendable
items and costs used to address such discharge and for all costs and
expenses set forth in this chapter within 45 days after receipt of a
statement from the Borough outlining said costs and expenses.
B. Whenever any person and/or entity responsible for any discharge of a
hazardous substance fails to remit payment within 45 days as
prescribed herein, the Borough may bring an action in a court of
competent jurisdiction to recover such costs, including reasonable
attorney fees and costs.
C. The remedies provided in this article shall be in addition to any other
remedies provided by the law. The recovery of costs incurred under this
article does not limit the liability of responsible parties under local
ordinance or state or federal law, rule or regulations.
§ 157-5 CHATHAM CODE § 157-6
154:242
Chapter 165
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Affordable housing — See Ch. 69.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 111.
Cooperative and condominium
conversions — See Ch. 115.
Development fees — See Ch. 119.
Affordable housing fees — See Ch. 129, Art. I.
Uniform Fire Code — See Ch. 136.
Noise — See Ch. 184.
Sidewalks — See Ch. 221.
Trees — See Ch. 314.
§ 157-6 GARAGE SALES § 157-6
154:243

ARTICLE I
General Provisions37
§ 165-1. Ordinance title. [Amended 12-14-1981 by Ord. No. 21-81]
The title of the ordinance comprising this chapter shall be: "A
comprehensive ordinance regulating and limiting the uses of land and the
use and locations of buildings and structures regulating and restricting
the height and bulk of buildings and structures and determining the area
of yards and other open spaces; regulating and restricting the density of
population; dividing the Borough into districts for such purposes; adopting
a map of said Borough showing boundaries and the classification of such
districts; establishing rules, regulations and standards governing the
subdivision of land within the Borough; establishing a Planning Board and
Zoning Board of Adjustment; and prescribing penalties for the violation of
its provisions."
§ 165-2. Short title of ordinance. [Amended 12-14-1981 by Ord. No.
21-81]
The short form by which this chapter may be known shall be the "Land
Development Ordinance of the Borough of Chatham."
§ 165-3. Purpose. [Amended 12-14-1981 by Ord. No. 21-81]
The chapter is adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., in order to
promote and protect the public health, safety, morals and general welfare,
and in furtherance of the following related and more specific objectives:
A. To secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other natural and man-made
disasters;
B. To provide adequate light, air and open space;
C. To ensure that the development of the Borough of Chatham does not
conflict with the development and general welfare of neighboring
municipalities, the county and the state as a whole;
D. To promote the establishment of appropriate population densities and
concentrations that will contribute to the well being of persons,
neighborhoods, and preservation of the environment;
E. To encourage the appropriate and efficient expenditure of public funds
by the coordination of public development with land use policies;
F. To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for a variety of
agricultural, residential, recreational, commercial and industrial uses
and open space, both public and private, according to their respective
environmental requirements;
37.Editor’s Note: As provided by Ord. No. 13-04, adopted 3-11-2013, to the extent there are
any inconsistencies between this chapter and the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq., the provisions of the Municipal Land Use Law shall govern.
§ 165-1 GARAGE SALES § 165-3
154:245
§ 165-4. Interpretation of standards. [Amended 12-14-1981 by Ord.
No. 21-81]
The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements.
Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction than is imposed or
required by other provisions of law or by other rules or regulations or
resolutions, the provisions of the chapter shall control. Where other laws,
rules, regulations or resolutions require greater restrictions that are
imposed or required by this chapter, the provisions of such other laws,
rules, regulations or restrictions shall control.
§ 165-5. Prohibited uses. [Amended 12-14-1981 by Ord. No. 21-81;
7-12-2010 by Ord. No. 10-10]
G. To encourage the location and design of transportation routes which
will promote the free flow of traffic while discouraging location of such
facilities and routes which result in congestion or blight;
H. To promote a desirable visual environment through creative
development techniques and good civic design and arrangements;
I. To promote the conservation of historic sites and districts, open space,
energy resources and valuable natural resources in the municipality
and to prevent urban sprawl and degradation of the environment
through improper use of land; [Amended 9-9-1991 by Ord. No.
11-91]
J. To encourage senior citizen community housing construction consistent
with provisions permitting other residential uses of a similar density in
the same zoning district.
K. To encourage coordination of the various public and private procedures
and activities shaping land development with a view of lessening the
cost of such development and to the more efficient use of land.
L. To promote the maximum practicable recovery and recycling of
recyclable materials from municipal solid waste through the use of
planning practices designed to incorporate the State Recycling Plan
goals and to complement municipal recycling programs. [Added
9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 11-91]
A. Any use not specifically listed as a permitted use, an accessory use, or a
conditional use shall be deemed a prohibited use. This prohibition shall
be liberally construed as protective of the zoning scheme and any doubt
shall be resolved in favor of interpreting the doubtful use as prohibited.
B. The following uses are expressly prohibited in each and every zone in
the Borough of Chatham.
(1) Certain adult entertainment uses. The following adult
entertainment uses shall be prohibited in all zones in the Borough:
§ 165-3 CHATHAM CODE § 165-5
154:246
§ 165-6. Time of compliance.
All applicable requirements shall be met at the time of erection,
enlargement, alteration, moving or change in use of the principal use and/
or structures and shall apply to the entire structure or structures where
involved in the erection, enlargement, alteration, moving or change in use.
§ 165-7. Conformity required. [Amended 12-14-1981 by Ord. No.
21-81]
No building shall hereafter be used, erected, altered, converted, enlarged,
added to, moved or reduced, wholly or in part, nor shall any land be
designed, used or physically altered for any purpose or in any manner
except in conformity with this chapter. Where a lot is formed from part of
a lot already occupied by a building, any subdivision shall be effected in
such a manner as not to impair any already occupied by a building, any
subdivision shall be effected in such a manner as not to impair any of the
requirements of this chapter with respect to the existing building(s) and
all yard requirements in connection therewith and so that all resulting lots
have adequate dimensions consistent with the requirements of the zoning
district in which they are located and so that all lots have frontage on a
street.
§ 165-8. Amendments.
This chapter may be amended from time to time by the governing body after
the appropriate referrals, notices, hearings and other requirements of law.
(a) Any establishment that sells, distributes, rents, depicts, or
exhibits obscene or pornographic material as defined in this
chapter.
(b) Any establishment that presents live human activity and/or live
human with animal activity that displays, depicts or exposes
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activity in an
obscene or pornographic way as defined in this chapter.
§ 165-5 GARAGE SALES § 165-8
154:247

ARTICLE II
Word Usage and Definitions
[Amended 12-14-1981 by Ord. No. 21-81; 9-9-1991 by Ord. No.
11-91]
§ 165-9. Word usage.38
For the purposes of this chapter, certain phrases and words are herein
defined as follows: Words used in the present tense include the future;
words used in the singular number include the plural number and vice
versa; the word "used" shall include arranged, designed, constructed,
altered, converted, rented, leased or intended to be used; the word "lot"
includes the words plot, premises, and tract; the word "building" includes
the words "structure," "dwelling," or "residence"; the word "shall" is
mandatory and not discretionary. Any word or term not defined herein shall
be used with a meaning as defined in Webster's Third New International
Dictionary of the English Language, unabridged (or latest edition).
Moreover, whenever a term is used in the chapter which is defined in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., such term is intended to have the meaning as
defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55-1 et seq., unless specifically defined to the contrary
in this chapter.
§ 165-10. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:39
ACCESSORY BUILDING, STRUCTURE OR USE — A building, structure or
use which is customarily associated with and is subordinate and incidental
to the principal building, structure or use and which is located on the same
lot therewith. An accessory building attached to the principal building shall
be considered part of the principal building.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The Borough Administrator of the Borough
of Chatham, Morris County, New Jersey.
ADULT DAY CARE CENTER — A facility that provides a coordinated
program of professional services in a community-based group setting to
functionally impaired adults, age 18 or older, for part of the day, excluding
overnight stays. The services provided are designed to meet the social
needs and some health service needs of adults with impairments and/or
medical conditions needing treatment and monitoring to prevent premature
institutionalization.[Added 9-10-2012 by Ord. No. 12-13]
38.Editor’s Note: As provided by Ord. No. 13-04, adopted 3-11-2013, all references to
masculine pronouns in this chapter shall be construed to be gender neutral.
39.Editor’s Note: Ordinance No. 13-04, adopted 3-11-2013, provided that all references to
"Zoning Officer" in this chapter be changed to the title of "Borough Zoning Official" or
designee and/or the Administrative Secretary of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, and further provided that any reference made in the ordinance to the
Borough Zoning Official and/or his/her designee shall also include and apply to the
Administrative Secretary of the Planning Board and the Administrative Secretary of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment, as appropriate.
§ 165-9 GARAGE SALES § 165-10
154:249
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT, ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
USE (also known as "SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS") — As set forth in
N.J.S.A. 2C:34-6, an establishment which:[Added 7-12-2010 by Ord. No.
10-10]
ADVERSE EFFECT — Conditions or situations creating, imposing,
aggravating or leading to impractical, unsafe or unsatisfactory conditions
on a subdivided property or off-tract property such as, but not limited
to, improper circulation and drainage right-of-way as defined in N.J.S.A.
40:55-1.2, as amended, inadequate drainage facilities, insufficient street
widths, unsuitable street grades, unsuitable street locations to
accommodate prospective traffic or coordinate and compose a convenient
system, locating lots in manner not adaptable for the intended purposes
without danger to health or peril from flood, fire, erosion or other menace,
providing for lots of insufficient size and neither providing nor making
future allowance for access to the interior portion of the lot or for other
facilities required by this chapter.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING — Newly constructed or rehabilitated housing
units within the means of a low- or moderate-income household as defined
in Subchapter 12, Controls on Affordability of the substantive rules of the
Council on Affordable Housing (COAH).[Added 2-8-1988 by Ord. No.
3-88]
AFFORDABLE HOUSING AGREEMENT — Any agreement entered into
between the Borough and a Developer setting forth mutual obligations
and rights with respect to the objectives of the Fair Housing Act (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-301 et seq.).[Added 2-8-1988 by Ord. No. 3-88]
Offers as one of its principal purposes the sale, rental, exhibit, or
display of any of the following: books, magazines, publications or other
printed materials, photography, videotapes, or audiotapes, still or
moving films, computer disks, computer games, CD ROMs, DVDs, or
any other media or tangible item of any kind, depicting or exhibiting
a specified anatomical area or a specified sexual activity as each is
defined herein; or
A.
Regularly features live performances characterized by the depiction of
a specified anatomical area or by a specified sexual activity as each is
defined herein; or
B.
Regularly shows films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other
photographic or film representations which depict or describe a
specified anatomical area or specified sexual activity as each is defined
herein.
C.
"Adult entertainment use" shall also include establishments which
constitute an adults-only club, adults-only restaurant, drinking, or
catering establishment, adult bookstores, adult video stores, adult
motion-picture theaters, and/or adult novelty/gift shops.
D.
§ 165-10 CHATHAM CODE § 165-10
154:250
AGE-RESTRICTED — Dwelling units designed for, and occupied by, at least
one person 55 years of age or older per dwelling unit.[Added 11-24-2014
by Ord. No. 14-09]
ALTERATION — Any change, addition or modification in construction or
arrangement; any change in use from that of one district classification to
another; and removal of a building from one location to another.
APARTMENT UNIT — See "dwellings."[Amended 9-9-1991 by Ord. No.
11-91]
APPLICANT — The landowner or the agent, optionee, contract purchaser or
other person authorized to act for and acting for the landowner submitting
an application under this chapter.
APPLICATION — An application may be an application for development,
application for appeal of a Borough Official’s decision, application for
change of permitted use with waiver of site plan, or application for such
other relief as is permitted under this chapter and/or the Municipal Land
Use Law. An application shall consist of a submission of completed
application form(s) provided by the Borough, together with all applicable
completed checklists, plans, reports, and documents required under the
checklists and this chapter, and the payment of all required fees and
escrows.[Added 3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-04]
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application or appeal forms
and all accompanying documents required by this chapter for approval of
a subdivision plan, site plan, conditional use, zoning variance or direction
of the issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 or N.J.S.A.
40:55D-36.[Amended 3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-04]
ART GALLERY — A room or rooms where works of art, including, without
limitation, paintings, sculptures, pottery, glass, and weaving, are exhibited
and displayed for sale and/or public education and enjoyment. Framing
services and sales of art supplies may also be provided in conjunction with
any principal gallery use.[Added 9-10-2012 by Ord. No. 12-13]
ATTIC — The unfinished space between the ceiling joists or the floor of the
top story and the bottom of the roof rafters.[Added 4-28-2003 by Ord. No.
03-08; amended 4-26-2010 by Ord. No. 10-09]
AWNING — A cover of canvas or other flexible material stretched over a
frame, that projects from the wall of a building for the purpose of shielding a
doorway, window, porch, deck or other building extension from the elements
and the like, constructed and installed in such a manner as not to impede
the flow of pedestrian traffic and compatible in color and design with the
structure to which it is attached. In residential districts, awnings shall
be of a traditional design, made of cloth or clothlike materials. Awnings
may either be retractable or built on permanent pipe frameworks.[Added
11-9-1987 by Ord. No. 15-87; amended 9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 11-91;
2-27-1995 by Ord. No. 4-95; 5-23-2005 by Ord. No. 05-18]
AWNING FRINGE — A permanent border or section of an awning attached
at the bottom of the main part of the awning, where verbiage or other
§ 165-10 GARAGE SALES § 165-10
154:251
permitted signs options can be displayed. The height of an awning fringe
shall not exceed nine inches.[Added 10-24-2011 by Ord. No. 11-18]
BASEMENT — A portion of a building having more than 50% of its clear
height below the average finished contact grade along the outside of the
building.[Amended 4-26-2010 by Ord. No. 10-09]
BEDROOM — A room planned or used primarily for sleeping.
BOARD — The Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment of the
Borough of Chatham.
BODY PIERCING — The piercing of any portion of the human body for the
placement of any type of jewelry or other ornamentation, other than ear
lobe and nose piercing.[Added 7-12-2010 by Ord. No. 10-10]
BODY PIERCING ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment or business
engaged in providing the service of piercing a person's skin or other part
of the human body, other than the ear lobe or nose.[Added 7-12-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-10]
BOROUGH — Borough of Chatham, Morris County, New Jersey.
BOROUGH OFFICIAL — An official of the Borough of Chatham, unless
a specific official or officials are otherwise designated by ordinance or
statute.[Added 3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-04]
BOUTIQUE HOTEL — A facility offering transient lodging accommodations
to the general public with up to 100 rooms and which may include additional
facilities and services, such as restaurants, meeting rooms, and recreational
facilities.[Added 11-24-2014 by Ord. No. 14-09]
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a construction adapted
to permanent, temporary or continuous occupancy and having a
roof.[Amended 9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 11-91]
BUILDING COVERAGE — The square footage or other area measurement
by which all buildings occupy a lot as measured on a horizontal plane
around the periphery of the facades and including the area under the roof
of any structure supported by columns, but not having walls, as measured
around the outside of the outermost extremities of the roof above the
columns.
BUILDING HEIGHT — Measurement of a proposed building from the
original ground elevations, as determined from United States Geological
Survey maps, to the points described in Subsection A, B or C in this
definition. The intent of the Code of the Borough of Chatham is to limit
To calculate the average finished contact grade, measurements shall be
taken of the clear height at each building corner and at each midpoint
between each building corner. Clear height shall be the distance from
the foundation sill to the finished contact grade.
A.
To be defined as a basement, the clear height average from these
measurements shall be less than half of the distance from the
foundation floor to the foundation sill.
B.
§ 165-10 CHATHAM CODE § 165-10
154:252
height to the specified maximum footage and specified number of stories
within the maximum footage. Building height shall be determined by
measuring the height at each corner of the building from the original
ground elevation to the points described in Subsection A, B or C of this
definition. The measurements shall then be averaged as to the maximum
and minimum vertical distances from the original ground elevations:
[Amended 11-9-1987 by Ord. No. 15-87; 9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 11-91;
4-26-2010 by Ord. No. 10-09]
BUILDING MARKER — See "sign, building marker."[Added 10-24-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-18]
BUSINESS SERVICES — Establishments primarily engaged in rendering
services to business establishments on a fee or contract basis, such as
advertising and mailing; building maintenance; employment service;
management and consulting services; protective services, equipment rental
and leasing; commercial research; development and testing; photo
finishing, and personnel supply services.[Added 11-9-1987 by Ord. No.
15-87]
CANOPY — A rooflike structure supported by posts, columns or walls above
a pedestrian, service, parking or other open area, to shield the area from
the elements and the like, and constructed with a flat, domed or peaked
roof. The canopy shall be open on at least two sides to permit the passage of
pedestrians or motor vehicles. The lowest surface (equivalent to a ceiling)
of a canopy, other than one located at a service station, shall be no more
than 10 feet above the lowest point of the finished surface below it. When
the canopy is not attached to another structure on the property, it shall
be known as a "detached canopy." When the canopy is attached to another
structure or structures on the property, it shall be known as an “attached
canopy.” Canopies located in a Historic District shall be reviewed in
accordance with Article X of this chapter.[Added 9-9-1991 by Ord. 11-91;
amended 5-23-2005 by Ord. No. 05-18]
CARPORT — A roofed building attached to an existing building and enclosed
on not more than three sides, providing space for the parking of motor
vehicles.[Added 9-9-1991 by Ord. 11-91]
CARTWAY — The hard or paved surface portion of a street customarily
used by vehicles in the regular course of travel. Where there are curbs, the
For mansard roofs with no other structures thereon except chimneys,
to the decline. The mansard may not extend above the deckline by more
than 10% of the building height;
A.
For gabled, hip and/or gambrel roofs with no other structures thereon
except chimneys, to the highest point of any roof surface;
B.
For all other roof types, including flat roofs, to the top of any roof
surface or any structure on the roof, including but not limited to
elevators, escalator penthouses or cooling towers, or one foot above
any structure housing or screening mechanical or other equipment.
C.
§ 165-10 GARAGE SALES § 165-10
154:253
cartway is that portion between the curbs. Where there are no curbs, the
cartway is that portion between the edges of the paved or graded width.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETE APPLICATION — A certificate of complete
application is a document supplied to an applicant by the Borough Zoning
Official or his/her designee, and/or the Administrative Secretary of the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, at the
time that an application has been reviewed and determined to be complete.
The date that an application is determined to be complete, as evidenced
by the certificate of complete application, shall be the date from which all
applicable time limits under law begin.[Added 3-11-2013 by Ord. No.
13-04]
CHANGE OF PERMITTED USE — An application which seeks a change
of permitted use with waiver of site plan in accordance with § 165-157C
or D. Approval shall require change from one permitted use to another
permitted use and shall be limited to change within a particular use group,
as determined by the Borough Zoning Official.[Added 3-11-2013 by Ord.
No. 13-04]
CHECKLIST — A list of requirements, documents, and information that
must be provided in order for an application to be accepted as a complete
application or returned and deemed as incomplete. Checklists have been
adopted by the Borough of Chatham and are made a part of this chapter,
as set forth in § 165-161 and attachments to this Chapter 165.40[Added
3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-04]
CHILD CARE CENTERS — An institution or place, for which, upon
completion, a license is required from the New Jersey State Department
of Human Services pursuant to N.J.S.A. 30:5B-1 et seq., and which, for
compensation or otherwise, receives for temporary custody six or more
children under the age of six years, apart from their parents or legal
guardians, during part or all of the day but for not less than three hours
each day.[Added 9-26-2011 by Ord. No. 11-16]
COMMERCIAL MESSAGE — Any sign wording, logo, or other
representation that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or calls
attention to a business, product, service, or other commercial
activity.[Added 2-27-1995 by Ord. No. 4-95]
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Any vehicle which is not a private vehicle as
defined in this chapter.[Amended 9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 11-91]
COMMON PROPERTY — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water, or a
combination of land and water, together with the improvements thereon and
designed and intended for the ownership, use and enjoyment shared by the
residents and owners of the development. Common property may contain
such complementary structures and improvements as are necessary and
appropriate for the benefit of the residents and owners of the development.
COMPLETE APPLICATION — An application completely filled out and
signed by the applicant, accompanied by all required documents and
40.Editor’s Note: The checklists are on file in the Borough offices.
§ 165-10 CHATHAM CODE § 165-10
154:254
information in form and content and in sufficient number as prescribed by
this chapter along with payment of all required fees, as determined by the
Zoning Official or his/her designee.[Added 3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-04]
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district only
upon a showing that such use in a specified location will comply with
the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such use as
specified in this chapter.
DECK — An exterior floor supported on at least two opposing sides by
an adjacent structure, posts, piers or other independent supports. See
§ 165-94.[Added 9-23-2002 by Ord. No. 02-18]
DENSITY, GROSS — The total number of dwelling units existing or
permitted on a tract divided by the total developable area of the tract. The
result is expressed as dwelling units per acre.41[Added 2-8-1988 by Ord.
No 3-88]
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure, or any mining,
excavation or land fill, and any use or change in use of any building or other
structure or land or extension of use of land, for which permission may be
required.
DORMER, GABLE — A window or windows set vertically in a gable
projecting from a sloping roof. A window dormer is a small gable where the
width is narrow and only a little wider than the window.[Added 4-26-2010
by Ord. No. 10-09]
DORMER, SHED — A larger gable that has a peak, and may extend the full
length of the roof, and contains one or more windows.[Added 4-26-2010
by Ord. No. 10-09]
DRAINAGE AND UTILITY RIGHT-OF-WAY — The lands required for the
installation and maintenance of stormwater and sanitary sewers, water
pipes or drainage ditches and other utilities, or required along a natural
stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the flow
of water therein to safeguard the public against flood damage.
DWELLINGS — [Added 9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 11-91]
APARTMENT HOUSE — A dwelling containing more than two dwelling
units.
A.
APARTMENT UNIT — A dwelling unit in a building containing more
than two dwelling units, or more than one use, and which consists of
one or more rooms with a private bath and kitchen facilities, with each
apartment having its own entrance to a hallway or staircase and any
ground floor entrances to apartments being separate from entrances
for nonresidential ground-floor uses. [Added 11-9-1987 by Ord. No.
15-87; amended 9-10-2012 by Ord. No. 12-13]
B.
41.Editor’s Note: The former definition of “developable area,” which immediately followed
this definition, was repealed 10-24-2016 by Ord. No. 16-11.
§ 165-10 GARAGE SALES § 165-10
154:255
EASEMENT — A use or burden imposed on real estate by deed or other
legal means to permit the use of land by the municipality, public, a
corporation or particular persons for specific uses.
EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS — Retail establishments
selling prepared food and drink within an enclosed building, without table
service, for immediate consumption on or off the premises, such as lunch
counters, ice cream parlors, delicatessens/sandwich shops, luncheonettes,
and pizzerias. No eating or drinking establishment shall have any walkup
windows nor any drive-through aisles or windows. "Table service" is
defined as customers' orders taken at tables where customers will be
served.[Added 11-9-1987 by Ord. No. 15-87; amended 4-25-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-07; 9-10-2012 by Ord. No. 12-13]
EDUCATIONAL INSTRUCTION — Educational instruction, including dance,
music, and art schools, as well as tutoring and test preparation services,
provided in a room or series of room(s). Retail sales of materials directly
related to instructional activity conducted on-site may be provided in
conjunction with principal educational instruction use. Educational
instruction shall not include recreational instruction, as defined in this
chapter.[Added 9-10-2012 by Ord. No. 12-13]
FACADE — The front or side face or elevation of a building including the
area of the windows and doors.[Added 2-27-1995 by Ord. No. 4-95]
FENCE — An artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination
of materials erected to enclose or screen areas of land.[Added 11-9-1987
by Ord. No. 15-87]
DETACHED SINGLE FAMILY — A building physically detached from
other buildings which is occupied or intended to be used as a single
dwelling unit.
C.
DWELLING UNIT — A room or series of connected rooms designed for
permanent residency containing living, sleeping, and sanitary facilities,
and one kitchen, for one housekeeping unit.
D.
GARDEN APARTMENT — A building containing a minimum of five
dwelling units and not exceeding 2 1/2 stories in height.
E.
GARDEN APARTMENT UNIT — A dwelling unit in a building containing
a minimum of five dwelling units and not exceeding 2 1/2 stories in
height.
F.
TOWNHOUSE — A one-family dwelling unit in a row of at least three
such units in which each unit has its own front and rear access to the
outside, no unit is located over another unit, and each unit is separated
from any other unit by one or more common fire-resistant walls.
G.
TWO FAMILY — A building containing two dwelling units, each having
entrances on the first floor. The dwelling units shall be entirely
separated from one another by vertical walls or horizontal floors,
unpierced except by access to the outside or a common basement.
H.
§ 165-10 CHATHAM CODE § 165-10
154:256
FLOODPLAIN — See § 165-72.[Added 9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 11-91]
FLOOR AREA — The aggregate sum of the horizontal areas of the several
floors of the building measured from the exterior face of the exterior walls
of all enclosed portions of the building, including but not limited to closets,
stairs, foyers, storage areas, interior fireplaces, attics, at- or above-grade
attached garages, and detached garages.[Amended 4-26-2010 by Ord.
No. 10-09]
FLOOR AREA FOR B1, B2, B3, B4, B5 AND B6 BUSINESS DISTRICTS
— The regulations contained in § 165-22 of the Code of the Borough of
Chatham and in this section, which describe floor area ratio and its
calculations for residential uses, shall be applicable in the B1, B2, B3,
B4, B5 and B6 Business Districts of the Borough of Chatham.[Added
4-26-2010 by Ord. No. 10-09]
FLOOR AREA FOR RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS — [Added 12-29-1997 by
Ord. No. 17-97; amended 6-11-2001 by Ord. No. 01-07; 4-26-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-0942; 11-22-2010 by Ord. No. 10-30; 9-28-2015 by Ord.
No. 15-14]
On any lot containing a one- or two-family residential dwelling, the
sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building,
calculated by using the exterior faces of the exterior walls of all
enclosed portions of the building. The following spaces shall be
included in calculating residential floor area:
Any horizontal floor space contained in any halls, storage areas,
and above-grade attached garages;
(1)
Any horizontal floor space which has more than 12 feet of clearance
above it to the ceiling or roof shall be counted twice (doubled), and
any horizontal floor space which has more than 20 feet of clearance
above it to the ceiling or roof shall be counted three times (tripled);
and
(2)
(3) Any horizontal floor space on a porch other than an open porch.
A.
The following shall not be included in calculating residential floor area:
Any horizontal floor space which does not have at least seven feet
of clearance above the floor rafters, or floor to the ceiling, or floor
to the bottom of a roof rafter, or floor to a ridge rafter;
(1)
Any horizontal floor space contained in a basement (see definition)
or on a deck;
(2)
(3) Below-grade attached garages;
(4) Open porches and open porticos;
B.
42.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed the former definition of "floor area, gross,"
which immediately followed.
§ 165-10 GARAGE SALES § 165-10
154:257
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The sum of the horizontal areas of all floors of
buildings on a lot divided by the total lot area of the site, expressed as a
percentage.[Amended 9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 11-91; 12-29-1997 by Ord.
No. 17-97; 4-26-2010 by Ord. No. 10-0943]
FOOTPRINT — The area encompassed by a building’s outer wall at ground
level.[Added 3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-04]
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A building or portion thereof, or a building or portion
thereof and carport, designed for the storage or parking of up to three
private vehicles, or two private vehicles and one commercial vehicle, and in
which no business, service or industry is conducted or rendered.[Amended
9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 11-91; 6-11-2001 by Ord. No. 01-07]
GARAGE, PUBLIC — A garage conducted as a business for the storage or
parking of motor vehicles. The rental of parking or storage space for more
than two vehicles not owned by persons residing on the premises shall be
deemed a business use.[Amended 9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 11-91]
GARDEN APARTMENTS — See "dwellings."[Amended 9-9-1991 by Ord.
No. 11-91]
GLARE — The effect produced by brightness sufficient to cause annoyance,
discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility. See also § 165-78,
Lighting.[Added 10-24-2011 by Ord. No. 11-18]
GRADE — The slope of a road, path, driveway, swale or other surface
or the average finished ground elevation adjoining a building at project
completion.
GROSS FLOOR AREA (FLOOR AREA, GROSS) — The aggregate sum of the
horizontal areas of all enclosed floors of a building or buildings, measured
from the exterior face of the exterior walls of all enclosed portions of the
building, including, but not limited to closets, stairs, foyers, and storage
areas. All attic, cellar or basement space(s) occupied for storage or other
ancillary uses with the exception of mechanical equipment shall also be
included in gross floor area.[Added 3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-04]
HEIGHT — See "building height" within this section.[Added 4-26-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-09]
HEIGHT OF BUILDING — See "building height."[Amended 9-9-1991 by
Ord. No. 11-91; 4-26-2010 by Ord. No. 10-09]
HISTORIC DISTRICT — 44 [Added 7-25-1988 by Ord. No. 15-88;
repealed 9-11-2000 by Ord. No. 14-2000]
HISTORIC SITE — [Added 7-25-1988 by Ord. No. 15-88; repealed
9-11-2000 by Ord. No. 14-2000]
Accessory structures, including detached garages, which meet
height and setback requirements or received variance relief.
(5)
43.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed the former definition of "floor area ratio,
gross," which immediately followed.
44.Editor's Note: See Art. X, Historic District Preservation, § 165-57, of this chapter.
§ 165-10 CHATHAM CODE § 165-10
154:258
HOME OCCUPATION — A customary occupation, including a home
professional office, carried on in a dwelling by the resident thereof as
an accessory use in a residence district. The term shall not include such
businesses or occupations as the operation of a beauty parlor, barbershop,
auto repair, servicing or body shop, convalescent or nursing home,
insurance or real estate agency, tourist house, kennel or stable, massage
parlor, or other similar establishments which offer services to the general
public and which have a tendency to create excessive traffic or noise.
An occupation shall not fall within the definition of a home occupation
unless it is carried on only by a member of the family residing on the
premises, the nameplate on the exterior does not exceed one square foot
in area, there is no other display that will indicate from the exterior that
the building is being utilized in whole or in part for any purposes other
than that of a dwelling, there is no stock-in-trade nor commodity sold upon
the premises, not more than one person is employed other than a member
of the family residing on the premises, and no mechanical equipment is
used except as is customary for purely domestic and household purposes or
in connection with permitted professional offices.[Amended 9-9-1991 by
Ord. No. 11-91]
HOME PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — A home occupation consisting of the
office of a practitioner of a recognized profession, including but not limited
to doctor, dentist, lawyer and accountant.[Added 11-9-1987 by Ord. No.
15-87; 9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 11-91]
HOUSEKEEPING UNIT — One or more persons living together in one
dwelling unit and sharing living, sleeping, and sanitary facilities, and one
kitchen, in domestic relationship based on birth, marriage or other domestic
bond, as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding or rooming
house, co-op, club, fraternity or hotel.[Amended 9-9-1991 by Ord. No.
11-91]
HOUSE OF WORSHIP — A building or structure, or groups of buildings
or structures, that by design and construction are primarily intended for
conducting organized religious services and associated accessory or
conditional uses.[Added 10-24-2011 by Ord. No. 11-18]
INCLUSIONARY DEVELOPMENT — A development containing both
affordable units and market rate units. This term includes, but is not limited
to: new construction, the conversion of a nonresidential structure to
residential use and the creation of new affordable units through the gut
rehabilitation or reconstruction of a vacant residential structure.[Added
2-8-1988 by Ord. No. 3-88; amended 10-24-2016 by Ord. No. 16-11]
INDOOR COMMERCIAL RECREATION/FITNESS CLUB — A commercial
facility enclosed within a building designed and equipped for the conduct of
sports and other recreational activities as a business and open to the public
for a fee and/or on a membership basis. Includes athletic clubs, tennis clubs,
squash clubs, health and fitness clubs, swim clubs, indoor climbing, and
similar recreation and fitness activities. This definition includes accessory
snack/juice bars and retail sales of related sports apparel and equipment,
§ 165-10 GARAGE SALES § 165-10
154:259
provided such uses do not exceed a combined 1,500 square feet of floor
area.[Added 11-24-2014 by Ord. No. 14-09]
INSTITUTIONAL USE — A nonprofit or quasi-public use or institution such
as a church, library, public or private school, hospital, or municipally owned
or operated building, structure or land used for public purpose.[Added
11-9-1987 by Ord. No. 15-87]
LAND DISTURBANCE — Any activity involving the excavating, moving,
filling or grading of land, including the creation of or an addition to a
driveway or parking area. Ordinary lawn care, landscape and gardening
activities are excluded, provided that they do not alter the drainage or
topography of the land.[Added 11-9-1987 by Ord. No. 15-87; amended
9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 11-91]
LIVE/WORK LOFT — A live/work unit is defined as a single unit (e.g., studio,
loft, or one bedroom) consisting of both a commercial/studio space and a
residential component that is occupied by the same resident. The live/work
unit shall be the primary dwelling of the occupant and the work space shall
be related to the visual arts.[Added 11-24-2014 by Ord. No. 14-09]
LOADING SPACE — An off-street space or berth on the same lot with a
building or group of buildings for the temporary parking of a commercial
vehicle while loading or unloading, with 15 feet of vertical clearance. No
portion of a loading space shall extend over a public street right-ofway.[
Amended 9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 11-91]
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plan or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.[Amended 3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-04]
LOT AREA — The area measured in square feet contained within the lot
lines of a lot not including any portion of a street right-of-way.[Amended
9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 11-91]
LOT, CORNER — A lot fronting on two streets at their intersection. In a
residence district, the owner, when first applying for a building permit, shall
designate which of the two streets is to be the principal frontage for the
purpose of establishing the front, rear and side yard requirements.
LOT COVERAGE — The square footage by which all buildings, decks, pools,
parking areas, drives and driveways, paved or unpaved, walks and patios, as
measured in a horizontal plane, cover a lot. Maximum allowed lot coverage
in this chapter shall be determined by referring to the lot coverage as a
portion of the total lot area. With respect to decks, only 50% of the area
of a deck will be included in lot coverage if the deck complies with all the
requirements of § 165-94, Decks, set forth herein.[Amended 9-9-1991 by
Ord. No. 11-91; 9-23-2002 by Ord. No. 02-18]
LOT FRONTAGE — The length of the front lot line measured at the street
right-of-way line. Where the front lot line is curved or offset (not at right
angles to the side lot lines), the minimum frontage at the street, measured
by the shortest line intersecting the side lot lines within the lot, shall be not
§ 165-10 CHATHAM CODE § 165-10
154:260
less than 80% of the required minimum lot width.[Amended 9-9-1991 by
Ord. No. 11-91; 12-11-2017 by Ord. No. 17-12]
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT, WIDTH — The straight and horizontal distance between side lot lines
at setback points on each side lot line measured an equal distance back
from the street line. The minimum lot width shall be measured at the
minimum required building setback line and shall be maintained for a
distance of 40 feet toward the rear yard from the required front yard
setback line. In the single- and two-family dwelling zones, lot width is
measured by placing a rectangle along the minimum front building setback
line. Where the setback line is curved, the rectangle is placed on the
line between the intersection points of the setback line with the side lot
lines (see Figure 1). The rectangle must have a minimum width equal to
the minimum lot width specified for the zone. The rectangle must have a
minimum depth of 40 feet, or extend to the rear property line, whichever is
less. The rectangle must fit entirely within the lot.[Amended 12-11-2017
by Ord. No. 17-12]
Figure 1
LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income equal to 50% or less of the median household
income.[Added 10-24-2016 by Ord. No. 16-11]
LOW-INCOME HOUSING — Housing affordable according to Federal
Department of Housing and Urban Development or other recognized
standards for home ownership and rental costs, and occupied or reserved
for occupancy by households with a gross household income equal to 50%
or less of the median gross household income for households of the same
size within the housing region defined in N.J.A.C. 5:92-1 of which Chatham
is a part, and subject to affordability controls.45[Added 2-8-1988 by Ord.
No. 3-88]
MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE — Any security which may be required and
accepted by a governmental agency to assure that necessary improvements
45.Editor’s Note: The former definition of “lower-income household,” which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 10-24-2016 by Ord. No. 16-11.
§ 165-10 GARAGE SALES § 165-10
154:261
will function as required for a specific period of time.[Amended 9-9-1991
by Ord. No. 11-91]
MASTER PLAN — A composite of the mapped and written proposals
recommending the physical development of the municipality which shall
have been duly adopted by the Planning Board.
MEDICAL/DENTAL OFFICES — Room(s) for conducting a medical business,
including, but not limited to, offices of medical doctors, dentists, dental
surgeons, veterinarians, chiropractors, podiatrists, psychologists and
licensed therapists. Medical services, including clinics, extended-care
facilities, and hospitals, are not included in this definition.[Amended
11-12-1984 by Ord. No. 18-84; Amended 9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 11-91;
9-10-2012 by Ord. No. 12-13]
MEDICAL SERVICES — [Added 9-10-2012 by Ord. No. 12-13]
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSING — A household with a total gross annual
household income in excess of 50% but less than 80% of the median
household income.[Added 2-8-1988 by Ord. No. 3-88; amended
10-24-2016 by Ord. No. 16-11]
MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL — Three or more dwelling units within a
single building that share common horizontal separations and that have an
entrance to each dwelling by direct access from the outside or through a
common hall.[Added 11-24-2014 by Ord. No. 14-09]
MUNICIPAL AGENCY — The Planning Board, Board of Adjustment or
governing body or any agency created by or responsible to one or more
municipalities, when acting pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
MUSEUM — Premises used for the exhibition of objects of cultural,
historical, or scientific interest, and which may include the collection or
preservation of such objects, for the recreation or cultural education of the
public.[Added 9-10-2012 by Ord. No. 12-13]
CLINICS AND LABORATORIES — Licensed facilities primarily engaged
in furnishing outpatient medical, mental health, surgical and other
personal health services, but which are separate from hospitals and
medical office buildings, including: medical and dental laboratories,
medical, dental and psychiatric clinics, out-patient care, stand-alone
walk-in medical care facilities, and other allied health services.
A.
EXTENDED-CARE — A licensed residential facility providing nursing,
psychiatric, and/or other health-related care as a primary use with
in-patient beds, including skilled nursing facilities and rehabilitation
facilities.
B.
HOSPITALS — Licensed hospitals and similar facilities engaged
primarily in providing diagnostic services and extensive medical
treatment, including surgical and other hospital services. These
establishments have an organized medical staff, inpatient beds, and
equipment and facilities to provide complete health care and are
licensed by the state as hospitals.
C.
§ 165-10 CHATHAM CODE § 165-10
154:262
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot, the area, dimension or location of which
was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of a zoning
ordinance, but fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district
in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or
amendment.[Amended 9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 11-91]
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure the size, dimension or
location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment
of a zoning ordinance but which fails to conform to the requirements of the
zoning district in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or
amendment.[Added 9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 11-91]
NONCONFORMING USE — A use or activity which was lawful prior to the
adoption, revision or amendment of a zoning ordinance, but which fails to
conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by
reasons of such adoption, revision or amendment.
NURSING HOME — A building(s) providing shelter and/or supplemental
health care, including in-patient beds, for the elderly or infirm and meeting
the standards of and licensed by the State of New Jersey, to operate as a
nursing home.[Added 9-10-2012 by Ord. No. 12-13]
OBSCENE or PORNOGRAPHIC — As set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:34-2a(1), any
description, narrative account, display, or depiction of sexual activity or
anatomical area contained in, or consisting of, a picture or other
representation, publication, sound recording, live performance, or film,
which by means of posing, composition, format or animated sensual
details:[Added 7-12-2010 by Ord. No. 10-10]
OFFICE — A room or group of rooms used for conducting the affairs of
a business, professional, service, industry, or government. For purposes
of permitted uses within zoning districts, offices shall mean all offices
with the exception of medical/dental offices and professional offices.[Added
11-9-1987 by Ord. No. 15-87; amended 9-10-2012 by Ord. No. 12-13]
OFF SITE — Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question but within
the property (of which the lot is a part) which is the subject of a
development application or contiguous portion of a street or right-ofway.[
Amended 9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 11-91]
OFF TRACT — Not located on the property which is the subject of a
development application or on a contiguous portion of a street or right-ofway.
Depicts or describes in a patently offensive way, ultimate sexual acts,
normal or perverted, actual or simulated, masturbation, excretory
functions, or lewd exhibition of the genitals; and
A.
Lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value, when taken
as a whole; and
B.
Is a part of a work, which to the average person applying contemporary
community standards, has a dominant theme which, taken as a whole,
appeals to the prurient interest.
C.
§ 165-10 GARAGE SALES § 165-10
154:263
ON SITE — Located on the lot in question.
ON TRACT — Located on the property which is the subject of a development
application or on a contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
OUTDOOR EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS — Retail
establishments selling food and drink for consumption on or off the
premises wherein a part or all of the dining area is located outdoors, or
where customers or patrons purchase or receive food outdoors.[Added
11-9-1987 by Ord. No. 15-87]
PARKING SPACE — An area of not less than nine feet wide by 18 feet in
length (unless otherwise specified), either within a structure or in the open,
for the parking of motor vehicles, exclusive of driveways, access drives,
fire lanes, public rights-of-way and loading areas. In the case of detached
dwelling units, the portion of a private driveway not within the public street
right-of-way shall be considered a parking space or spaces. The area is
intended to be sufficient to accommodate the exterior extremities of the
vehicles, whether in addition thereto wheel blocks are installed within this
area to prevent the bumper from overhanging one end of the parking space.
The width and length of each space shall be measured perpendicular to
each other regardless of the angle of the parking space to the access aisle
or driveway.[Amended 11-9-1987 by Ord. No. 15-87; 9-9-1981 by Ord.
No. 11-91]
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE — Any security, which may be accepted by
the Borough, including cash, provided that the Borough shall not require
more than 10% of the total performance guarantee in cash.[Amended
9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 11-91]
PERMITTED USE — Any use of land or buildings as permitted by this
chapter.
PERSONAL SERVICES — Establishments primarily engaged in providing
services involving the personal care of a person, his or her personal goods
or apparel, including the following: day spas, hair salons, beauty salons, and
barbershops; skin care and nail salons; shoe repair; clothing and garment
services such as cleaning, pressing, rental, and tailoring; licensed massage
therapy, bodywork and somatic therapy (See Chapter 289 for permit
requirements); funeral services; pet grooming and pet day care.
Recreational instruction and educational instruction uses are not included
in the definition of personal services.46[Added 11-9-1987 by Ord. No.
15-87; amended 9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 11-91; amended 4-25-2005 by
Ord. No. 05-09; 9-10-2012 by Ord. No. 12-13]
PORCH, OPEN — A porch or veranda which is open to the weather at
all times, and which contains only handrails between columns; an open
porch contains no screens or glass or the structures for holding screens or
glass.[Added 12-29-1997 by Ord. No. 17-97]
46.Editor’s Note: The former definition of "plat," as amended, which immediately followed
this definition, was repealed 3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-04, which ordinance also provided
that all references to "plat" or "plats" in this chapter be deleted and, where appropriate,
the word "plan" or "plans" be inserted.
§ 165-10 CHATHAM CODE § 165-10
154:264
PORTICO — A standing or walkway area with a roof supported by columns
at an entrance to a building.[Added 4-26-2010 by Ord. No. 10-09]
PRINCIPAL USE — The main purpose for which a lot or building is used.
PRIVATE CUSTOMER AND EMPLOYEE PARKING — A structure or lot
which is accessory to a commercial or office establishment, building or use
and is primarily for the parking and storage of vehicles operated by the
customers, employees, and visitors.[Added 11-9-1987 by Ord. No. 15-87;
amended 9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 11-91]
PRIVATE PARKING — A parking area for the private use of the owners
or occupants of the lot on which the parking area is located.[Added
11-9-1987 by Ord. No. 15-87]
PRIVATE VEHICLE — A motor vehicle which has private license plates and
which does not display any written indication of a business use which is
visible from the exterior.[Added 9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 11-91]
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — The office of a member of a recognized
profession, including, but not limited to, attorney at law, accountant,
architect, engineer, which shall be so designated by the approving authority
upon finding that such operation is professional in character and requires at
least a bachelor's degree from an accredited college or university, licensing,
training and experience as a condition for the practice thereof. The issuance
of a state or local license shall not alone merit professional standing.
Professional office shall not include medical/dental offices for purposes
of use regulation within zoning districts.[Added 11-9-1987 by Ord. No.
15-87; amended 9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 11-91; 9-10-2012 by Ord. No.
12-13]
PUBLIC PARKING AREA — A parking area available to the public, with or
without compensation.[Added 11-9-1987 by Ord. No. 15-87]
PUBLIC PURPOSE USE — The use of land or buildings by the Borough
of Chatham or any other officially created authority or agency
thereof.[Amended 9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 11-91]
RECREATIONAL INSTRUCTION — Recreational instruction, including
yoga, pilates, martial arts, and personal training studios (but excluding
health clubs), provided in a room or series of rooms. Retail sales of good
directly related to instructional emphasis on-site may be provided in
conjunction with the principal recreational instruction use.47[Added
9-10-2012 by Ord. No. 12-13]
REPAIR SHOP, BODY — The land and buildings designed and used for the
structural and/or cosmetic repair and the incidental mechanical repair of
motor vehicles for monetary compensation, and where no outside vehicle
storage on the premises is allowed for more than one week.[Amended
9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 11-91]
47.Editor’s Note: The former definition of “region,” which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 10-24-2016 by Ord. No. 16-11.
§ 165-10 GARAGE SALES § 165-10
154:265
REPAIR SHOP, MECHANICAL — The land and buildings designed and used
predominantly for the mechanical repair of motor vehicles for monetary
compensation, and where no outside vehicle storage on the premises is
allowed for more than one week.[Amended 9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 11-91]
RESTAURANT — Establishment where food and drink is prepared, served,
and consumed within an enclosed building, and wherein food is served
primarily by providing table service. "Table service" is defined as taking
customer's orders at tables where they will be served. No restaurant shall
have any walk-up windows nor any drive-through aisles or windows.[Added
11-9-1987 by Ord. No. 15-87; amended 4-25-2011 by Ord. No. 11-07;
9-10-2012 by Ord. No. 12-13]
RESUBDIVISION — The further division or relocation of lot lines of any
lot or lots within a subdivision previously made and approved or recorded
according to law, or the alteration of any streets or the establishment
of any new streets within any subdivision previously made and approved
or recorded according to law, but does not include conveyances so as to
combine existing lots by deed or other instrument.[Amended 9-9-1991 by
Ord. No. 11-91]
RETAIL SERVICES — Establishments providing services, as opposed to
products, to the general public, including, but not limited to, finance, real
estate and insurance, travel agencies, copying, mailing and packing
services, and photographic services. Educational instruction and
recreational instruction services are excluded from this definition of retail
services for purposes of uses permitted within zoning districts. No retail
service use shall have any walk-up windows nor any drive-through aisles or
windows.[Added 11-9-1987 by Ord. No. 15-87; amended 9-9-1991 by
Ord. No. 11-91; 9-10-2012 by Ord. No. 12-13]
RETAIL TRADE — Establishments engaged in selling goods or merchandise
to the general public for personal or household consumption. Even though
certain establishments, including but not limited to hardware, paint, glass
and wallpaper stores, may do a substantial portion of their business with
contractors, they are included in this definition of retail trade. No retail
trade establishment shall have any drive-through vehicular aisles or
windows, or any service to the public in that manner.[Added 11-9-1987 by
Ord. No. 15-87; amended 9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 11-91; 9-10-2012 by
Ord. No. 12-13]
RIDGE RAFTER — The ridge board at the top of roof framing to which the
rafters are attached.[Added 4-26-2010 by Ord. No. 10-09]
SATELLITE ANTENNA — Any apparatus which is designed for the purpose
of receiving and/or transmitting television, radio, microwave, or similar
signals by satellite.[Added 12-9-1985 by Ord. No. 21-85; amended
9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 11-91]
SERVICE STATION — Land and buildings provided for the sale of fuel,
lubricants and automotive accessories, maintenance and minor repairs for
motor vehicles, but not for vehicle body repairs or painting, car washing
operations, car or truck rentals, parking for a fee, outside storage of motor
§ 165-10 CHATHAM CODE § 165-10
154:266
vehicles on the premises for more than one week, or any other activity not
specifically a part of the service station use.[Amended 9-9-1991 by Ord.
No. 11-91]
SETBACK LINE — That line that is the required minimum distance from the
street line, or any other lot line that establishes the area within which the
structure or any part thereof must be erected or placed. For any exceptions,
see the various definitions of Yards in this section.[Amended 9-9-1991 by
Ord. No. 11-91]
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — See definition of "adult entertainment
use" herein.[Added 7-12-2010 by Ord. No. 10-10]
SHOPPING CENTER — A group of commercial establishments built on one
tract that is planned and developed as an operating unit; it provides onsite
parking in definite relationship to the type and total size of the stores.
The commercial establishments may be located in one or several buildings,
attached or separated.
SIDEWALK, PUBLIC — A usually paved walk for pedestrians at the side
of either a public street or a vehicle accessway open to the public.[Added
8-11-2003 by Ord. No. 03-16]
SIGHT EASEMENT AT INTERSECTION — A triangular-shaped area
established in accordance with the requirements of this chapter in which no
grading, planting or structure shall be erected or maintained higher than
two feet in height, except for street signs, fire hydrants and light standards.
SIGN — A visible device appearing on or apparent from a building or
structure that uses letters, symbols, color, or form to advertise or announce
the purpose of a person or entity, or to communicate information of any kind
to the public.[Amended 9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 11-91; 2-27-1995 by Ord.
No. 4-95]
SIGN AREA — The dimensions or area of a sign shall be considered as being
the smallest rectangle enclosing all letters, symbols, and other devices, or
the area of its background if distinguishable from a larger background such
as the wall of a building. When two identical sign faces are placed back
to back so that both faces cannot be viewed from any point at the same
time, the sign area shall be computed by the measurement of one of the
faces.[Added 2-27-1995 by Ord. No. 4-95]
SIGN, BUILDING MARKER — Any sign indicating the name of a building
and date and incidental information about its construction, which sign
is cut into a masonry surface or made of bronze or other permanent
material.[Added 2-27-1995 by Ord. No. 4-95]
SIGN, DIRECTORY — A sign listing names of businesses or offices in a
building or complex.[Added 2-27-1995 by Ord. No. 4-95]
SIGN, FREESTANDING — Any sign supported by structures or supports
that are placed on, or anchored in, the ground and that are independent
from any building or other structure.[Added 2-27-1995 by Ord. No. 4-95]
§ 165-10 GARAGE SALES § 165-10
154:267
SIGN, ILLUMINATED — All light sources for signs shall be white. An
externally illuminated sign is one the surface of which receives light from
outside the sign. An internally illuminated sign is one the surface of which
receives light from within or from the rear of the sign.[Added 2-27-1995
by Ord. No. 4-95]
SIGN, INCIDENTAL — A sign, generally informational, that has a purpose
secondary but related to the use of the lot on which it is located, such
as “no parking,” “entrance,” “loading only,” “telephone” and other similar
directives. No sign with a commercial message legible from a position off
the lot on which the sign is located shall be considered incidental.[Added
2-27-1995 by Ord. No. 4-95; amended 5-23-2005 by Ord. No. 05-19]
SIGN MODIFICATION — Changing of surface sign space, ornamental
molding, frames, trellises or ornamental features or landscaping below the
baseline; or the addition, construction, installation or changing of electrical
wiring or electrical devices, or other embellishments. Replacement of a
panel in any interior-lit sign other than with a dark or opaque background
shall be considered a modification.[Added 2-27-1995 by Ord. No. 4-95]
SIGN, PORTABLE — Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or
other permanent structure. In the business and industrial districts, portable
signs are limited to political signs in conformance with § 165-99D and real
estate, work-in-progress, easel, or sandwich board signs in conformance
with § 165-99E. In residential districts, portable signs are limited to political
signs in conformance with § 165-99D and real estate, work-in-progress, and
garage sale signs in conformance with § 165-106C.[Added 2-27-1995 by
Ord. No. 4-95; amended 10-24-2011 by Ord. No. 11-18]
SIGN, PROJECTING — Any sign affixed to a building or wall in such a
manner that its leading edge extends beyond the surface of such building or
wall.[Added 2-27-1995 by Ord. No. 4-95]
SIGN, WALL — Any sign attached parallel to, but within 12 inches of, a wall,
painted on the wall surface of, or erected and confined within the limits of
an outside wall of any building or structure, which is supported by such wall
or building, and which displays only one sign surface.[Added 2-27-1995
by Ord. No. 4-95]
SIGN, WINDOW or DOOR — A sign, as herein defined, placed inside within
one foot of, or upon the inside of any glass or translucent material in, a wall
opening of a building. Each such opening separated by a vertical supporting
structural member shall be considered a separate single window, regardless
of the number of lights or panes, or whether it is a window or a door.[Added
2-27-1995 by Ord. No. 4-95; amended 5-23-2005 by Ord. No. 05-19]
SITE — Any plot or parcel of land or combination of contiguous lots or
parcels of land.[Added 9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 11-91]
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which is
shown:[Amended 9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 11-91]
§ 165-10 CHATHAM CODE § 165-10
154:268
SITE PLAN APPROVAL — The approval by the appropriate Board of a site
plan.[Added 9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 11-91]
SITE PLAN REVIEW — The examination of the specific development plans
for a site.[Amended 9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 11-91]
SLOPE — Degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually
expressed in percentages or degrees.[Added 9-9-1991 by Ord. No.
11-91]
SOIL REMOVAL — Excavation or removal of soil on a site, other than for
use on the site.[Amended 9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 11-91]
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — As set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:34-6c, less
than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region,
buttock, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of
the areola, or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.[Added 7-12-2010 by Ord. No. 10-10]
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY — As set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:34-6d, any
actual or simulated act of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or
deviate sexual intercourse, or any fondling or other erotic touching of
covered or uncovered human genitals, pubic region, buttock of the human
male or female, or the breasts of the female, whether alone or between
members of the same or opposite sex or between humans and
animals.[Added 7-12-2010 by Ord. No. 10-10]
STORY — The space between the upper surface of any floor and the next
upper surface of the floor or roof above, except that the topmost story shall
be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the
topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above.[Added 9-9-1991 by Ord. No.
11-91; amended 4-26-2010 by Ord. No. 10-09]
The existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including but not
necessarily limited to topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains,
marshes and waterways;
A.
The location of all existing and proposed buildings, drives, parking
spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities,
utility services, landscaping, structures and signs, lighting, screening
devices; and
B.
Any other information that may be reasonably required in order to
make an informed determination concerning the adequacy of the plan
in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
C.
A half story is a portion of a building between the upper surface of a
floor and the roof above where the enclosed space has an average clear
height of not more than five feet.
A.
To calculate the average clear height of a building level, height
measurements shall be taken at each corner of the interior space and at
the midpoint between each corner, from the upper surface of the floor
to the next upper surface of the floor or roof above. The measurements
B.
§ 165-10 GARAGE SALES § 165-10
154:269
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive or
other way (1) which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway or
(2) which is shown upon a plan heretofore approved pursuant to law or
(3) which is approved by official action as provided by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq., or (4) which is shown on a plan duly filed and recorded in the office of
the county recording officer prior to the appointment of a Planning Board
and the grant to such Board of the power to review plans; and includes the
land between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may
comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking areas
and other areas within the street lines.[Amended 9-9-1991 by Ord. No.
11-91; 3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-04]
STREET LINE — The edge of the existing or future street right-of-way, as
shown on the adopted Master Plan or Official Map, forming the dividing line
between the street and a lot.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation whether installed on, above, or below the
surface of a parcel of land, including but not limited to buildings, fences,
tanks, towers, signs, advertising devices and swimming pools.[Amended
9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 11-91]
SUBDIVISION [Amended 9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 11-91] — The division
of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or
other divisions of land for sale or development. The following shall not be
considered subdivisions within the meaning of this chapter if no new streets
are created:
shall then be averaged, and if the average is more than five feet, the
building level shall be considered a story.
If gable and/or shed dormers are included on sloping roofs, the
calculation of average clear height shall include height measurements
at the interior corners of each dormer.
C.
Story height may be calculated from accurately drawn building
elevations where all front, back and side elevations are shown with
dimensions and the upper surface floor and roof above for each story or
half story are clearly and accurately depicted.
D.
Divisions of land found by the Planning Board or Subdivision Committee
thereof appointed by the Chairman to be for agricultural purposes
where all resulting parcels are five acres or larger in size.
A.
B. Divisions of property by testamentary or intestate provision.
Divisions of property upon court order, including but not limited to
judgments of foreclosure.
C.
D. Consolidation of existing lots by deed or other recorded instrument.
The conveyance of one or more adjoining lots, tracts or parcels of
land, owned by the same person or persons and all of which are
found and certified by the administrative officer to conform to the
E.
§ 165-10 CHATHAM CODE § 165-10
154:270
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR — Any subdivision of land not classified as a minor
subdivision.[Added 9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 11-91]
SUBDIVISION, MINOR — Any subdivisions of land containing an aggregate
of not more than three lots (two new lots and the remaining parcel) each
fronting on an existing street or streets; not involving any new street or
the installation of any street improvements or the extension of Borough
facilities; not involving any street(s) requiring additional right-of-way width
as specified in the Master Plan or Official Map and the street requirements
of this chapter, unless such additional right-of-way width, along one or both
sides of said street(s), as applicable, shall be deeded to the Borough or to
the appropriate governmental authority prior to classification as a minor
subdivision; not adversely affecting the development of the remainder of
the parcel or adjoining property and in conflict with any provision of the
Master Plan, Official Map or this chapter; not being a further division of
an original tract of land for which previous minor subdivision(s) have been
approved by the Borough within the past two-year time period from the
date of the current application and where the combination of the proposed
and approved minor subdivision(s) constitutes a major subdivision; and
not being deficient in those details and specifications required of minor
subdivision as specified in this chapter. The original tract of land shall
be considered any tract in existence at the time of the adoption of the
ordinance of which this is a revision as shown on the Borough Tax Maps.
Any readjustment of lot lines resulting in no new lots shall be classified
as a minor subdivision. Any subdivision involving a planned development
or the extension of any off-tract improvement, the cost of which is to be
prorated pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42, shall not be considered a minor
subdivision.[Added 9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 11-91]
SWIMMING POOL, PORTABLE — Portable pools shall not be subject to the
requirements of this chapter and are those pools which are not otherwise
permanently installed; do not require water filtration, circulation and
purification; do not exceed a water surface of 100 square feet; and do not
require braces or supports.
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL — A private residential
swimming pool shall be:[Amended 9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 11-91;
12-11-1995 by Ord. No. 17-95]
requirements of the municipal development regulations and are shown
and designated as separate lots, tracts or parcels on the tax map or
atlas of the municipality. The term "subdivision" shall also include the
term "resubdivision."
An artificially constructed pool, whether located above or below the
ground, having a depth of 18 inches or more and water surface of
100 square feet or more, designed and maintained for swimming and
bathing purposes by an individual for use by members of the household
and guests and which is located on a lot as an accessory use to a
detached dwelling; or
A.
B. An in-ground, aboveground or on-ground hot tub or spa.
§ 165-10 GARAGE SALES § 165-10
154:271
TATTOO PARLOR — An establishment or business engaged in providing
the service of marking a person's skin with indelible patterns.[Added
7-12-2010 by Ord. No. 10-10]
TWO-FAMILY — See "dwellings."[Amended 9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 11-91]
USABLE LOT AREA — A contiguous area within the boundaries of the lot,
but outside of applicable required setback areas, that is free of wetlands,
wetland transition areas, flood hazard areas, predevelopment slopes of 25%
or more and easements that restrict development.[Added 4-5-1999 by
Ord. No. 2-99; amended 5-10-2004 by Ord. No. 04-12]
VARIANCE — Permission to depart from the literal requirements of a zoning
ordinance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60, 40:55D-40 and
40:55D-70.[Amended 9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 11-91]
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS — Any personal wireless services
as defined in the Telecommunications Act of 1996, which describes FCClicensed
commercial wireless telecommunications services, including
cellular services, personal communications services (PCS), specialized
mobile radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR), paging,
and similar services that currently exist or that may in the future be
developed. It does not include any amateur radio facility that is owned
and operated by a federally-licensed amateur radio station operator or is
used exclusively for receive-only antennas.[Added 4-12-1999 by Ord. No.
5-99]
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA (WT ANTENNA) —
Antenna of any type of design, which is or may be used for the sending or
receiving of wireless telecommunications, except for those radio antenna,
dish antenna, or satellite receiving stations regulated pursuant to § 165-93
of this chapter.[Added 4-12-1999 by Ord. No. 5-99]
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT (WT EQUIPMENT) —
Any building, structure, or equipment including without limitation,
transmitters, power sources, or other equipment, except antennas or
towers, which are or may be used for the delivery of wireless
telecommunications.[Added 4-12-1999 by Ord. No. 5-99]
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT COMPOUND (WT
EQUIPMENT COMPOUND) — The area which houses any combination of
WT equipment.[Added 4-12-1999 by Ord. No. 5-99]
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES (WT FACILITIES) —
Collectively WT antennas, WT equipment, WT equipment compound, and
WT towers.[Added 4-12-1999 by Ord. No. 5-99]
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER (WT SERVICE
PROVIDER) — Any person, business organization, or other entity, or any
kind, whether public or private, which seeks to install, operate, or maintain
any combination of WT facilities within the boundaries of the Borough of
Chatham, or which already operates or maintains such WT facilities in the
Borough as of the effective date of this amendment.[Added 4-12-1999 by
Ord. No. 5-99]
§ 165-10 CHATHAM CODE § 165-10
154:272
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER (WT TOWER) — A vertical
structure which is or may be used to support any WT antenna or WT
equipment; this may be an existing structure or a new tower built
specifically for WT antennas or WT equipment.[Added 4-12-1999 by Ord.
No. 5-99]
YARD, FRONT — A space extending the full width of the lot between any
building or part of a building, including steps, eaves in excess of two feet,
rainwater leaders, window sills and other such fixtures, and the front line,
and measured perpendicular to the building at the closest point to the front
line. If any street as shown on the Official Map of the Borough is less
than 50 feet wide, the front setback shall be measured from a line parallel
to and 25 feet from the center line of the right-of-way or, if there is no
specific right-of-way shown on the Official Map, from the center line of the
paved carriageway.[Amended 9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 11-91; 12-11-1995
by Ord. No. 17-95]
YARD, REAR — A space extending across the full width of the lot between
any building and the rear lot line, and measured perpendicular to the
building at the closest point to the rear lot line.[Amended 9-9-1991 by
Ord. No. 11-91]
YARD, SIDE — A space extending from the front yard to the rear yard
and lying between each side lot line and the closest point of the principal
building on the lot. No part of a building, including a bay window, a
cantilevered portion of the building, or the like, may extend into the
minimum side yard permitted by this chapter except steps and a landing for
a distance of not more than four feet, eaves for a distance of not more than
two feet, rain water leaders, window sills and other such fixtures. When the
building is on a lot with a width of 50 feet or less, however, these exceptions
shall not be permitted.[Amended 9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 11-91; 7-9-2007
by Ord. No. 07-18]
§ 165-10 GARAGE SALES § 165-10
154:273

ARTICLE III
Zoning Districts and Zoning Map
§ 165-11. Zoning districts. [Amended 12-14-1981 by Ord. No. 21-81;
2-8-1988 by Ord. No. 3-88; 2-8-1993 by Ord. No. 3-93; 9-23-2002 by
Ord. No. 02-17]
§ 165-12. Zoning Map. [Amended 12-14-1981 by Ord. No. 21-81;
2-8-1988 by Ord. No. 3-88; 3-13-1989 by Ord. No. 2-89; 2-8-1993 by
Ord. No. 3-93; 3-8-2004 by Ord. No. 04-04; 4-25-2005 by Ord. No.
05-09; 10-11-2005 by Ord. No. 05-28; 6-22-2015 by Ord. No. 15-08;
8-8-2016 by Ord. No. 16-06]
A. For the purpose of this chapter, the Borough of Chatham is hereby
divided into 21 districts, as follows: [Amended 6-22-2015 by Ord. No.
15-08]
R-1 Residential
R-2 Residential
R-3 Residential
R-4 Residential
G-1 Residential
B-1 Business
B-2 Business
B-3 Business
B-4 Business
B-5 Business
B-6 Business
M-1 Industrial
M-2 Industrial
M-3 Industrial
CONS Conservation
AFD-1 Affordable Housing
AFD-1.1 Affordable Housing
AFD-2 Affordable Housing
AFD-3 Affordable Housing
AFD-4 Affordable Housing
FP Floodplain
B. In addition, WHPAs, Well Head Protection Areas, are added as an
overlay zoning district. WHPAs are described and regulated in Article
IX herein. [Added 3-8-2004 by Ord. No. 04-04]
§ 165-11 GARAGE SALES § 165-12
154:275
§ 165-13. Interpretation of boundaries. [Amended 12-14-1981 by
Ord. No. 21-81]
Zoning district boundary lines are intended to follow street center lines,
railroad rights-of-way, streams and lot or property lines as they exist on
lots of record at the time of enactment of this chapter unless otherwise
indicated by dimensions on the Zoning Map. Any dimensions shown shall be
in feet and measured horizontally and, when measured from a street, shall
be measured from the street right-of-way line even if the center line of that
street is used for the location of a zoning district line. The exact location of
any disputed zoning district boundary line shall be determined by the Board
of Adjustment. The zoning standards, controls and designations apply to
every structure, lot and use within each district and the district lines extend
vertically in both directions from ground level.
A. The location and boundaries of these districts are hereby established as
shown on the map entitled "Official Zoning Map of the Borough of
Chatham," dated January 15, 2016, as amended, which map is attached
hereto and made a part of this chapter. The Official Zoning Map shall be
identified by the signature of the Mayor, attested by the Borough Clerk
and bearing the seal of the Borough under the following words: "This is
to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in § 165-12 of
the Borough Code of the Borough of Chatham, New Jersey," together
with the date of adoption. All notations, references and other
information shown on said map are incorporated by reference herein
and made a part hereof. The map is on file in the Borough Clerk's office.
B. If, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the Municipal
Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., changes are made in the zones
and boundaries or other matters portrayed on the Official Zoning Map,
such changes shall be made on the Official Zoning Map promptly after
the amendment has been approved by the Mayor and Council, together
with an entry on the Official Zoning Map as follows: "On (date), by
official action of the Mayor and Council, the following change(s) were
made in the Official Zoning Map: (brief description of the nature of the
change)", which entry shall be signed by the Mayor and attested by the
Borough Clerk.
C. Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the Official Zoning
Map which may from time to time be published, the Official Zoning Map
shall be located in the office of the Borough Clerk and shall be the final
authority as to the current zoning status in the Borough.
D. In accordance with the provisions of Article IX, WHPA Well Head
Protection Areas, § 165-46 et seq., Well Head Protection Areas are
added to the zoning districts described in this Chapter. The said Well
Head Protection Areas are shown on a map described in § 165-50A(1)
herein, which shall be considered to be superimposed over any other
established zoning district.
§ 165-12 CHATHAM CODE § 165-13
154:276
ARTICLE IV
Residential District Regulations
§ 165-14. R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 Residential Districts. [Amended
12-14-1981 by Ord. No. 21-81; 2-8-1993 by Ord. No. 3-93]
A. Principal permitted uses on the land and in building.
(1) Detached dwelling units.
(2) Two-family dwelling units in the R-4 District only.
(3) Public playgrounds, conservation areas, parks and public purpose
uses.
(4) Churches.
(5) Public and private day schools of elementary and/or high school
grade, not operated for profit.
(6) Development of lots with limited allowable land disturbance, as a
conditional use. [See §§ 165-14G(2) and 165-141.] [Added
5-10-2004 by Ord. No. 04-12]
B. Accessory uses permitted.
(1) Private residential swimming pools. (See § 165-88 for standards.)
(2) Off-street parking and private garages.
(3) Fences. (See § 165-77.) [Amended 4-25-2005 by Ord. No.
05-09]
(4) Signs. (See Article XIII.)
(5) Home occupations.
(6) Family day-care homes as described in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.4 et seq.
These shall be treated in the same manner as other home
occupations in this chapter.
(7) Any other detached accessory structure not to exceed 10 feet in
height and an eighty-square-foot footprint.
(8) Decks. (See § 165-94.) [Added 9-23-2002 by Ord. No. 02-18]
(9) Awnings, but they shall not be subject to front yard setbacks, and
canopies. [Added 5-23-2005 by Ord. No. 05-18]
C. Maximum building height.
(1) No dwelling or school shall exceed 35 feet and 2 1/2 stories in
height. [Amended 4-26-2010 by Ord. No. 10-09]
§ 165-14 GARAGE SALES § 165-14
154:277
(2) No church (principal building of worship) shall exceed 40 feet or
2 1/2 stories in height, except that church spires and cupolas shall
not exceed 55 feet in height.
D. Usable lot area requirements. [Added 4-5-1999 by Ord. No. 2-99;
amended 5-10-2004 by Ord. No. 04-12]
(1) All lots created by subdivision after the effective date of this section
within the R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 Zones shall be required to have a
minimum usable lot area of at least 3,000 square feet in the R-3
Zone; at least 3,500 square feet for single-family dwellings in the
R-2 and R-4 Zones; at least 4,000 square feet for two-family
dwellings in the R-4 Zone; and at least 4,500 square feet in the R-1
Zone and for churches and schools in all residential zones. All
permitted structures other than a driveway connection and
necessary utility connections for the individual lot shall be
constructed within the usable lot area. Usable lot area shall be as
defined in § 165-10 of this chapter. Moreover, at least 60% of the
minimum required usable lot area on such subdivided lots shall
consist of land having redevelopment slopes of less than 15%, and
not more than 20% of the minimum required usable lot area on
such subdivided lots shall consist of land having predevelopment
slopes of 20% or more.
(2) Where a lot existing as of the effective date of this section does not
contain the minimum usable lot area required in Subsection D(1)
above due to the presence of predevelopment slopes of 25% or
more or does not meet the requirement of Subsection D(1) above
pertaining to the percentage of the minimum required usable lot
area that must have slopes of less than 15%, the lot may
nevertheless be developed with a new structure, provided that all
of the regulations set forth in § 165-14G shall apply to such
development as well as to any proposed additions to any structure
on the lot and any other improvements proposed for the lot.
(3) To ensure compliance with this section and to facilitate the
preparation of a grading and stormwater management plan, if
required at § 165-14G, a slope analysis map shall accompany any
request for subdivision approval and any request for a land
disturbance permit for a lot existing as of the effective date of this
section. The slope analysis map shall be prepared by a licensed
land surveyor or by a licensed engineer based upon a topographic
survey, shall be drawn at a scale of not less than one inch equals 20
feet, shall indicate the existing topography of the land in two-foot
interval contour lines and shall identify by shading and numerical
calculations all areas of the lot, both within and outside of the
delineated minimum required usable lot area, where slopes exist in
the following ranges: less than 15%, 15% and over but less than
20%, 20% and over but less than 25%, and 25% and greater, based
on the measurement of the horizontal distances between two-foot
contour intervals. In addition, any applicant seeking relief from
§ 165-14 CHATHAM CODE § 165-14
154:278
§ 165-14G(1) or conditional use approval under § 165-14G(2) shall
also submit a plot plan containing all of the information required at
§ 165-92 for a land disturbance permit.
E. Area and yard requirements. [Amended 11-9-1987 by Ord. No.
15-87; 2-8-1993 by Ord. No. 3-93; 4-5-1999 by Ord. No. 2-99;
11-11-2002 by Ord. No. 02-21; 4-25-2005 by Ord. No. 05-09;
7-9-2007 by Ord. No. 07-18; 4-26-2010 by Ord. No. 10-09;
11-25-2013 by Ord. No. 13-21; 12-11-2017 by Ord. No. 17-12]
Detached Dwellings
R-1
District
R-2 and
R-4
District
R-3
District
Twofamily
Dwellings
R-4
District
Churches*
and
Schools3**
Principal Buildings
Lot area sq.
ft.
15,0001 9,3002 7,500 10,000 15,000
Lot
frontage
100 ft. 75 ft. 60 ft. 100 ft. 100 ft.
Lot width 100 ft. 75 ft. 60 ft. 100 ft. 100 ft.
Lot depth 100 ft. 100 ft. 100 ft. 100 ft. 100 ft.
Side yards See Subsection E(1)(a) below.
Front yards See Subsection E(1)(b) below.
Rear yards See Subsection E(1)(c) below.
Maximum
height
35 ft. and
2.5 stories
35 ft. and
2.5 stories
35 ft. and
2.5 stories
35 ft. and
2.5 stories
35 ft. and
2.5 stories
§ 165-14 GARAGE SALES § 165-14
154:279
Detached Dwellings
R-1
District
R-2 and
R-4
District
R-3
District
Twofamily
Dwellings
R-4
District
Churches
and
Schools3
Accessory Buildings
Minimum
distance to
other
buildings
10 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft.
Distance to
side and
rear lot
lines
See Subsection E(2) below.
Maximum
height4
35 ft. and
2.5 stories
35 ft. and
2.5 stories
35 ft. and
2.5 stories
35 ft. and
2.5 stories
*See
§ 165-14C(2);
**See
§ 165-14C(1)
NOTES:
1 A lot of lesser width and/or area may be
used as a site for a detached dwelling if it
was a lot of record on the Tax Maps of the
Borough of Chatham in effect on October
15, 1953, of 75 feet or more in width, 125
feet or more in depth and 10,250 square
feet or more in area, with no land on either
side or to the rear in the same ownership
or control, and if all other regulations
affecting such site as prescribed in this
chapter are met.
§ 165-14 CHATHAM CODE § 165-14
154:280
2 A lot of lesser width and/or area may be
used as a site for a detached dwelling if it
was a lot of record on the Tax Maps of the
Borough of Chatham in effect on October
15, 1953, of 50 feet or more in width and
100 feet or more in depth and 6,000 square
feet or more in area, with no land on either
side or to the rear in the same ownership
or control, and if all other regulations
affecting such site as prescribed in this
chapter are met.
3 The maximum lot coverage allowed for
churches and schools in the R-1, R-2, R-3
and R-4 Districts is 65%.
4 Detached garages shall not exceed 16 feet
in height; all other accessory structures
shall not exceed 10 feet in height.
(1) Side, front and rear yards.
(a) There shall be two side yards, each at least 12 feet wide or 15%
of the lot width, whichever is greater, except that on a corner
lot the exterior side yard shall be at least 30 feet in width.
However, on lots less than 80 feet wide, a one-story, ground
floor addition attached to a dwelling lawfully existing on or
before May 1, 2007, may be permitted to extend into an
interior side yard, provided that such extension shall be set
back at least nine feet from the side property line. For
churches and schools and other permitted uses, there shall be
two side yards, each at least two feet in least dimension for
each one foot of height of such a building, provided that each
side yard shall not be less than 30 feet.
(b) There shall be a front yard of at least one foot in depth for each
one foot of height of the principal building; provided, however,
that no front yard shall be less than 30 feet in depth (except as
noted in this provision), and provided further, however, that the
building shall not extend nearer to a fronting street line than
the average distance of setbacks of the nearest building or
buildings, other than accessory buildings, within 200 feet of
each side line of said lot and fronting on the same side of the
street. In cases where the prevailing setbacks are generally
consistent within 200 feet of each side line of said lot, the front
yard setback shall be within five feet of the average prevailing
setback and may be less than 30 feet, but no less than 20 feet
in depth. Coverage shall not exceed 30% of any front yard area
as measured to the front building line.
(c) There shall be a yard at least 1.5 feet in least dimension for
each one foot of height of a dwelling, and for other types of
§ 165-14 GARAGE SALES § 165-14
154:281
principal buildings the rear yard shall be at least two feet in
least dimension for each one foot of height of such principal
building; provided, however, that no rear yard shall be less
than 30 feet.
(d) Porticos (as defined in § 165-10) that are added to an existing
landing and stairs and that do not extend more than five feet
beyond the existing outside face of the exterior front wall of a
permitted dwelling shall be exempted from the front yard
setback requirement.
(e) Attached garages with doors facing public streets shall be set
back a minimum of three feet from the front building line for
single-car-width garages and five feet for two-or-more-car
garages.
(2) No private garage or other accessory building located in the rear
yard shall be placed nearer to a rear or side property line than four
feet. No garage or other accessory building shall be placed nearer
than 10 feet to a rear property line which serves as a neighbor's
side property line. No private garage or other accessory building
shall be placed nearer to a main street property line than 60 feet,
nor nearer to a side street property line than 30 feet. Nothing
herein contained, however, shall prevent the construction of a
private garage as a structural part of a dwelling, provided that,
when so constructed, the garage walls shall be regarded as any
other walls of the main building in applying to coverage, front, side,
and rear yard requirements of this chapter.
F. Building coverage, residential floor area and lot coverage. [Added
9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 11-91; 12-29-1997 by Ord. No. 17-97;
4-5-1999 by Ord. No. 2-99; 11-11-2002 by Ord. No. 02-21]
(1) The maximum permitted building coverage, residential floor area
and lot coverage for all one- and two-family detached dwellings
shall be in accordance with the following table. Maximum
residential floor area shall in all cases be not greater than 2.00
times the maximum permitted building coverage, and maximum lot
coverage shall in all cases be not greater than 2.1 times the
maximum permitted building coverage. If a lot area is between two
of the numbers in the first column of the table, the maximum
building coverage, maximum residential floor area and maximum
lot coverage shall be calculated proportionately between the two
numbers. [Amended 9-28-2015 by Ord. No. 15-14]
§ 165-14 CHATHAM CODE § 165-14
154:282
Table
(All figures represent square feet.)
Lot Area
Maximum
Building
Coverage
Maximum
Residential
Floor Area/
FAR %
Maximum
Lot
Coverage
3,000 600 1,200/40% 1,260
4,000 800 1,600/40% 1,680
5,000 1,000 2,000/40% 2,100
6,000 1,180 2,360/39.33% 2,478
7,000 1,300 2,600/37.14% 2,730
8,000 1,420 2,840/35.5% 2,982
9,000 1,510 3,020/33.56% 3,171
10,000 1,600 3,200/32% 3,360
11,000 1,685 3,370/30.64% 3,539
12,000 1,765 3,530/29.42% 3,707
13,000 1,840 3,680/28.31% 3,864
14,000 1,910 3,820/27.29% 4,011
15,000 1,975 3,950/26.33% 4,148
16,000 2,040 4,080/25.5% 4,284
17,000 2,105 4,210/24.76% 4,421
18,000 2,170 4,340/24.11% 4,557
19,000 2,235 4,470/23.53% 4,694
20,000 2,300 4,600/23% 4,830
21,000 2,360 4,720/22.48% 4,956
22,000 2,420 4,840/22% 5,082
23,000 2,480 4,960/21.57% 5,208
24,000 2,540 5,080/21.17% 5,334
25,000 2,600 5,200/20.8% 5,460
26,000 2,660 5,320/20.46% 5,586
27,000 2,720 5,440/20.15% 5,712
(2) For every 1,000 square feet by which a lot exceeds 27,000 square
feet, the maximum building coverage shall be increased by 60
square feet, the maximum residential floor area shall be not greater
than 2.00 times the maximum building coverage, and the maximum
lot coverage shall not be greater than 2.1 times the maximum
building coverage. If a lot area is between two of the 1,000 square
foot numbers over 27,000 square feet, the maximum building
§ 165-14 GARAGE SALES § 165-14
154:283
coverage, maximum residential floor area and maximum lot
coverage shall be calculated proportionately between the two
numbers. [Amended 9-28-2015 by Ord. No. 15-14]
(3) Porticos (as defined in § 165-10) that have a floor area of no more
than 30 square feet shall be excluded from the calculation of
building coverage. [Added 11-25-2013 by Ord. No. 13-21]
G. Regulations applicable to development or land disturbance in areas of
steep slope. [Added 9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 11-91; repealed
12-29-1997 by Ord. No. 17-97; 4-5-1999 by Ord. No. 2-99;
amended 5-10-2004 by Ord. No. 04-12]
(1) Disturbance of steep slopes. Throughout the R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4
Zones, portions of any lot having a predevelopment slope of 25% or
more shall remain undisturbed; not more than 1/5 of the portions of
any lot having a predevelopment slope of 20% or more but less than
25% shall be disturbed; and not more than 2/5 of the portions of
any lot having a predevelopment slope of 15% or more but less than
20% shall be disturbed.
(2) Lots with limited allowable land disturbance. If the provisions of
Subsection G(1) above limit the total area of allowable land
disturbance on a lot existing as of the effective date of this
subsection to 3,000 square feet or less, development of the lot shall
be permitted only as a conditional use, subject to compliance with
the conditional use requirements of § 165-141 and all requirements
of this section other than Subsection G(1).
(3) Building height in areas of excessive slope. Where relief is granted
from Subsection G(1) above to locate a building wholly or partly on
a predevelopment slope of 25% or more, building height shall be
measured in accordance with the definition of "building, height of"
in § 165-10, provided that the uphill elevation of the building shall
not exceed 1 1/2 stories and shall be not more than 16.5 feet in
height measured from the finished grade, and further provided that
the elevation of the front entry floor level shall be not more than
three feet higher or lower than the average elevation of the street
frontage of the lot or, in the case of a corner lot, not more than
three feet higher or lower than the elevation at the intersection of
the street lines, but in no case shall the elevation of the front entry
floor level be required to be below the elevation of the street the
house faces.
(4) Redevelopment in areas of excessive slope. Where a lot containing
slopes of 25% or more, which slopes have already been developed
or disturbed, is proposed to be redeveloped, the elevation of the
front entry floor level of the new dwelling shall not be higher or
lower relative to the street level than the elevation of the front
entry floor level of the dwelling that is being replaced.
§ 165-14 CHATHAM CODE § 165-14
154:284
(5) Front yard setback. Where appropriate, and as a means of limiting
the extent of disturbance of steep slopes, the Board may grant a
reduction in the required front yard.
(6) Appearance of buildings. Buildings constructed or partly
constructed on any slope of 15% or more shall present a finished
appearance on all sides of the building to within two feet of the
finished grade at the foundation. The achievement of a finished
appearance shall be through a combination of exterior building
materials, fenestration, fencing and trim.
(7) Disturbance of required rear and side yards. No land disturbance
shall be permitted within a required rear yard or in any portion of a
required side yard located behind the front building line.
(8) Grading and stormwater management plan required; retaining
walls; soil erosion and sedimentation.
(a) Where disturbance of predevelopment slopes of 15% or more
will exceed applicable limits set forth in Subsection G(1) above,
a proposed grading and stormwater management plan for the
lot shall be submitted to the Borough Engineer for review and
approval prior to the issuance of a construction permit.
(b) Stormwater runoff shall be controlled so as to result in zero net
increase in both the volume and the rate of runoff from the site
relative to predevelopment conditions both during and after
disturbance and at all times thereafter and to comply with all
current Borough and state regulations. The stormwater
management plan shall include plans for maximizing recharge
through the construction of dry wells, rain gardens and other
infiltration facilities and may include provisions for the
collection and use of rainwater for lawn and garden watering
and other approved purposes.
(c) Where structural retaining walls are proposed to be used to
limit disturbance of steep slopes, to control drainage and to
prevent soil erosion, they shall comply with setback
requirements and other applicable Borough regulations and
shall require a construction permit. No individual retaining
wall shall exceed six feet in height, measured from the toe of
the wall to the top of the wall. Where there is a need for a
structural retaining wall greater than six feet in height, the
wall shall be constructed in sections of not more than six feet in
height each and shall be designed and spaced as recommended
by the Construction Official in consultation with the Borough
Engineer to ensure the stability of the construction.
(d) All structural retaining walls shall be landscaped on the
downhill side to mitigate the potential visual impact of the wall
structure(s) on neighboring properties, and the proposed
landscaping shall be reviewed by the Borough Engineer and, if
§ 165-14 GARAGE SALES § 165-14
154:285
the Borough Engineer or the Board so recommends, by a
landscape architect retained by the Board to ensure that the
root system of any proposed landscaping will not undermine
the long-term stability of the retaining wall and that the
proposed landscaping will be viable and will achieve its
aesthetic purpose.
(e) The location and design of any proposed structural retaining
wall(s) shall be shown on the proposed grading and
stormwater management plan for the lot, which shall be
subject to review and approval by the Borough Engineer.
(f) Measures shall be instituted to prevent soil erosion and
sedimentation due to land disturbance activities, and such
measures shall be in operation during all stages of the
development. The specific methods to be utilized to prevent
soil erosion and sedimentation both during and after
construction shall be shown on the grading and stormwater
management plan.
(g) The smallest practicable area of land shall be exposed at any
one time during development. To that end, work shall be
undertaken in discrete stages so as to minimize the extent and
duration of exposed soil at any one time, and the proposed
staging plan shall be subject to review as part of the grading
and stormwater management plan. All stripping of vegetation,
grading or other soil disturbance shall be undertaken in a
manner that will avoid soil erosion and sedimentation.
Sediment shall be required to be retained on the site. Sediment
basins, debris basins, desilting basins, or silt traps may be
required to be installed to remove sediment from runoff
waters. In addition, temporary seeding, mulching, plant cover
or other suitable stabilization measures shall be used to
protect exposed areas during construction and other land
disturbance activities.
(h) The construction or installation of soil erosion and sediment
control measures, such as diversions, sediment basins and
other such structures, shall occur prior to the start of any other
construction or on-site grading or land disturbance activities.
All soil erosion and sediment control measures required by this
subsection shall be maintained by the owner of the property
and by all successors in title until the Borough Engineer has
confirmed that the possibility of soil erosion and sedimentation
no longer exists.
(i) Where an applicant seeks approval of a conditional use
pursuant to § 165-141, the Board shall review and act upon the
proposed grading and stormwater management plan, based
upon the Borough Engineer's review and recommendations, as
part of its consideration of the conditional use application.
§ 165-14 CHATHAM CODE § 165-14
154:286
(9) Landscaping and revegetation plan.
(a) Where disturbance of predevelopment slopes of 15% or more
will exceed applicable limits set forth in Subsection G(1) above,
a proposed landscaping plan for the revegetation of the steep
slopes disturbed on the lot shall be submitted to the Board or
Borough Engineer, as the case may be. The landscaping plan
shall accompany the application for minor subdivision
approval, preliminary major subdivision approval or site plan
approval, or if none of these approvals are required, then the
application for a land disturbance permit. The landscaping
plan shall show the locations of all existing vegetative types,
including meadow, forest and scrub lands, and shall identify
the locations and area of each type of vegetation to be removed
and the locations and area of each type of vegetation to be
preserved. Wherever feasible, natural vegetation shall be
retained and protected.
(b) The landscaping plan shall also identify the proposed final
plant cover(s), and such plant cover(s), including lawns and
ground covers, shall be installed prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy. In the event that the final plant cover
cannot be installed because of weather conditions, the
installation thereof shall be enforced by appropriate provisions
in a bond or other surety and an improvement agreement. In
such case, temporary protective measures shall be installed in
accordance with the requirements of the Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey as promulgated
by the State Soil Conservation Committee and shall be
maintained until such time as the permanent protective
measures can be installed.
(c) The Board or Borough Engineer, as the case may be, may seek
the advice of a consultant landscape architect in reviewing the
landscaping plan.
(d) Where an applicant seeks approval of a conditional use
pursuant to § 165-141, the Board shall review and act upon the
proposed landscaping plan as part of its consideration of the
conditional use application.
(10) Conservation easements. Lands to be preserved as open space due
to the presence of steep slopes may be offered for dedication to the
municipality, a private land trust or a nonprofit agency in order to
preserve and maintain the area in its natural state. Portions of any
individual lot that are required to be left undisturbed by the terms
of this subsection are encouraged to be permanently protected by a
conservation easement in favor of the Borough of Chatham.
H. Minimum off-street parking. Each individual use shall provide parking
spaces according to the following minimum provisions. Where a
§ 165-14 GARAGE SALES § 165-14
154:287
§ 165-15. G-1 Residential District.
permitted use of land includes different specific activities with different
specific parking requirements, the total number of required parking
spaces shall be obtained by individually computing the parking
requirements for each different activity and adding the resulting
numbers together. [Amended 9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 11-91; 4-5-1999
by Ord. No. 2-99]
(1) Dwelling units shall each provide two spaces per dwelling unit.
(2) Churches shall provide one space per every five permanent seats.
(One seat shall be considered 22 inches in calculating the capacity
of pews or benches.)
(3) Schools shall provide one space per employee for grades
kindergarten through 10th grades, two spaces per employee for
grades 11 and 12, and in all cases sufficient space for school bus
loading and unloading.
(4) Home occupations shall provide one space per 200 square feet of
gross floor area or fraction thereof devoted to the home occupation.
(5) See § 165-82 for additional standards.
I. To the extent that any property is also within the Main Street Historic
District or any other historic district or historic site designated in this
chapter, the owners must comply with the provisions of Article X
(§ 165-56 et seq.) of this chapter. [Added 9-11-2000 by Ord. No.
14-2000]
A. Principal permitted uses on the land and in building.
(1) Public purpose uses. [Amended 2-8-1993 by Ord. No. 3-93]
(2) Garden apartment dwelling units.
B. Accessory uses permitted.
(1) Off-street parking, private garages and appropriate accessory
buildings.
(2) Fences. (See § 165-77.)
(3) Signs. (See Article XIII.)
(4) Awnings, but they shall not be subject to front yard setbacks, and
canopies. [Added 5-23-2005 by Ord. No. 05-18]
C. Maximum building height.
(1) No garden apartment building shall exceed 35 feet in height nor
shall it have more than two stories. [Amended 4-26-2010 by Ord.
No. 10-09]
§ 165-14 CHATHAM CODE § 165-15
154:288
(2) No permitted accessory building shall exceed 12 feet and one story
in height. [Amended 2-8-1993 by Ord. No. 3-93]
D. Area and yard requirements.
(1) The minimum tract size shall be three acres. A minimum of 200 feet
of frontage on one street shall be required.
(2) No development shall exceed 10 dwelling units per overall tract
acre.
(3) Minimum yard dimensions shall be measured horizontally in feet
and shall be measured from the front, sides and rear surfaces of
each building. The minimum dimension for front and side yards
shall be 25 feet. For rear yards, the minimum shall be 40 feet. No
building shall be closer to an adjacent building than the combined
applicable minimum setback dimension for each building. Any
driveways or other vehicle-access dimensions shall be excluded
from the determination of the minimum distance between
buildings. In addition, no building shall be located closer than 40
feet to any public street. [Amended 2-8-1993 by Ord. No. 3-93;
4-25-2005 by Ord. No. 05-09]
(4) Building coverage shall not exceed 25% of the total tract area.
(5) Land area equal to at least 400 square feet for each dwelling unit
shall be specified on the site plan and improved by the developer as
recreation areas for use by the residents of the development. Such
areas shall be an integral part of the development and each shall be
at least 25 feet wide and have a slope of less than 5%. Recreational
facilities may include residential swimming pool(s) and regulation
doubles tennis court(s) or for developments where a swimming
pool or tennis court is not feasible, the Planning Board may permit
other recreational facilities to be constructed in lieu of and as
alternatives of the aforesaid pool and tennis facilities, provided that
they seem to be appropriate substitutes thereof. [Amended
2-8-1993 by Ord. No. 3-93]
(6) In addition to any storage area contained inside individual dwelling
units, there shall be provided for each dwelling unit 200 cubic feet
of storage area in a convenient, centrally located area in the
basement or ground floor of the dwelling structure where personal
belongings and effects may be kept locked and separated from the
belongings of other occupants. There shall be a further minimum
common storage area in each building of 50 cubic feet per dwelling
unit easily accessible to the outside ground level for bicycles,
perambulators and similar types of equipment.
E. General requirements.
(1) No portion of a basement shall be occupied as all or part of a
dwelling unit. [Amended 2-8-1993 by Ord. No. 3-93]
§ 165-15 GARAGE SALES § 165-15
154:289
(2) No outside area or equipment shall be provided for the hanging of
laundry or the outside airing of laundry in any manner. Sufficient
area and equipment shall be made available within each building
for the laundering and artificial drying of laundry of occupants of
each building.
F. Minimum off-street parking.
(1) Two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling
unit. [Amended 2-8-1993 by Ord. No. 3-93]
(2) See § 165-82 for additional standards.
G. To the extent that any property is also within the Main Street Historic
District or any other historic district or historic site designated in this
chapter, the owners must comply with the provisions of Article X
(§ 165-56 et seq.) of this chapter. [Added 9-11-2000 by Ord. No.
14-2000]
§ 165-15 CHATHAM CODE § 165-15
154:290
ARTICLE V
Business District Regulations
[Amended 12-14-1981 by Ord. No. 21-81; 11-9-1987 by Ord. No.
15-87]
§ 165-16. B-1 Business Service District.
§ 165-17. B-2 Regional Business District.
A. Purpose. The B-1 Business Service District provides for small scale
business and professional office uses which are compatible with
residential uses.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) Home professional offices.
(2) Professional offices.
(3) Apartments above the first floor. [Added 9-10-2012 by Ord. No.
12-1348]
(4) Retail service.
(5) Child-care centers as provided for in N.J.S.A. 30:5B-1 et seq. and
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.6. [Added 2-8-1993 by Ord. No. 3-93]
C. Conditional uses permitted. [Amended 2-8-1993 by Ord. No. 3-93;
9-10-2012 by Ord. No. 12-13]
(1) Educational and recreational instruction, in accordance with
conditions in Article XVII.
(2) Public utilities, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67 and
§ 165-143.
(3) Medical/dental office, in accordance with conditions in Article XVII.
D. Accessory uses permitted.
(1) Private parking.
(2) Private customer or employee parking.
(3) Business signs. (See Article XIII.)
(4) Fences. (See § 165-77.)
(5) Awnings, but they shall not be subject to front yard setbacks, and
attached canopies. [Added 5-23-2005 by Ord. No. 05-18]
48.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection B(3), Business services.
§ 165-16 GARAGE SALES § 165-17
154:291
A. Purpose. The B-2 Regional Business District provides for general
business and office uses which provide limited goods and services to
customers on a more regional scale, as well as local goods and services
for local residents. [Amended 9-10-2012 by Ord. No. 12-13]
B. Permitted uses. [Amended 2-8-1993 by Ord. No. 3-93; 2-12-2001
by Ord. No. 01-01; 3-26-2007 by Ord. No. 07-17; 9-10-2012 by
Ord. No. 12-13
(1) Professional offices.
(2) Offices.
(3) Personal services.
(4) Retail trade, only on premises known and described as Block 29,
Lot 9, and Block 84, Lot 7, on the Tax Maps of the Borough of
Chatham. The two lots described above are commonly known as the
CVS Mall and Kings Supermarket, which have contained retail
trade uses for many years. Retail trade is otherwise prohibited in
the B-2 Regional Business District.
(5) Retail services.
(6) Restaurants.
(7) Child-care centers as provided in N.J.S.A. 30:5B-1 et seq. and
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.6.
(8) Apartments above the first floor.
(9) Educational and recreational instruction.
(10) Nursing homes and adult day-care centers.
C. Conditional uses permitted. [Amended 3-26-2007 by Ord. No.
07-17; 9-10-2012 by Ord. No. 12-13]
(1) Medical/dental office, in accordance with conditions in Article XVII.
(2) Public utility, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67 and § 165-143.
(3) Banks, in accordance with § 165-144.
(4) Commercial recreation, entertainment, and amusement uses, in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67 and § 165-147.
(5) Institutional uses, in accordance with the conditions in Article XVII.
D. Accessory uses permitted.
(1) Private parking.
(2) Private customer or employee parking.
(3) Public parking.
§ 165-17 CHATHAM CODE § 165-17
154:292
§ 165-18. B-3 General Business District.
(4) Business signs. (See Article XIII.)
(5) Fences. (See § 165-77.)
(6) Awnings, but they shall not be subject to front yard setbacks, and
attached canopies. [Amended 2-8-1993 by Ord. No. 3-93;
5-23-2005 by Ord. No. 05-18]
E. Any residential development shall comply with the affordable housing
set-aside requirement set forth at § 69-4 of this Code. [Added
10-24-2016 by Ord. No. 16-11]
A. Purpose. The B-3 General Business District provides for general
business, office, and retail uses to serve the local community market, in
keeping with the existing smaller scale of the historic buildings in the
district. This district is similar to the B-4 Community Business District,
but is meant to encourage the establishment of more vehicular-oriented
and less intensive uses than the B-4 District. [Amended 4-25-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-07]
B. Permitted uses. [Amended 2-8-1993 by Ord. No. 3-93; 3-26-2007
by Ord. No. 07-17; 4-25-2011 by Ord. No. 11-07; 9-10-2012 by
Ord. No. 12-13]
(1) Professional offices.
(2) Offices.
(3) Restaurants.
(4) Retail trade and/or retail services, provided that the aggregate
total of such uses shall not exceed 2,500 square feet on a tax lot of
less than 1.5 acres.
(5) Child-care centers, as provided in N.J.S.A. 30:5B-1 et seq. and
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.6.
(6) Museums.
(7) Art galleries.
(8) Apartments above the first floor.
(9) Medical/dental offices.
(10) Educational instruction.
C. Conditional uses. [Amended 3-26-2007 by Ord. No. 07-17;
9-10-2012 by Ord. No. 12-13]
(1) Public utility, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67 and § 165-143.
(2) Banks, in accordance with § 165-144.
§ 165-17 GARAGE SALES § 165-18
154:293
§ 165-19. B-4 Community Business District.
(3) Service stations, in accordance with § 165-146.
D. Accessory uses permitted.
(1) Private parking.
(2) Private customer and employee parking.
(3) Business signs. (See Article XIII.)
(4) Fences. (See § 165-77.)
(5) Awnings, but they shall not be subject to front yard setbacks, and
attached canopies, but they shall not encroach on any yard
setbacks. Detached canopies are permitted in connection with
service stations as provided for in § 165-146. [Amended 2-8-1993
by Ord. No. 3-93; 5-23-2005 by Ord. No. 05-18]
A. Purpose. The B-4 Community Business District is intended to provide
for retail trade and personal services on the ground level which
provides customers from the local community with goods and services
for their own personal and household use. These uses are meant to
serve pedestrian-oriented shopping in a downtown environment.
Related professional offices and business services are secondary uses
which may be provided above the ground level.
B. Permitted uses. [Amended 2-8-1993 by Ord. No. 3-93; 9-10-2012
by Ord. No. 12-13]
(1) Retail trade.
(2) Personal service.
(3) Retail service, except for finance, insurance, and real estate offices,
which shall only be permitted on upper floors.
(4) Restaurants.
(5) Eating and drinking establishments.
(6) Child-care centers, as provided for in N.J.S.A. 30:5B-1 et seq. and
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.6.
(7) Educational instruction on upper floors.
(8) Apartments above the first floor.
(9) Museums.
(10) Art galleries.
C. Conditional uses. [Amended 2-8-1993 by Ord. No. 3-93; 9-10-2012
by Ord. No. 12-13]
§ 165-18 CHATHAM CODE § 165-19
154:294
§ 165-20. B-5 Office District.
(1) Professional offices or office uses, provided that they are located
above the first floor.
(2) Outdoor eating and drinking establishments, in accordance with
§ 165-145.
(3) Recreational instruction, in accordance with standards in Article
XVII.
(4) Institutional uses, in accordance with standards in Article XVII.
D. Accessory uses.
(1) Private parking.
(2) Private customer and employee parking.
(3) Business signs. (See Article XIII.)
(4) Awnings, but they shall not be subject to front yard setbacks, and
attached canopies. [Amended 2-8-1993 by Ord. No. 3-93;
5-23-2005 by Ord. No. 05-18]
(5) Public parking area.
(6) Child-care centers as provided for in N.J.S.A. 30:5B-1 et seq. and
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.6. [Added 2-8-1993 by Ord. No. 3-93]
(7) Charitable clothing bins. [Added 8-9-2010 by Ord. No. 10-20]
E. Any residential development shall comply with the affordable housing
set-aside requirement set forth at § 69-4 of this Code. [Added
10-24-2016 by Ord. No. 16-11]
A. Purpose. The B-5 Business Office District provides for large-scale office
and professional office use as well as research laboratories.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) Professional office.
(2) Office.
(3) Research laboratories.
(4) Child-care centers as provided for in N.J.S.A. 30:5B-1 et seq. and
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.6. [Added 2-8-1993 by Ord. No. 3-93]
C. (Reserved)49
D. Accessory uses.
49.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, Conditional uses, was repealed 9-10-2012 by Ord. No.
12-13.
§ 165-19 GARAGE SALES § 165-20
154:295
§ 165-21. B-6 Business Office District.
§ 165-22. Area, yard and building requirements for business
districts. [Amended 11-12-1984 by Ord. No. 12-1984; 9-24-2007 by
(1) Private employee parking.
(2) Business signs. (See Article XIII.)
(3) Fences. (See § 165-77.)
(4) Awnings, but they shall not be subject to front yard setbacks, and
attached canopies. [Added 5-23-2005 by Ord. No. 05-18]
(5) A dining area, fitness facility, or cafeteria, provided that such uses
collectively occupy no more than 20% of the floor area of the
principal permitted use and exclusively serve the employees
occupying the principal use. [Added 9-10-2012 by Ord. No.
12-13]
A. Purpose. The B-6 Business Office District is intended to provide for
small scale business and office uses.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) Retail trade.
(2) Personal service.
(3) Retail service.
(4) Business service.
(5) Child-care centers as provided for in N.J.S.A. 30:5B-1 et seq. and
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.6. [Added 2-8-1993 by Ord. No. 3-93]
C. Conditional uses.
(1) Professional office or office uses, provided that any single office use
occupies no more than 1,000 square feet of floor area.
(2) Apartment units in accordance with § 165-148.
D. Accessory uses.
(1) Private parking.
(2) Private customer or employee parking.
(3) Business signs. (See Article XIII.)
(4) Fences. (See § 165-77.)
(5) Awnings, but they shall not be subject to front yard setbacks, and
attached canopies. [Added 5-23-2005 by Ord. No. 05-18]
§ 165-20 CHATHAM CODE § 165-22
154:296
Ord. No. 07-28; 4-26-2010 by Ord. No. 10-09; 9-10-2012 by Ord. No.
12-13]
B-1
District
B-2
District
B-3
District
B-4
District
B-5
District
B-6
District
Principal Buildings
Minimum
Lot area None None None None None None
Side yard (one) 10 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft. None 10 ft. 10 ft.
Aggregate (both) 20 ft. 20 ft. 24 ft. None 20 ft. 20 ft.
Front yards 25 ft. 35 ft. 35 ft. None 50 ft. 10 ft.
Yard buffer1 15 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft. 25 ft. 25 ft.
Maximum height 35 ft. 35 ft. 35 ft. 40 ft. 40 ft. 35 ft.
Maximum stories 2 2.5 2.5 3 3 2
B-1
District
B-2
District
B-3
District
B-4
District
B-5
District
B-6
District
Total Development
Maximum
Lot coverage 65% 75% 75% 90% 65% 50%
Floor area ratio 22.4% None None None 30% 35%
Building
coverage
25% 20% 15% None 20% None
Maximum square
footage of
individual (new)
buildings
2,500 sf 4,500 sf 2,500 sf None None None
1 See § 165-164B(17) of this chapter.
§ 165-23. General requirements.
A. Any principal building in the B-4 District may contain more than one
activity, provided that the total impervious surface coverage does not
exceed the maximum specified for the district and, further, that each
activity occupies a minimum gross floor area of 750 square feet.
[Amended 2-8-1993 by Ord. No. 3-93]
B. Any lot in the B-1, B-2 and B-3 Districts may contain more than one
principal building, provided that all land coverage requirements of this
chapter are met. Buildings shall be no closer than 15 feet to one
another and shall not be connected except by single level, uncovered or
covered, but not enclosed walkways. Atriums as enclosed structures
§ 165-22 GARAGE SALES § 165-23
154:297
§ 165-24. Minimum off-street loading.
§ 165-25. Minimum off-street parking.
shall not be permitted as such interconnections. [Amended 2-8-1993
by Ord. No. 3-93]
C. No merchandise, products, equipment or similar material or objects
shall be displayed or stored outside.
D. All buildings shall be compatibly designed whether constructed all at
one time or in stages over a period of time. Where practical and
appropriate every primary structure should appear to have one of its
main entrances on the facade of the building facing the principal street
on which it is located.
E. All areas not utilized for buildings, parking, loading, access aisles,
driveways or pedestrian walkways shall be suitably landscaped with
shrubs, ground cover, seeding or similar plantings and maintained in
good condition.
F. No business use shall be permitted or activity conducted for profit
which of its nature or for any reason bars admission to all or any part of
the public portion of any premises to particular members of the public,
by reason of age or otherwise, or except upon payment of an admission,
membership, cover, entertainment or similar charge. In appropriate
cases the Board, however, may waive or vary the application of this
provision to a commercial recreational, entertainment or amusement
use granted under § 165-147. [Amended 4-25-2005 by Ord. No.
05-09]
G. Commercial recreational, entertainment, and amusement uses are
permitted as conditional uses in the B-2 District. Such uses, including
electronic games, pinball machines, and similar devices shall not be
deemed permitted in any other district nor as an accessory, incidental
or additional use to or with another principal use in any district.
[Added 9-10-2012 by Ord. No. 12-13]
H. Any structure on a roof must be screened from view in a manner
consistent with the building’s architecture. [Added 4-26-2010 by Ord.
No. 10-09]
A. Each activity shall provide for off-street loading and unloading with
adequate ingress and egress from streets. Each shall be at least 15 feet
by 40 feet.
B. This requirement will not apply in the B-4 District where a permitted
use or a permitted conditional use is proposed, unless a new building is
constructed or there are alterations or additions to an existing building
which will result in an increase in gross floor area or the loss of existing
off-street loading spaces. [Amended 11-11-1996 by Ord. No. 16-96]
§ 165-23 CHATHAM CODE § 165-25
154:298
A. Except for permitted uses on first floors of existing structures in the B-4
District and except as provided in the immediately succeeding
subsections, off-street parking standards, based on gross floor area
(GFA) where floor area is indicated as the unit of measurement, are as
follows: [Amended 9-10-2012 by Ord. No. 12-13]
Use
Minimum Number of Parking
Spaces
Adult day care 3 for every 1,000 square feet of
GFA
Apartments As required per RSIS
Art gallery 3 for every 1,000 square feet of
GFA
Banks 4.75 for every 1,000 square feet of
GFA with a maximum standard of
6 for every 1,000 square feet of
GFA
Child-care center 1 for every staff member plus 1 for
every 10 students at peak capacity
Educational instruction 4 for every 1,000 square feet of
GFA
Elementary/middle school 1 for every employee plus 1 for
every classroom
Funeral home 1 for every 3 permanent seats plus
1 space for every 150 square feet
of lounge/parlor area
Institutional use (unless otherwise
specified)
1 for every 250 square feet of
program space or 1 for every 3
seats, whichever is greater
Medical/dental office 4.5 for every 1,000 square feet of
GFA
Museum 4 for every 1,000 square feet of
program space
Nursing home 1 for every 3 beds
Office/professional office (nonmedical/
dental)
3 for every 1,000 square feet of
GFA
Personal services/business
services
4.5 for every 1,000 square feet of
GFA
Recreational instruction 4 for every 1,000 square feet of
GFA
Research laboratory/testing 1 for every 700 square feet of GFA
Retail trade and service 4 for every 1,000 square feet of
GFA
§ 165-25 GARAGE SALES § 165-25
154:299
Use
Minimum Number of Parking
Spaces
Secondary (high) school 1 for every employee plus 4 for
every classroom
Theater 1 for every 3 seats
B. In addition, one space for every vehicle owned and/or operated by the
use operating from that site shall be provided.
C. Restaurants, except in the B-4 District, will provide a minimum of one
parking space for each three seats in the dining area(s) plus one
parking space for every two seats in the lounge or bar area(s).
D. Restaurants in the B-4 District and eating establishments having more
than 200 square feet devoted to customer service and dining area or
more than six seats will provide one parking space per 50 square feet of
customer service and dining area.
E. The requirements contained in Subsections A through D herein will not
apply in the B-4 District where a permitted nonresidential use or a
permitted conditional use is proposed, unless a new building is
constructed or there are alterations or additions to an existing building
which will result in an increase in gross floor area or the loss of existing
off-street parking spaces. [Added 11-11-1996 by Ord. No. 16-96;
amended 2-26-2007 by Ord. No. 07-13; 9-10-2012 by Ord. No.
12-13]
F. Child-care centers shall provide a minimum of one parking space for
each staff member and one parking space for every 10 students.
[Added 9-26-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1650]
G. See § 165-82 for additional standards. [Amended 11-11-1996 by Ord.
No. 16-96]
H. Reductions in required off-street parking due to proximity to public
shoppers' parking lots or striped on-street parking. The reviewing
Board may grant a reduction of 25% of the required nonresidential offstreet
parking for any property within 800 feet of public shoppers'
parking lots or striped on-street parking. [Added 9-10-2012 by Ord.
No. 12-13]
I. Option to request land-banking of off-street parking. In cases where
proposed off-street parking exceeds 120% of the minimum required offstreet
parking (before taking any reductions under Subsection H above)
on any nonresidential property in the B-2, B-3 and B-5 Districts, the
reviewing Board may request land-banking of some of the proposed offstreet
parking. [Added 9-10-2012 by Ord. No. 12-13]
50.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection F as Subsection G.
§ 165-25 CHATHAM CODE § 165-25
154:300
§ 165-26. Additional standards for site review in business districts.
All commercial uses in the business districts shall be subject to the
following additional design review standards:
§ 165-27. Properties within Historic District. [Added 9-11-2000 by
Ord. No. 14-2000]
To the extent that any property is also within the Main Street Historic
District or any other historic district or historic site designated in this
chapter, the owners must comply with the provisions of Article X (§ 165-56
et seq.) of this chapter.
J. Minimum required bicycle parking. One bicycle parking space shall be
provided for every 10 required off-street parking spaces. Such bicycle
parking shall be located and clearly designated in a safe and convenient
location, shall be designed to accommodate U-shaped locking devices,
and shall support bicycles in a stable position without damage to
wheels, frame, or other components, and shall be securely anchored.
[Added 9-10-2012 by Ord. No. 12-13]
A. Consistency with the purposes of the business district in which the use
is located.
B. Conceptual compatibility of design with the immediate environment of
the site.
C. Appropriateness of the design to the site and function of the project.
D. In areas considered by the Board as having unified character or
historical character, to determine if the scale and design are
compatible. [Amended 2-8-1993 by Ord. No. 3-93]
E. Whether the design promotes harmonious transitions in scale and
character in areas between different designated land uses. [Amended
2-8-1993 by Ord. No. 3-93]
F. Whether access to the property and circulation thereon are safe and
convenient for pedestrians and vehicles.
G. Whether the arrangement of open space and landscaping are
appropriate to the design and function of the structures.
H. Whether the materials, textures, colors and details of construction are
compatible with the adjacent and neighboring structures and functions.
§ 165-25 GARAGE SALES § 165-27
154:301

ARTICLE VI
M-1, M-2 and M-3 Industrial Districts; Gateway Overlay District.
[Amended 12-14-1981 by Ord. No. 21-81; 11-12-1984 by Ord. No.
18-84; 2-8-1993 by Ord. No. 3-93; 4-12-1999 by Ord. No. 5-99;
9-11-2000 by Ord. No. 14-2000; 5-23-2005 by Ord. No. 05-18;
4-26-2010 by Ord. No. 10-09; 7-12-2010 by Ord. No. 10-10; 8-9-2010
by Ord. No. 10-20; 11-24-2014 by Ord. No. 14-0951]
§ 165-28. Principal permitted uses in M-1 District.
Principal permitted uses on land and in buildings in the M-1 District shall
be as follows:
§ 165-28.1. Conditional uses in M-1 District. [Amended 6-22-2015
by Ord. No. 15-09]
A. Public purpose uses.
B. Laboratories of an experimental, research, development or testing
nature which carry on processes within completely enclosed buildings
and which do not produce noticeable noise, vibration, smoke, dust,
odors, heat, glare or hazardous or toxic waste or materials.
C. Light manufacturing and assembly or treatment of products from
previously prepared materials, including art, metal, and architectural
fabrication, but excluding the synthesis and/or storage of chemical or
flammable products.
D. Retail trade and retail services, excluding sales, distribution, and
storage of chemicals, flammable materials and fuel products, and
excluding drive-throughs.
E. Offices, including general offices, contractor's offices, medical offices,
and professional offices.
F. Restaurants and eating and drinking establishments, non-drivethrough.
G. Art galleries.
H. Personal services.
I. Recreational instruction.
J. Indoor commercial recreation/fitness club.
K. Business services.
L. Mixed-use buildings comprised of any of the above permitted uses.
51.Editor's Note: A complete copy of this ordinance with the map referenced and made a part
thereof (as stated in the ordinance preamble) delineating the Gateway Overlay District is
on file in the Borough offices.
§ 165-28 GARAGE SALES § 165-28.1
154:303
A. Wireless communications facilities as a conditional use in accordance
with Article XVI.
B. Apartments on upper floors of buildings with permitted nonresidential
uses in accordance with the following standards:
(1) Properties shall have frontage on Summit Avenue or Watchung
Avenue.
(2) No rooms intended for human habitation shall be located in an
attic.
(3) A maximum of six total units shall be permitted in each structure on
upper floors above permitted ground level nonresidential uses.
(4) No individual building footprint shall exceed 6,000 square feet.
(5) The development shall comply with the affordable housing setaside
requirement set forth at § 69-4 of this Code. [Amended
10-24-2016 by Ord. No. 16-11]
C. Auto repair/mechanical repair shops as a conditional use in accordance
with the following standards:
(1) Auto repair/mechanical repair shops shall have access via
Commerce Street.
(2) Repairs and services shall take place within a principal structure.
All minor repairs and services are permitted to take place outdoors.
(3) The walls of the principal structure shall be at least 15 feet from
the side and rear property lines.
(4) All exit and entrance drives shall be at least five feet from any
adjoining property line.
(5) Any fuel or air pump and filler pipe, or other similar equipment,
shall be located 20 feet from any property line.
(6) No sale, leasing or rental of any vehicles shall be permitted.
(7) Permitted outdoor storage shall be limited to valid registered lightduty
vehicles awaiting repairs; provided that those vehicles shall be
parked or stored on surfaced areas, including concrete, asphalt or
stone, and shall not hinder or obstruct access to dispensers, bays,
service areas, site circulation and access and shall be in
accordance with an approved site plan. No vehicle shall be kept
outdoors overnight, on jacks, stands or lifts.
(8) Such uses that are located less than 100 feet from a residential
zone, as measured from the perimeter of the lot line, shall be closed
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(9) No other use shall be permitted on the same lot.
§ 165-28.1 CHATHAM CODE § 165-28.2
154:304
§ 165-28.2. Accessory uses in M-1 District.
§ 165-28.3. Permitted uses in M-2 District.
§ 165-29. Principal permitted uses in M-3 District.
Principal permitted uses on land and in buildings in the M-3 District shall
be as follows:
A. Off-street parking that serves a principal use or uses on the lot.
B. Fences. (See § 165-77.)
C. Signs. (See Article XIII.)
D. Garages, storage buildings and toolsheds only upon specific approval of
the Planning or Zoning Board during site plan review.
E. Awnings and canopies, provided they do not extend more than three
feet into any required setback.
F. Outdoor storage of materials in accordance with the standards in
§ 165-32.
G. Accessory uses that are customary and incidental to principal permitted
uses.
A. Principal permitted uses.
(1) Public purpose uses.
(2) Indoor commercial recreation/fitness club.
(3) Moving businesses, including indoor storage related to the
principal use.
B. Accessory uses.
(1) Off-street parking that serves a principal use or uses on the lot.
(2) Fences. (See § 165-77.)
(3) Signs. (See Article XIII.)
(4) Garages, storage buildings and toolsheds only upon specific
approval of the Planning or Zoning Board during site plan review.
(5) Accessory uses that are customary and incidental to principal
permitted uses.
A. Public purpose uses.
B. Laboratories of an experimental, research or testing nature which carry
on processes within completely enclosed buildings and which do not
§ 165-28.2 GARAGE SALES § 165-29
154:305
§ 165-29.1. Conditional uses in M-3 District. [Amended 6-22-2015
by Ord. No. 15-09]
produce noticeable noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat, glare or
hazardous or toxic waste or materials.
C. Light manufacturing and assembly or treatment of products from
previously prepared materials, including art fabrication, but excluding
the synthesis and/or storage of chemical or flammable products which
do not produce noticeable noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat,
glare or hazardous or toxic waste or materials.
D. Retail trade and retail services, excluding sales, distribution, and
storage of chemicals, flammable materials, and fuel products, and
excluding drive-throughs.
E. Offices, including general offices, contractor's offices, medical offices
and professional offices.
F. Two-family residences in accordance with the bulk and design
standards in the R-4 District.
G. Restaurants and eating and drinking establishments, non-drivethrough.
H. Apartments on upper floors of buildings with permitted nonresidential
uses occupying the first/ground floor level. The standards in § 165-32
shall apply to these uses.
I. Art galleries.
J. Personal services.
K. Recreational instruction.
L. Indoor commercial recreation/fitness club.
M. Business services.
N. Financial institutions, including banks, non-drive-through.
O. Mixed-use buildings comprised of any of the above permitted uses.
A. Wireless communications facilities as a conditional use in accordance
with Article XVI.
B. Multifamily residential as a conditional use in accordance with the
following standards:
(1) The site shall be located outside of the Gateway Overlay District,
contain a minimum of 20,000 square feet, and be located on the
southeastern side of River Road (the Passaic River side of the M-3
District along River Road).
§ 165-29 CHATHAM CODE § 165-29.1
154:306
§ 165-29.2. Accessory uses in M-3 District.
(2) Adequate off-street parking is provided in accordance with the
standards in § 168-82, or, in instances where waivers from the RSIS
parking standards are requested, documentation should be
provided by a parking expert regarding the adequacy of the
proposed parking supply and proposed management of parking
resources to serve the proposed use as outlined in § 165-163C.
(3) No rooms intended for human habitation shall be located in an
attic.
(4) The development shall comply with the affordable housing setaside
requirement set forth at § 69-4 of this Code. [Amended
10-24-2016 by Ord. No. 16-11]
(5) Parking structures shall be integrated into principal structures.
The exterior of any parking level(s) shall be composed primarily of
brick or other masonry materials and shall contain at least sixtypercent
solid wall area, including architectural details to integrate
parking into the overall development.
(6) The reviewing Board may allow an increase in height to three
stories and up to 45 feet where two of the four following conditions
are satisfied:
(a) In cases where such property contains Passaic River frontage,
a conservation easement shall be dedicated to the Borough
sufficient to accommodate a trail along the Passaic River;
(b) At least 2/3 of the parking shall be located underground and/or
contained within the principal structure;
(c) The project shall be designed to meet LEED Silver certification
standards under LEED Homes, LEED Neighborhood
Development or LEED Building Design and Construction in
accordance with the scoring system put forth by the United
States Green Building Council, or utilize similar techniques
that are designed to reduce consumption of energy, water and/
or sewer demand; and/or
(d) Provision of a shuttle bus/jitney to New Jersey Transit
station(s) coinciding with weekday morning and evening peakhour
train schedules.
C. Outdoor dining per § 165-145.
D. Banks in accordance with the conditions in § 165-144 except that drivethrough
structures and lanes shall not be visible from any public street.
A. Off-street parking that serves a principal use or uses on the lot.
B. Fences. (See § 165-77.)
§ 165-29.1 GARAGE SALES § 165-29.2
154:307
§ 165-30. Gateway Overlay District regulations.
C. Signs. (See Article XIII.)
D. Garages, storage buildings and toolsheds only upon specific approval of
the Planning Board during site plan review.
E. Awnings and canopies, provided they do not extend more than three
feet into any required setback.
F. Charitable clothing bins located in the rear of properties only, not
visible from public rights-of-way or adjacent residential properties,
provided that nothing herein shall affect the authority of the Borough to
regulate charitable clothing bins pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60 et seq.
and § 199-14.
G. Outdoor storage of materials in accordance with the standards in
§ 165-32.
H. Accessory uses that are customary and incidental to principal permitted
uses.
A. Permitted uses. [Amended 6-22-2015 by Ord. No. 15-09]
(1) Permitted ground floor uses: retail sales and service (non-drivethrough),
restaurants and eating and drinking establishments (nondrive-
through), boutique hotel, performing arts venue, theater, art
galleries, personal services, offices (general and professional
office) with less than 3,000 square feet of floor area, and
recreational instruction.
(2) Permitted upper floor uses: commercial; office; apartments; live/
work artist lofts; institutional/educational use not to exceed 15% of
gross floor area; performing arts venue; boutique hotel; theater; art
galleries.
(3) Townhouse development behind permitted uses fronting River
Road or Watchung Avenue, in accordance with the standards of the
AFD-2 District as outlined in Article VIII of the Chatham Borough
Land Development Ordinance;
(4) Multifamily development (on all floors), whether attached to one
another horizontally, vertically, or by some combination of the two,
shall be permitted, including age-restricted multifamily
development.
B. Permitted accessory uses. [Amended 6-22-2015 by Ord. No. 15-09]
(1) Uses that are customarily incidental and accessory to the principal
use.
C. Affordable housing requirement. Any residential development shall
comply with the affordable housing set-aside requirement set forth at
§ 165-29.2 CHATHAM CODE § 165-30
154:308
§ 69-4 of this Code. [Amended 6-22-2015 by Ord. No. 15-09;
10-24-2016 by Ord. No. 16-11]
D. Area, height, and bulk requirements.
(1) Minimum lot area: 30,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum and maximum height/stories:
(a) Maximum height: three stories/35 feet without incentives.
(b) Based on incentives specified in this section, the reviewing
Board may allow a fourth story and a maximum height of 48
feet.
(c) Enclosed below-grade parking levels shall not count as a story
if the exposure of the parking level at the street line (exclusive
of any entrance or exit to the parking) is less than four feet as
measured from the proposed grade plane to the underside of
the structure of the floor above.
(d) Minimum height shall be two stories along all public street
frontages.
(3) Required yards (setbacks).
(a) Minimum yards (setbacks): minimum front yard setback of 10
feet and maximum front yard setback of 20 feet; other yards in
accordance with the M District standards.
(b) Building separation: 20 feet minimum if structures are three
stories or less and 30 feet if over three stories.
(c) Any story above the second story shall be set back an
additional eight feet from River Road or Watchung Avenue.
(4) Maximum impervious coverage: 85%.
(5) Incentives/height bonus: The reviewing Board may grant an
increase in height of one additional story where two of the four
following conditions are satisfied:
(a) In cases where such property contains Passaic River frontage,
a conservation easement shall be dedicated to the Borough
sufficient to accommodate a trail along the Passaic River;
(b) Provision of at least 75% of the required parking below grade
and/or in a structure that is wrapped along public street
frontages with permitted ground floor uses;
(c) The project shall be designed to meet LEED Silver certification
standards under LEED Homes, LEED Neighborhood
Development or LEED Building Design and Construction in
accordance with the scoring system put forth by the United
§ 165-30 GARAGE SALES § 165-30
154:309
States Green Building Council, or utilize similar techniques
that are designed to reduce consumption of energy, water and/
or sewer demand; and/or
(d) Provision of a shuttle bus/jitney to New Jersey Transit
station(s) coinciding with weekday morning and evening peakhour
train schedules.
E. Gateway Overlay design standards.
(1) Applicability. These standards and guidelines shall be applicable to
any project requiring subdivision, variance, and/or site plan
approval. The design standards and guidelines shall be applied
concomitantly with the applicable use and bulk regulations of the
district, as well as with other standards within this chapter. The
general requirements of § 165-32 and the design standards in
§ 165-32.1 shall apply, along with the standards in this section.
Where the standards conflict, the more restrictive requirement
shall govern.
(2) Modifications and exceptions. Modifications or exceptions to the
design guidelines and standards contained in this section may be
approved by the Board, provided the applicant has met the criteria
for exceptions pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-51, and can provide
testimony that the resulting change will conform to all of the
following: satisfy the purpose and intent of this section; enhance
the development plan; and enhance the streetscape and
neighborhood.
(3) Gateway design standards.
(a) Context, continuity, massing and scale.
[1] In cases where there is no consistent pattern of
streetscape or buildings abutting a development
application or where that pattern is inconsistent with
these guidelines, the applicant is encouraged to view its
application as an opportunity to establish the future
context for the area.
[2] Buildings located at the borders or edges of the district
shall mark the transition into and out of the district in a
distinct fashion, using massing, height extensions,
contrasting materials and/or architectural embellishments
to obtain this effect.
[3] Focal points, or points of visual termination, shall
generally be occupied by structures with distinctive
architectural treatments. Applicants may also submit
plans in which building voids or natural features, such as a
plaza or a park, act as points of visual termination.
§ 165-30 CHATHAM CODE § 165-30
154:310
[4] The layout, materials and details used in the treatment of
exterior spaces shall be selected to enhance their
immediate surroundings. Exterior spaces shall be
functional and provide visual and/or physical amenities for
their users, including, but not limited to, textured paving,
landscaping, lighting, street trees, benches, bicycle racks,
trash receptacles and other items of street furniture, as
appropriate.
[5] When development consists of multiple structures,
buildings shall be oriented around open space, courtyard
or similar landscape/streetscape elements with the overall
design preserving existing trees, vegetation and grades to
the maximum extent possible.
[6] A minimum of two principal buildings per tract is required
for properties with two or more acres.
[7] Buildings' principal orientation shall be towards and relate
to public streets, both functionally and visually. Buildings
shall not be oriented to front parking lots.
[8] In a sequence of structures along a street, the spacing
between them (sidewall to sidewall) is an important
element in defining the observer's perception of rhythm.
New structures shall reflect the existing rhythm, or, in the
absence of a clear rhythm, shall better define it. In new
development, a sequence of structures shall seek to
establish a spacing rhythm that is related to the scale of
the individual buildings, their height, the composition of
the facade, and the width of the street.
[9] All buildings are required to incorporate frequent vertical
and horizontal articulation through slight variations in
build-to-lines, incorporation of front entries and porches,
variations in roof pitch, careful selection of materials, the
use of windowed projections, and similar architectural
treatments to improve the visual appearance of the
buildings. Vertical articulations shall be provided at least
every 30 feet along all facades that exceed 60 feet in
length or width.
(b) Building orientation and architectural treatment.
[1] A diversity of architectural styles adds interest to a
streetscape or district. No particular architectural style is
preferred outside of local historic districts, and both
contemporary contributions and reinterpretations of older
architectural styles with a contemporary flavor may be
acceptable. However, a diversity of appearance in facades
shall be counterbalanced with continuity in massing, wall
line, verticality, and spacing.
§ 165-30 GARAGE SALES § 165-30
154:311
[2] In rehabilitations of older buildings in the district,
distinctive stylistic features or characteristic examples of
skilled craftsmanship shall be treated with sensitivity. If
deteriorated, these architectural features shall be restored
rather than replaced, wherever possible. In the event
replacement is necessary, the new material shall match
that being replaced in composition, design, color, texture
and other visual qualities, to the maximum extent possible.
(c) Multiple uses, ground floor retail emphasis, and/or storefronts.
[1] Storefronts, display windows and other ground floor
openings shall be accentuated through fenestration and
architectural treatment. Storefronts shall maintain
consistency with upper floors in terms of composition,
materials, style and detailing.
[2] Ground floor display windows shall be oriented to the
public street rather than designed with an inward, internal
orientation.
[3] Retail sales and service uses shall have large pane display
windows on the ground level. Such windows shall be
framed by the surrounding wall.
[4] The maximum size of a ground floor retail trade, retail
service or food service establishment shall not exceed
6,500 square feet of gross floor area.
[5] Solid metal security gates or solid roll-down metal
windows are prohibited.
(d) Fenestration.
[1] Fenestration shall be architecturally compatible with the
style, materials, colors and detail of a building. Windows
shall be vertically proportioned wherever possible. To the
extent possible, the location of windows on the upper
stories of a building shall be vertically aligned with the
location of windows and doors on the ground level,
including storefronts or display windows.
[2] In buildings designed in an architectural style that
normally has windows with muntins or divided lights,
these shall be required, and they must be externally
attached on both sides on the ground floor level.
[3] Windows shall be required at ground floor level with total
fenestration at ground level a minimum of 60% along all
exposed facades.
(e) Materials, colors, roofs and building details.
§ 165-30 CHATHAM CODE § 165-30
154:312
[1] All building facades shall be treated as front facades.
[2] The selection of building design elements, such as
materials, color and texture, should be compatible with the
building's style and with those details that prevail in the
Borough. Exterior building materials shall be selected to
convey a sense of dignity and permanence to the building.
Natural materials and natural colors are preferred except
in cases where architectural style dictates a more varied
color scheme. Clapboard siding, cedar shingles, Hardie
plank, stone, or brick shall be the primary exterior
material.
[3] The use of metal or glazed curtain walls, Dryvit panels,
mirrored and/or heavily tinted glass, plastic panels, thin
veneers, exposed concrete block, aluminum or vinyl siding
or other artificial materials as exterior building materials
are prohibited.
[4] The type, shape, pitch, texture and color of a roof shall be
considered as an integral part of the design of a building
and shall be architecturally compatible with the building's
style, materials, colors and details. Flat roofs are
permitted on buildings of a minimum of two stories in
height, provided all visibly exposed walls have an
articulated cornice that projects out horizontally from the
vertical building wall plane. Hip or gable roofs are
permitted where appropriate to the building type and
compatible with the surrounding area. Other types of roofs
are permitted if appropriate to the building's architecture.
[5] Architectural embellishments that add visual interest to
roofs, such as dormers, belvederes, masonry chimneys,
cupolas, clock towers and other similar elements are
encouraged, provided they are architecturally compatible
with the building.
[6] Green or vegetative roofs are strongly encouraged as is
the incorporation of any type of rooftop landscaping
features.
[7] Awnings and canopies. Fixed or retractable awnings are
permitted at ground floor level, and on upper levels where
appropriate, provided they complement a building's
architectural style, are compatible with its materials,
colors and details, and are not internally illuminated.
Canvas is the preferred material, although other
waterproofed fabrics may be considered. Metal,
aluminum, or vinyl awnings, as well as waterfall-type
awnings, are prohibited. Awnings shall not be placed so as
to conceal any significant architectural feature or detail,
§ 165-30 GARAGE SALES § 165-30
154:313
and particular attention shall be taken with selection of
the appropriate supporting structure and hardware, as
well as with the location and method by which it is
attached to the building facade. Ground-mounted supports
are prohibited. In buildings with multiple storefronts,
compatible awnings should be used as a means of unifying
the structure.
(f) Parking and access.
[1] Site plans shall balance the functional requirements of
parking with the provision of pedestrian amenities.
Transition areas between parking and commercial or
residential uses shall be designed with textured paving,
appropriate pedestrian walkways and crosswalk
treatment, landscaping and street furniture to clearly
demarcate pedestrian flows and to protect pedestrian
safety.
[2] Parking lot layout and orientation of parking with respect
to proposed buildings shall reflect pedestrian needs,
accessibility, and safety.
[3] Parking lot layout, landscaping, buffering and screening
shall prevent direct views of parked vehicles by the public,
minimize spill-over light, glare, noise or exhaust fumes
onto adjacent properties, in particular residential
properties, and provide the parking area with a reasonable
measure of shade.
[4] The interior of all parking lots shall be landscaped to
provide shade and visual relief. A minimum of one
deciduous shade tree shall be planted for every 10 parking
spaces.
(g) Streetscape elements, lighting, walls and fences, signage and
utilities.
[1] Elements of street furniture, such as benches, waste
containers, planters, bicycle racks and bollards should be
carefully selected to ensure compatibility with the
character of the area and the site. Consistency in the
location of the various elements of street furniture is
critical, for maximum effect and functional usage.
[2] Walkway design, including sidewalks, shall promote
pedestrian activity and safety within each site and
throughout the district; walkways shall be separate and
distinct from motor vehicle circulation, provide a pleasant
route for users, and promote pedestrian safety. Walkways
shall be constructed of brick, slate, colored/textured
concrete pavers or slabs, or some combination thereof that
§ 165-30 CHATHAM CODE § 165-30
154:314
is compatible with the style, materials, colors and details
of the surrounding buildings.
[3] Lighting fixtures shall be compatible with the building's
style and shall be concealed through shielding or installed
behind features to eliminate glare and spillage.
[4] Pedestrian-scaled lights shall be provided along public
street frontages and along interior pedestrian pathways.
No freestanding lights in parking areas (base plus pole)
shall exceed 16 feet in height. Pedestrian lighting shall not
exceed 12 feet tall (base plus pole).
[5] No fences or gates across access drives shall be permitted.
Fencing along the perimeter of rear and side yards shall
not exceed six feet in height. Walls and fences shall be
made of durable materials, and shall be compatible in
style, materials and color with buildings. Brick walls with a
stone or cast-stone cap are encouraged. Board-on-boardtype
wooden fences, with reinforced corners and entrance
poles, are permitted in rear and side yards only. Chain-link,
split-rail, highway-style guardrail, stockade or
contemporary security fencing such as barbed wire or
razor wire is prohibited. Landscaping and creative use of
materials are encouraged to improve the appearance of
walls.
[6] Master signage plans are required per § 165-104. Signs
affixed to the exterior of a building shall be architecturally
compatible with the style, composition, materials, colors
and details of the building. Signs shall not interfere with
door and window openings, conceal any architectural
details or obscure the composition of the facade where
they are located. Wood and painted metal are the
preferred materials for signs. Sign colors should be limited
in number and compatible with the colors of the building
facade and of nearby signs. Internally illuminated signs,
including backlit channel lettering affixed directly to a
building facade, are discouraged.
[7] Loading areas and their driveways shall be effectively
screened from adjacent properties and from the public
right-of-way through a combination of walls, fences and
landscaping. Screening and landscaping shall also
mitigate spillover glare, noise or exhaust fumes generated
by loading activities.
[8] All utilities (water, sewer, electric, phone, etc.) shall be
located underground.
F. Additional site plan/subdivision submission requirements. In addition to
the site plan, subdivision and variance checklist requirements, the
§ 165-30 GARAGE SALES § 165-30
154:315
§ 165-31. Bulk requirements.
Bulk requirements for the M-1, M-2 and M-3 Districts shall be as follows:
M-1 District M-2 District M-3 District
Maximum Height
Stories (maximum) 2.5 2.5 2.5
Stories (minimum) 2.0 None 2.0
Feet 35 40 35
Principal
building
minimum
Lot area 5,000 square
feet
5 acres 5,000 square feet
Side yards (each)
(feet)
102 252 102
Front yards (feet) 10 100 10
Rear yard buffer1
(feet)
15 25 15
Accessory
structures
Minimum side yard
(feet)
5 15 5
Minimum rear yard
(feet)
10 15 10
following additional materials are required to be submitted at the time
of initial application submission.
(1) Traffic impact statement per § 165-163B.
(2) In cases where parking variances or RSIS waivers are requested, or
where requested by the reviewing Board, a parking management
report per § 165-163C.
(3) In addition to scaled elevations of all sides of all proposed buildings
with proposed details on materials, fenestration, colors, and facade
treatments, applicants shall prepare photo simulations of the
proposed development in context and to scale as viewed from
public streets and other likely viewing locations.
(4) Community impact assessment that analyzes projected population
and employment and impacts on schools, emergency services,
water/sewer demand, and other key community services based on
the likely demographics of the proposed project. This analysis shall
be prepared by a licensed planner and be based on accepted
community impact assessment methods.
§ 165-30 CHATHAM CODE § 165-31
154:316
M-1 District M-2 District M-3 District
Maximum height
(feet)
15 15 15
Total
Development
Maximum
Lot coverage
(percent)
80% 20% 75%
NOTES:
1 Buffers are required along all lot lines between M Zones and residential
zoning districts (except where said lot lines coincide with existing
railroad rights-of-way) and all lot lines/properties in the M Zones that
abut the Passaic River. Required buffers shall consist of screening
with a minimum width of 15 feet; there shall be no debris, structures,
parking or storage permitted in the buffer area. All buffers shall be
planted and maintained with native plantings, trees, shrubs and plant
material at least five feet in height at time of planting. Depending on
the location, a fence may also be required.
2 Whenever a lot developed with nonresidential uses in the M-1 or M-3
Districts abuts a residential district (except when adjoining lot lines
coincide with existing railroad rights-of-way), all buildings shall be set
back at least 25 feet from the residential district boundary line. In the
M-2 District, this setback shall be at least 35 feet.
§ 165-32. General requirements for M-1, M-2 and M-3 Districts.
Relief from the following standards shall be in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70c of the Municipal Land Use Law.
A. Any lot may contain more than one principal building, provided that all
land coverage requirements of the chapter are met. Buildings shall be
no closer than 15 feet to one another.
B. Outdoor storage of merchandise, equipment, products and materials
relating to any business or industrial operation is permitted, subject to
the following regulations:
(1) There shall be no outdoor storage in any required front yard or side
yard.
(2) Any outdoor storage shall be contained and screened by fencing
(no vinyl or chain-link fencing permitted in any storage area visible
from any public street, adjacent residential property, or public open
space) or any combination of fencing, landscaped walls and
plantings on any side which adjoins or faces a residential district or
public street. The height of said fencing and screening shall be
equal to or greater than the height of the material stored, but not
§ 165-31 GARAGE SALES § 165-32
154:317
greater than six feet, and the height of the material so stored shall
not exceed six feet.
(3) The area devoted to outdoor storage shall not exceed 50% of the
yard in which it is located.
(4) Articles and materials so stored shall be kept in an orderly manner
at all times and shall not include any discarded or abandoned
articles or materials.
C. All buildings shall be compatibly designed whether constructed all at
one time or in stages over a period of time. All building walls facing any
street or residential district line shall be suitably finished for aesthetic
purpose with no blank walls and with architectural elements from the
front facade continued around all visible sides of a building. Building
wall and roofline offsets shall be incorporated to minimize the effect of a
single, long wall and single, long roof.
D. All areas not utilized for buildings, parking, loading, access aisles and
driveways or pedestrian walkways shall be suitably landscaped with
native trees, shrubs, hedges, ground covers, and/or grasses and shall
be maintained in good condition.
E. Shade trees shall be provided along each side of all streets, public or
private access drives, existing or proposed. Existing trees shall be
preserved and protected, to the maximum extent feasible. Shade trees
shall have a minimum caliper of 2.5 inches at time of planting and a
maximum spacing of 40 feet on center.
F. Any structure on a roof, including mechanical equipment and other
appurtenances shall be screened from view in a manner consistent with
the building's architecture. Ground-mounted HVAC or other mechanical
systems shall be suitably screened with architectural walls, fencing,
and/or landscaping.
G. No individual ground floor retail, restaurant, eating and drinking, or
personal service establishment shall exceed 6,500 square feet of gross
floor area.
H. The principal orientation of any building shall be towards and relate to
public streets; buildings shall not be oriented to front parking lots.
I. Loading areas and their access drives shall be effectively screened from
adjacent properties and from public streets through a combination of
walls, fences, and landscaping.
J. Parking areas shall be located within buildings and to the rear of
buildings and are not permitted in any front yard. The visual impact of
parking areas to adjacent properties and to public streets should be
minimized.
K. Parking structures shall be integrated into principal structures. The
exterior of any parking level(s) shall be composed primarily of brick or
§ 165-32 CHATHAM CODE § 165-32
154:318
§ 165-32.1. General design guidelines and standards for M-1, M-2
and M-3 Districts.
Modifications or exceptions to the design guidelines and standards
contained in this section may be approved by the Board, provided the
applicant has met the criteria for exceptions pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-51,
and can provide testimony that the resulting change will conform to all of
the following: satisfy the purpose and intent of this section; enhance the
development plan; and, enhance the streetscape and neighborhood.
§ 165-32.2. Additional height.
The reviewing Board may consider permitting a full third story for mixeduse
buildings in the M-1 District only in cases where all standards in
§§ 165-32 and 165-32.1 are met and the conditional use standards for
mixed-use buildings are adequately addressed in a cohesive design.
other masonry materials and shall contain at least sixty-percent solid
wall area, including architectural details and incorporation of
commercial uses to functionally and aesthetically integrate parking into
the overall development.
L. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the RSIS
requirements and the standards in §§ 165-25 and 165-82.
M. An adequate screened and enclosed area shall be provided for on-site
storage of solid waste.
A. Development plans should be evaluated in relation to the surrounding
context, including incorporation of design features to implement the
streetscape and neighborhood vision outlined in the 2014 Master Plan
Amendment. Pedestrian accessibility and the human scale shall be
emphasized through architectural elements, building setbacks, vertical
and horizontal variations/projections, front entrances accessible from
public streets, incorporation of street trees, and other development
features.
B. The use of sustainable site design and green building techniques is
encouraged, including the use of porous paving systems, as reviewed
and approved by the Borough Engineer in accordance with the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. In considering
variance requests for impervious coverage, the Board should consider
efforts to incorporate porous pavement.
C. Shared access connections between adjacent properties are
encouraged to facilitate access and to minimize the need for new curb
cuts.
D. A landscape plan identifying proposed plantings shall be prepared by a
certified landscape architect.
§ 165-32 GARAGE SALES § 165-33
154:319
§ 165-33. Minimum off-street loading.
Each nonresidential activity exceeding 10,000 square feet of gross floor
area shall provide one off-street loading and unloading space with adequate
ingress and egress from streets. Each space shall be at least 15 feet by 40
feet.
§ 165-34. Minimum off-street parking.
§ 165-35. (Reserved)
A. The off-street parking standards in §§ 165-25 and 165-82 shall be met
for specific uses identified. In addition, the following additional
minimum off-street parking standards apply:
(1) All parking for residential uses shall be in accordance with the
RSIS.
(2) Storage uses: one space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.
(3) Light manufacturing/assembly: one space per 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area.
(4) For uses with no specific parking standard, the applicant may
present and the reviewing Board/entity may accept a standard
based on the most recent ITE Parking Generation guidance or
another generally accepted source.
(5) In addition to the required calculated parking based on proposed
use(s), one space for every vehicle owned and/or operated by the
use operating from the site shall be provided.
B. Shared parking. A shared parking arrangement between compatible
uses on the same or different properties with complementary peak
parking demand periods may be acceptable, provided that
documentation is provided by a parking expert that analyzes the
feasibility of the proposed shared parking based on an analysis of the
specific uses, the proximity of the proposed parking to each use, the
peak usage periods of each use and of the combined usage of the lot,
and lot capacity to address peak parking demand. A written contractual
arrangement shall be secured for a minimum two-year period with a
renewable option between parties.
C. See § 165-82 for additional standards; mixed-use developments shall
meet the applicable standards for residential and nonresidential
development, with the strictest standard applying in instances where
such standards conflict.
§ 165-33 CHATHAM CODE § 165-35
154:320
ARTICLE VII
CONS Conservation District
[Amended 12-14-1981 by Ord. No. 21-81]
§ 165-36. Principal permitted uses on the land and in buildings.
Public purpose uses including, but not necessarily limited to, the following:
§ 165-37. Maximum building height.
No building or structure shall exceed one story or 25 feet in height, except
that works for watershed protection and facilities for water supply and
sewage disposal shall not exceed 40 feet.
§ 165-38. Yard and lot coverage requirements.
A. Forestry and natural cover, which are valuable in protecting Borough
wetlands, and bottomlands that have a high water table or are subject
to floods.
B. Borough wetlands, public park, wildlife preserve.
C. Noncommercial outdoor recreational uses.
A. Yards: For outdoor recreational facilities, for buildings and for
structures, the front yards, side yards and rear yards shall be not less
than 50 feet from all street and property lines.
B. Lot coverage: No more than 25%.
§ 165-36 GARAGE SALES § 165-38
154:321

ARTICLE VIII
AFD-1, AFD-1.1, AFD-2, AFD-3 and AFD-4 Affordable Housing
Districts
[Added 2-8-1988 by Ord. No. 3-88; 9-23-2002 by Ord. No. 02-17]
§ 165-39. Purpose.
§ 165-40. Application procedure.
A. The purpose of the AFD-1, AFD-1.1, AFD-2, AFD-3 and AFD-4 Districts
is to encourage the development of certain vacant tracts in a manner
which incorporates the best features of design and relates the type,
design and layout of residential development to the particular site, and,
at the same time, provides the realistic opportunity for lower-income
housing to be constructed in accordance with the guidelines set forth in
the Fair Housing Act as interpreted by the Council on Affordable
Housing (COAH). These districts are intended to implement the
Borough's Fair Share Plan prepared in accordance with the COAH's
rules, which plan was adopted by the Borough Council and submitted
thereafter to the COAH. Special standards and procedures applicable to
these districts only are set forth herein to expedite the production of the
lower income housing. [Amended 9-23-2002 by Ord. No. 02-17;
6-22-2015 by Ord. No. 15-0852]
B. Recognizing that low- and moderate-income housing requires the
removal of standards which may be desirable to achieve but which may
also be cost generating to a developer of lower-income housing and
thereby inhibit its production, the guidelines set forth herein are
deemed, in connection with the initial construction of said low- and
moderate-income housing and the accompanying market value housing,
to be the minimum necessary for public health, safety and welfare.
[Amended 7-26-1999 by Ord. No. 10-99]
C. After completion of the low- and moderate-income housing and the
accompanying market value housing in a development to the
satisfaction of the appropriate Borough officials, when excessive cost as
an inhibitor of the development of lower-income housing is no longer a
factor, it is determined that the public good has been served by
providing a realistic opportunity for a fair share of the region's present
and prospective needs for low- and moderate-income families. It is
further determined that upon completion of a development as above
described, the public interest will be best served in the future by
making all relevant provisions of this chapter and the Municipal Land
Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.) applicable to the market value
dwellings in the development. [Added 7-26-1999 by Ord. No. 10-99]
52.Editor's Note: This ordinance also amended the title of Art. VIII, which was formerly
AFD-1, AFD-1.1, AFD-2 and AFD-3 Affordable Housing Districts.
§ 165-39 GARAGE SALES § 165-40
154:323
§ 165-41. AFD-3 Affordable Housing Agreement.
A. The applicant shall submit all plans and documents to the Planning
Board for site plan review and approval in accordance with Article XX of
this chapter and such regulations as may from time to time be enacted
in this regard. The Planning Board shall distribute the plans to those
agencies required by law to review and/or approve development plans
and to such municipal agencies and technical advisors as the Planning
Board deems appropriate. [Amended 9-23-2002 by Ord. No. 02-17]
B. The Planning Board may, at the cost of the applicant, refer the
application to technical advisors in advance of the public hearing for
comments on the completeness of the application and other matters, in
which case said technical advisors shall report in writing on the
application and the applicant shall be provided a copy of such
comments prior to the public hearing.
C. The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-46.1 on the application. The Planning Board shall take
action on the application within 60 days from the date of submission of
a complete application for preliminary approval. If subsequent final
approval is sought, action on the final plan shall be taken by the
Planning Board within 30 days of the date that a complete application is
submitted.
D. The applicant is encouraged to submit a concept plan for informal
review by the Board pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.1 prior to the
preparation of a preliminary development plan.
E. The development plans submitted shall contain the information
required in Article XX of this chapter, unless the Planning Board waives
a particular requirement as being inapplicable or impracticable.
F. The developer shall formulate and implement a written affirmative
marketing plan acceptable to the Planning Board and conforming with
pertinent Borough regulations, if any, and the provisions of N.J.A.C.
5:92-15.1 and 5:92-15.2 which plan shall be realistically designed to
insure the persons in eligible lower-income households are informed of
the housing opportunities in the development, feel welcome to seek to
buy or rent such housing, and have the opportunity to buy or rent such
housing.
G. See also § 165-45F(8) for submission of proposed deed restrictions.
A. Permitted uses. The Affordable Housing Agreement dated December
28, 1987, between the Borough of Chatham and Chatham Land, Inc. is
incorporated by reference and made part hereof, including the zoning
limitations and restrictions set forth therein. (See Addendum 1 to
Article VIII attached hereto.)53
53.Editor's Note: The Addendum is on file in the Borough Clerk's office.
§ 165-40 CHATHAM CODE § 165-41
154:324
§ 165-42. Permitted uses.
(1) Where inconsistent or in conflict with the provisions of this chapter,
said agreement shall prevail, but in all other respects the use
provisions of this chapter shall continue to apply to the AFD-3
District.
A. Principal uses.
(1) Single-family dwellings.
(2) Garden apartments in AFD-1 and AFD-2 only subject to the
following restrictions:
(a) In AFD-1 for any type of dwelling unit; and
(b) In AFD-2 exclusively for low- and moderate-income housing
units with no more than three dwelling units per building.
(3) Townhouses, in AFD-1, AFD-1.1 and AFD-2 only. [Amended
9-23-2002 by Ord. No. 02-17)
(4) Public or private parks and playgrounds.
(5) Public or private recreation buildings and facilities.
(6) Public utilities.
(7) In the AFD-2 only, tracts which have a minimum of five contiguous
acres of land which are unconstrained by one-hundred-year
floodplains, freshwater wetlands or areas of slope exceeding a 15%
grade, the following shall apply: [Added 8-14-1995 by Ord. No.
13-95]
(a) Garden apartment buildings containing up to four inclusionary
housing units shall be permitted.
(b) Where the number of affordable housing units required to be
constructed yields a fraction, the number required shall be
rounded down to the nearest whole number.
(c) The height of each proposed structure, being not more than
2 1/2 stories or 33 feet, shall be measured from the preexisting
grade as established by a survey certified by a licensed
surveyor.
(8) Apartment houses in the AFD-1.1 and AFD-4 Districts only. [Added
9-23-2002 by Ord. No. 02-17; amended 6-22-2015 by Ord. No.
15-08]
B. Accessory uses and structures.
(1) Garages and off-street parking facilities.
§ 165-41 GARAGE SALES § 165-42
154:325
§ 165-43. Density, bulk and spacing restrictions.
(2) Storage and maintenance buildings.
(3) Customary accessory structures approved as part of the site plan,
including fences, walls, lampposts, trellises and the like.
A. Density. [Amended 9-23-2002 by Ord. No. 02-17]
(1) AFD-1: not applicable.
(2) AFD-1.1: 12.5 dwelling units per developable acre.
(3) AFD-2: 10.0 dwelling units per developable acre.
(4) AFD-4: 36.0 dwelling units per developable acre. [Added
6-22-2015 by Ord. No. 15-08]
B. Bulk restrictions. [Amended 9-23-2002 by Ord. No. 02-17]
(1) There shall be the following maximum coverage of land surface:
[Amended 6-22-2015 by Ord. No. 15-08]
Building Coverage Total Impervious Coverage
AFD-1 50% 75%
AFD-1.1 35% 60%
AFD-2 35% 60%
AFD-4 50% 75%
(2) There shall be the following maximum gross floor area ratio:
(a) AFD-1: 100%.
(b) AFD-1.1: 100%.
(c) AFD-2: 60%.
(d) AFD-4: 85%. [Added 6-22-2015 by Ord. No. 15-08]
(3) Spacing requirements.
(a) There shall be the following minimum spacing between
buildings:
[1] Front face of one building to the front, rear or side of
another building: 40 feet.
[2] Rear face of one building to the side face of another
building: 20 feet.
[3] Side face of one building to the side face of another
building: 20 feet.
§ 165-42 CHATHAM CODE § 165-43
154:326
§ 165-44. Other requirements.
[4] Building face (except garage face) to common parking
area: 10 feet.
(4) There shall be the following minimum setbacks: [Amended
9-23-2002 by Ord. No. 02-17; 6-22-2015 by Ord. No. 15-08]
AFD-1
and
AFD-4 AFD-1.1 AFD-2
Any building face to front
property line
25 30 30
Any building face to street
curb face or edge of pavement
30 35 35
Any building face to any
property side line
10 10 10
Parking area or internal
roadway to building face
(except garage face) or side
line
10 10 10
Any building face to any rear
property line
25 25 25
A. Building height. [Amended 9-23-2002 by Ord. No. 02-17;
4-26-2010 by Ord. No. 10-09]
(1) No building shall be more than three stories or 42 feet in height in
the AFD-1 District.
(2) No building shall be more than three stories, excluding basements
used solely for parking, storage or utilities, nor may such building
exceed 40 feet in height, in the AFD-1.1 District and 42 feet in
height in the AFD-4 District. [Amended 6-22-2015 by Ord. No.
15-08]
(3) No building shall be more than 2 ½ stories or 35 feet in height in
the AFD-2 and the AFD-3 Districts.
B. Parking. Parking shall be provided in strict conformance with the
Residential Site Improvement Standards. [Amended 9-23 2002 by
Ord. No. 02-17]
C. Entrances. All dwelling units shall for fire safety have two means of
egress to ground level and, except for lower-income housing, shall have
at least two private outside entrances, one of which shall face the front
property line. This provision shall not apply to dwellings in the AFD-1.1
Zone, as long as the dwellings comply with the State Construction Code
in effect at the time of application for development. [Amended
9-23-2002 by Ord. No. 02-17]
§ 165-43 GARAGE SALES § 165-44
154:327
D. Shape of lots. As far as feasible, all lots shall be of regular shape and
four-sided, and all property lines shall be at right angles and/or parallel.
E. Basements and attics. No rooms intended for human habitation shall be
located in a basement or attic. However, all buildings should, where
feasible, have basements and attics.
F. Heat and utilities. Each dwelling unit shall have its own heating system
and shall constitute a separate, independent unit for metering and all
other purposes with respect to all required utilities and similar
conveniences. No common or central laundry facility shall serve more
than one building.
G. Yards, patios or courts. Each dwelling unit, except for low- and
moderate-income housing units or those in multifamily dwellings,
including apartment houses, shall have at least one individual private
yard area, open patio or court adjoining the unit, said area to have a
width of at least 15 feet and an area of at least 150 square feet, being
effectively screened in order to provide a reasonable degree of privacy.
[Amended 9-23-2002 by Ord. No. 02-17]
H. Aesthetic congruity. As far as feasible, buildings, houses and
townhouses containing low- and/or moderate-income housing shall be
aesthetically congruous and composed of like materials in exterior
facade and landscaping with the rest of the development.
I. Storage space. A storage space with separate access containing a
minimum of 70 square feet of floor area and a minimum volume of 500
cubic feet shall be provided for each dwelling unit, except for low- and
moderate-income units, said storage space to be in the basement of the
building in which the unit is located, in a garage serving the unit (but
not usurping the ten-by-twenty-foot space for a vehicle), attached to the
unit, or in another accessory building.
J. Garbage. Adequate, screened space must be provided for on-site
storage of garbage retention until pickup.
K. Paved Areas. All off-street parking and driveways shall conform to the
Residential Site Improvement Standards. [Amended 9-23-2002 by
Ord. No. 02-17]
L. Article XII provisions. Unless inconsistent herewith, the provisions of
Article XII (§ 165-76 et seq.) of this chapter shall apply to affordable
housing.
M. Common recreational areas. If in any development there is any
multifamily dwelling, including an apartment house, garden apartment
or townhouse cluster having more than three units, there shall be in
such development at a location convenient to such units a space of 450
square feet in a usable configuration and location for play lots or
shaded area with benches for the elderly or other space for recreation
which is suitable to the development. In AFD-1.1 only, such area of 450
§ 165-44 CHATHAM CODE § 165-44
154:328
square feet may be located within a required side or rear yard.
[Amended 9-23-2002 by Ord. No. 02-17]
N. Minimum floor area. Minimum floor areas for dwelling units shall be:
(1) Studio: 450 square feet.
(2) One-bedroom: 600 square feet.
(3) Two-bedroom: 750 square feet.
(4) Three-bedroom: 900 square feet.
(5) Four-bedroom: 1,100 square feet.
O. Building length. No building, including townhouse cluster, shall on any
one side, whether or not that side is indented or varied, have a length of
more than 200 feet.
P. Television antennas. There shall be no more than one television antenna
per building or townhouse cluster.
Q. Laundry facilities. Laundry facilities may be provided for in each
building with dwelling unit(s) and in each townhouse cluster. No
outside clothes drying will be allowed in buildings or townhouse
clusters of more than two dwelling units.
R. Screening of parking and common facilities. Landscaping shall be
provided as needed to shield parking areas and other common facilities,
including garages and storage area, from the view of adjoining
properties and streets.
S. Landscaping.
(1) Provisions shall be made for the preservation of existing trees and
natural features to the extent feasible. The development shall be
landscaped with the following plantings:
(a) Grass or ground cover over all disturbed areas;
(b) Shade trees of one and 1.5 to 2.0 caliper at planting at fifty-foot
intervals along all streets and common parking areas;
(c) Conifers at least three feet high at planting in buffer areas that
have been disturbed or do not have existing plants providing
adequate screening;
(d) Shrubs of at least 18 inches high at planting along the front
facade of each building; and
(e) One additional shade tree of a caliper of 1.5 to two inches at
planting or one conifer at least six feet high at planting for
each dwelling unit, said shade tree or conifer to be planted in
common areas or yards, as may be appropriate.
§ 165-44 GARAGE SALES § 165-44
154:329
§ 165-45. Affordable housing requirements for inclusionary
developments.
(2) Choice locations of plantings shall be approved by the Planning
Board, which in so doing may rely upon recommendations of the
Shade Tree Commission. All plantings shall be of nursery stock,
balled and burlapped, and shall be healthy and free of disease.
T. After completion of any market-value dwelling in any affordable
housing district to the satisfaction of the appropriate Borough officials,
the following shall be applicable to such dwelling: [Added 7-26-1999
by Ord. No. 10-99]
(1) All relevant provisions of this chapter and the Municipal Land Use
Law shall henceforth be applicable to such market-value dwelling.
(2) The owner of any such market-value dwelling shall have any and all
rights to variances and any other relief which can be granted by the
Borough Board of Adjustment or Borough Planning Board under
the provisions of the Municipal Land Use Law and this chapter.
A. Any residential development shall comply with the affordable housing
set-aside requirement set forth at § 69-4 of this Code. [Amended
9-23-2002 by Ord. No. 02-17; 6-22-2015 by Ord. No. 15-08;
10-24-2016 by Ord. No. 16-11]
B. Bedroom distribution.
(1) All low- and moderate-income housing units contained within any
inclusionary development shall provide a bedroom mix in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:92-14.1 which are as
follows:
(a) At a minimum, 35% of all low- and moderate-income units shall
be two-bedroom units; and
(b) At a minimum, 15% of all low- and moderate-income units shall
be three-bedroom units; and
(c) No more than 20% of all low- and moderate-income units may
be studio units.
(2) These requirements shall be subject to any amendments to such
section (N.J.A.C. 5:92-14.1) which may occur from time to time.
C. Affordability range. All low- and moderate-income housing units
contained within any inclusionary development which are offered for
sale shall be priced according to the ranges set forth in N.J.A.C.
5:92-13.2(b) which is as follows:
For every 20 low- and moderate-income units:
Low income: 1 unit at 40 through 42.5 percent of region's median
income
§ 165-44 CHATHAM CODE § 165-45
154:330
3 units at 42.6 through 47.5 percent of region's
median income
6 units at 47.6 through 50 percent of region's
median income
Moderate
income:
1 unit at 50.1 through 57.5 percent of region's
median income
1 unit at 57.6 through 64.5 percent of region's
median income
1 unit at 64.6 through 68.5 percent of region's
median income
1 unit at 68.6 through 72.5 percent of region's
median income
2 units at 72.6 through 77.5 percent of region's
median income
4 units at 77.6 through 80 percent of region's
median income
D. Other regulations. The provisions of Part II, Chapter 69, Affordable
Housing, shall apply to any inclusionary development under this
Chapter 165, Article VIII. [Added 6-10-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1254]
54.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection D, Affordability controls;
Subsection E, Initial pricing; Subsection F, Eligibility; Subsection G, Procedures for resale;
and Subsection H, regarding foreclosure.
§ 165-45 GARAGE SALES § 165-45
154:331

ARTICLE IX
WHPA Well Head Protection Areas
[Added 3-8-2004 by Ord. No. 04-04]
§ 165-46. Statement of findings.
The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Chatham (the Borough) find that:
§ 165-47. Purpose.
The purpose of the addition of Article IX, hereinafter described as "this
article," to the Chatham Borough Land Development Ordinance, is to
protect the public health, safety and welfare through the protection of
the groundwater resources underlying the Borough to ensure a supply of
safe and healthful drinking water for the present and future generations
of local residents, employees and the general public in the Borough, as
A. The groundwater underlying the Borough is a major source of existing
and future water supplies, including drinking water. The groundwater
underlying the Borough lies within the Buried Valley Aquifer Systems of
the Central Passaic River Basin, which are designated as a "sole source"
aquifer under Section 1424(e) of the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act of
1974.
B. The groundwater aquifers are integrally connected with, are recharged
by, and flow into the surface waters, lakes and streams, which also
constitute a major source of water for drinking, commercial and
industrial needs.
C. Accidental spills and discharges of toxic and hazardous materials may
threaten the quality of these groundwater supplies and related water
sources.
D. Contaminated water from any source is a detriment to the health,
welfare and comfort of the residents of the Borough, and other users of
these water resources.
E. Spills or discharges of hazardous substances or hazardous wastes may
contaminate or pollute water. As a preventive measure, the proximity of
such materials to sources of water supplies, such as public community
wells, should be restricted so that there will be sufficient time to find
and clean up such spills or discharges before water supplies become
contaminated.
F. The Chatham Borough Planning Board, after careful consideration of
the need for well head protection in a form similar to the Model
Municipal Well Head Protection Ordinance (developed, with the
assistance of the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection,
by the Passaic Valley groundwater Protection Committee of the Passaic
River Coalition), has amended the Borough Master Plan to include well
head protection area zoning.
§ 165-46 GARAGE SALES § 165-47
154:333
well as users of these water supplies outside the Borough. Areas of land
surrounding each public community well, known as Well Head Protection
Areas (WHPAs), from which contaminants may move through the ground to
be withdrawn in water taken from the well, have been delineated. Through
regulation of land use, physical facilities and other activities within these
areas, the potential for groundwater contamination can be reduced. The
purpose of the regulations contained in this article is to prevent the
migration of potential pollutants from areas within a WHPA into
groundwater that is withdrawn from a public community well.
§ 165-48. Statutory authority.
The Borough of Chatham is empowered to regulate these activities under
the provisions of the New Jersey Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq., which authorizes each municipality to plan and regulate land use
to secure a safe and adequate drinking water supply for its residents. The
Board of Health of the Borough has autonomous power granted by the
State Legislature to develop this article to protect public health, safety
and welfare, as set forth in the New Jersey Local Boards of Health Law,
N.J.S.A. 26:3-1 et seq., and the New Jersey County Environmental Health
Act, N.J.S.A. 26:3A2-21 et seq.
§ 165-49. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY — The Planning Board or the Board of
Adjustment, whichever has jurisdiction in a particular matter, acting after
consultation with the Board of Health, with all of the powers delegated,
assigned, or assumed by them according to statute or ordinance.
APPLICANT — Person applying to the Board of Health, Planning Board, or
the Construction Office proposing to engage in an activity that is regulated
by the provisions of this article, and that would be located within a
regulated Well Head Protection Area.
AQUIFER — A formation, group of formations, or part of a formation that
contains sufficient saturated permeable rock, sand, or gravel which is
capable of storing and transmitting usable quantities of water to wells and
springs.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES PERFORMANCE STANDARDS —
Performance or design standards established to minimize the risk of
contaminating groundwater or surface waters while managing the use,
manufacture, handling or storage of hazardous substances or hazardous
wastes.
CONTAMINATION — The presence of any harmful or deleterious
substances in the water supply.
DEVELOPMENT — The carrying out of any construction, reconstruction,
alteration of surface or structure or change of land use or intensity of use.
§ 165-47 CHATHAM CODE § 165-49
154:334
DISCHARGE — Any intentional or unintentional action or omission, unless
pursuant to and in compliance with the conditions of a valid and effective
federal or state permit, resulting in the releasing, spilling, pumping,
pouring, emitting, emptying or dumping of a hazardous substance into the
waters or lands located within the Borough or into waters outside the
jurisdiction of the Borough when damage may result to the lands, waters or
natural resources within the jurisdiction of the Borough.
GROUNDWATER — Water contained in interconnected pores of a saturated
zone in the ground, also known as "well water." A saturated zone is a volume
of ground in which the voids in the rock or soil are filled with water at a
pressure greater than atmospheric.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE — Any substance designated under 40 CFR
116 pursuant to Section 311 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act,
33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq., the Spill Compensation and Control Act, N.J.S.A.
58:10-23.11 et seq., or Section 4 of the New Jersey Water Pollution Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10A-1 et seq. Substances listed include petroleum,
petroleum products, pesticides, solvents and other substances.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any solid waste that is defined or identified as
a hazardous waste pursuant to the Solid Waste Management Act, N.J.S.A.
13:1E-1 et seq., N.J.A.C. 7:26-8, or 40 CFR Part 261.
MAXIMUM CONTAMINANT LEVEL — The maximum permissible level of a
contaminant in water which is delivered to any user of a public community
water system.
NJDEP — New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
PERSON — Any individual, public or private corporation, limited liability
company, partnership, firm, association, owner or operator, political
subdivision of this state, and any state, federal or interstate agency or an
agent or employee thereof.
POLLUTED WATER — In the content of drinking water, water is polluted
when a pollutant is present in excess of a maximum contaminant level or
bacteriological limit established by law or regulation.
POTENTIAL POLLUTANT SOURCE (PPS) — Activity or land use which may
be a source of a pollutant that has the potential to move into groundwater
withdrawn from a well. For the purposes of this article potential pollutant
sources are defined in § 165-52.
PUBLIC COMMUNITY WATER SYSTEM — A public water system providing
to a residential population, such as a municipality or a subdivision, water
for human consumption through pipes or other constructed conveyances,
if such system has at least 15 service connections used by year-round
residents, or which regularly serves at least 25 year-round residents.
PUBLIC COMMUNITY WELL — A public water supply well which is a part
of a public community water system.
SIC — Standard Industrial Classification.
§ 165-49 GARAGE SALES § 165-49
154:335
SOLE-SOURCE AQUIFER — Any drinking water aquifer upon which more
than 50% of a population group depends and for which there is no
practicable or affordable alternate water supply, as certified by the United
States Environmental Protection Agency.
TIME OF TRAVEL (TOT) — The average time that a volume of water will
take to travel in the saturated zone from a given point to a pumping well.
TIER 1 WELL HEAD PROTECTION AREA — That area of land within a
WHPA from which groundwater may enter the well within two years. (See
maps referenced under § 165-50.)
TIER 2 WELL HEAD PROTECTION AREA — That area of land within a
WHPA from which groundwater may enter the well within five years. (See
maps referenced under § 165-50.)
TIER 3 WELL HEAD PROTECTION AREA — That area of land within a
WHPA from which groundwater may enter the well within 12 years. (See
maps referenced under § 165-50.)
WELL — A structure by use of which groundwater may be extracted from
the ground.
WELL HEAD — The well borehole and appurtenant equipment.
WELL HEAD PROTECTION AREA (WHPA) — An area described in plan view
around a well, from which groundwater flows to the well and groundwater
pollution, if it occurs, may pose a significant threat to the quality of water
withdrawn from the well.
WHPA — Well Head Protection Area.
§ 165-50. Establishment of Well Head Protection Areas and Maps.
A. Well Head Protection Areas and Maps: [Amended 8-8-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-06]
(1) The delineations of Well Head Protection Areas for public
community wells, as established by the New Jersey Geological
Survey of the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection,
are hereby incorporated herein and made a part of this article.
(2) The delineations of the Well Head Protection Areas located within
the Borough of Chatham are hereby established as shown on the
map entitled "Well Head Protection Area Overlay Zoning District of
the Borough of Chatham" dated December 15, 2014 and as
amended, which map is attached hereto and made a part of this
Chapter. The Official Well Head Protection Map shall be identified
by the signature of the Mayor, attested by the Borough Clerk and
bearing the seal of the Borough under the following words: "This is
to certify that this is the Official Well Head Protection Area Overlay
Zoning District Map of the Borough of Chatham referred to in
Section 165-150 of the Borough Code of the Borough of Chatham,
New Jersey" together with the date of adoption. All notations,
references and other information shown on said map are
§ 165-49 CHATHAM CODE § 165-50
154:336
§ 165-51. Regulation of Well Head Protection Areas for public
community wells.
incorporated by reference herein and made a part hereof. The map
is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk's office.
(3) If, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the
delineations established by the New Jersey Geological Survey of
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, changes
are made to the delineations of the Well Head Protection Areas
located within the Borough, such changes shall be made on the
Official Well Head Protection Map promptly after the amendment
has been approved by the Mayor and Council, together with an
entry on as follows: "On (date), by official action of the Mayor and
Council, the following change(s) were made in the Official Well
Head Protection Area Overlay Zoning District Map: (brief
description of the nature of the change)", which entry shall be
signed by the Mayor and attested by the Borough Clerk.
(4) Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the Well Head
Protection Area Overlay Zoning District Map which may from time
to time be published, the Official Well Head Protection Area
Overlay Zoning District Map shall be located in the office of the
Borough Clerk and shall be the final authority as to the current
delineations of the Well Head Protection Areas located within the
Borough.
(5) Said map shall be considered superimposed over any other
established zoning district. Land in a Well Head Protection Area
may be used for any purpose permitted in the underlying district,
subject to the additional restrictions set forth in this article.
B. Assignment of restrictions within Well Head Protection Areas.
Properties located wholly or partially within a single Well Head
Protection Area shall be governed by the restrictions applicable to that
Well Head Protection Area. Properties located in two Well Head
Protection Areas shall be governed by the restrictions applicable to the
Well Head Protection Area which is closest to the well head.
A. The administrative authority (defined in § 165-49) shall administer the
provisions of this article.
B. Any applicant for a permit requesting a change in land use or activity,
other than a land use or activity involving a lot containing an existing
one-family residence, which is subject to review under the provisions of
the Municipal Land Use Law and pertinent regulations of the Code of
the Borough of Chatham, and which is located within a WHPA as
delineated in § 165-50, and which involves a potential pollutant source
(PPS), as listed in § 165-52, shall comply with the requirements of this
article.
§ 165-50 GARAGE SALES § 165-51
154:337
§ 165-52. Potential pollutant sources listed.
The following are major and minor potential pollutant sources (PPS) subject
to the requirements of this article. This listing is consistent with the New
Jersey Safe Drinking Water Act Regulations at N.J.A.C. 7:10-11.7 through
7:10-12.12.
C. Any applicant for a permit requesting a change in land use or activity,
which is subject to the requirements of this article, shall file an
operations and contingency plan, as required by § 165-54, with the
administrative authority. No permit that allows a change in land use or
activity, which is subject to the requirements of this article, shall be
granted unless an operations and contingency plan for the proposed
change has been approved by the administrative authority. Any plan
approved by the administrative authority shall be kept on file in the
office of the Borough Construction Official, and it shall be available to
the public for inspection.
D. Any change in land use or activity that introduces a major or minor
potential pollutant source (PPS), as listed in § 165-52, shall be
prohibited within a Tier 1 WHPA.
E. Any change in land use or activity which introduces a major PPS, as
listed in § 165-52, shall be prohibited within a Tier 2 WHPA.
F. Any change in land use or activity that involves any PPS, as listed in
§ 165-52, within any WHPA, which is not prohibited pursuant to
§ 165-51D or E, shall comply with the best management practices
performance standards described in § 165-53.
G. This article is supplementary to other laws and ordinances in this
municipality. Where this article or any portion thereof imposes a
greater restriction than is imposed by other regulations, the provisions
of this article shall take precedence.
A. Major potential pollutant sources (PPS) include:
(1) Permanent storage or disposal of hazardous wastes, industrial or
municipal sludge or radioactive materials, including solid waste
landfills.
(2) Collection and transfer facilities for hazardous wastes, solid wastes
that contain hazardous materials, and radioactive materials.
(3) Any use or activity requiring the underground storage of a
hazardous substance or waste in excess of an aggregate total of 50
gallons.
(4) Underground fuel and chemical storage and oil tanks regulated by
NJDEP under provisions of the Underground Storage of Hazardous
Substances Act (N.J.S.A. 58:10A-21 et seq.).
§ 165-51 CHATHAM CODE § 165-52
154:338
(5) Aboveground storage facility for a hazardous substance or waste
with a cumulative capacity greater than 2,000 gallons.
(6) Any industrial treatment facility lagoon.
(7) Any facility with a SIC Code number included under the New Jersey
Safe Drinking Water Act Regulations at N.J.A.C. 7:10A-1.14, Table
II(N), with a toxicity number of II or greater. (See Appendix A.)55
(8) Automotive service center (repair and maintenance).
(9) Landfill.
(10) Dry-cleaning facility.
(11) Road salt storage facility.
(12) Cemetery.
(13) Highway maintenance yard.
(14) Truck, bus, locomotive maintenance yard.
(15) Site for storage and maintenance of heavy construction equipment
and materials.
(16) Site for storage and maintenance of equipment and materials for
landscaping.
(17) Livestock operation.
(18) Quarrying and/or mining facility.
(19) Asphalt and/or concrete manufacturing facility.
(20) Junkyard/auto recycling and scrap metal facility.
(21) Residential or agricultural motor fuel in NJDEP exempted
underground storage tanks (i.e., under 1,000 gallons).
(22) Oil and hazardous substance pipelines as defined by Chapter 189
(see conditions in § 165-148.3). [Added 8-14-2017 by Ord. No.
17-09]
B. Minor potential pollutant sources (PPS) include:
(1) Underground storage of hazardous substance or waste of less than
50 gallons.
(2) Underground heating oil storage tank with a capacity of less than
2,000 gallons.
(3) Sewage treatment facility.
55.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Borough Clerk's office.
§ 165-52 GARAGE SALES § 165-52
154:339
§ 165-53. Best management practices performance standards.
Any applicant proposing any change in land use or activity that involves any
PPS, as listed in § 165-52, which would be located either wholly or partially
within any WHPA, shall comply with and operate in a manner consistent
with the following best management practices performance standards:
(4) Sanitary sewer system, including sewer line, manhole, or pump
station. (See conditions in § 165-52C.)
(5) Industrial waste line. (See conditions in § 165-52C.)
(6) Septic leaching field.
(7) Facility requiring a groundwater discharge permit issued by the
NJDEP pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:14A et seq.
(8) Stormwater retention-recharge basin.
(9) Dry well. (See conditions in § 165-52C.)
(10) Storm water line. (See conditions in § 165-52C.)
(11)Waste oil collection, storage and recycling facility.
(12) Agricultural chemical bulk storage and mixing or loading facility
including crop dusting facilities.
(13) Aboveground storage of hazardous substance or waste in
quantities of less than 2,000 gallons.
C. Conditions:
(1) Sanitary sewer lines, industrial waste lines and storm water lines
may be located no closer than 100 feet to a regulated well, and only
if they are constructed of watertight construction (that is steel,
reinforced concrete, cast iron, PVC or other suitable material).
(2) Manholes and/or connections to a sanitary sewer system are
prohibited within 100 feet of a regulated well.
(3) Dry wells dedicated to roof runoff and serving commercial or
industrial properties with SIC codes not listed in Appendix A56 may
be located no closer than 100 feet to a regulated well.
A. All portions or areas of a facility in which hazardous substances or
hazardous wastes are stored, processed, manufactured or transferred
outdoors, shall be designed so that the discharges of hazardous
substances will be prevented from overflowing, draining, or leaching
into the groundwater or surface waters.
56.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Borough Clerk's office.
§ 165-52 CHATHAM CODE § 165-53
154:340
B. Outdoor storage, dispensing, loading, manufacturing or processing
areas of hazardous substances or hazardous wastes must be protected
from precipitation, stormwater flows or flooding.
C. Wherever hazardous substances are stored, processed, manufactured
or transferred outdoors, the design features shall include secondary
containment and/or diversionary structures which may include but not
be limited to:
(1) Containers, dikes, berms or retaining walls sufficiently
impermeable to contain spilled hazardous substances, for the
duration of a spill event.
(2) Curbing.
(3) Gutters, culverts and other drainage systems.
(4) Weirs, booms and other barriers.
(5) Lined diversion ponds, lined lagoons and lined retention basins,
holding tanks, sumps, slop tanks and other collecting systems.
(6) Drip pans.
D. Secondary containment and/or diversionary systems, structure or
equipment must meet the following standards:
(1) The system must block all routes by which spilled hazardous
substances could be expected to flow, migrate, or escape into the
groundwater or surface waters.
(2) The system must have sufficient capacity to contain or divert the
largest probable single discharge that could occur within the
containment area, plus an additional capacity to compensate for
any anticipated normal accumulation of rainwater.
(3) In order to prevent the discharge of hazardous substances into
groundwater, all components of the system shall be made of or
lined with impermeable materials sufficient to contain the
substance for the duration of a spill event. Such material or liner
must be maintained in an impermeable condition.
(4) No manufacturing area, processing area, transfer area, dike
storage area, or other storage area, or secondary containment/
diversion system appurtenant thereto shall drain into a
watercourse, or into a ditch, sewer, pipe or storm drain that leads
directly or indirectly into a surface or subsurface disposal area,
unless provision has been made to intercept and treat any spilled
hazardous substances in an NJDEP-approved industrial wastewater
treatment or pretreatment facility, or other NJDEP-approved
facility.
§ 165-53 GARAGE SALES § 165-53
154:341
§ 165-54. Operations and contingency plan.
§ 165-55. Enforcement.
A prompt investigation shall be made by the appropriate personnel of the
Board of Health of the Borough of any person or entity believed to be in
violation hereof. If, upon inspection, a condition which is in violation of this
article is discovered, the Borough may take such corrective action and seek
fines or other penalties against the violator as are described in §§ 165-172
and 165-173 of this chapter. The violation of any section or subsection of
(5) Catchment basins, lagoons and other containment areas that may
contain hazardous substances shall not be located in a manner that
would subject them to flooding by natural waterways.
E. Stormwater shall be managed so as to prevent contamination of
groundwater, and so as to be in accordance with applicable laws and
regulations of the State of New Jersey and of the Borough.
A. Any applicant proposing any change in land use or activity that involves
any PPS, as listed in § 165-52, that would be located either wholly or
partially within any WHPA shall submit an operations and contingency
plan to the administrative authority. This operations and contingency
plan shall inform the administrative authority about the following
aspects of the proposal:
(1) Types of PPS proposed for the site;
(2) Types and quantities of hazardous substances or hazardous wastes
that may be used or stored on site;
(3) Means to be employed to contain or restrict the spillage or
migration of hazardous substances or hazardous wastes from the
site into groundwater;
(4) Means to be used to contain or remediate accidental spillage of
such materials;
(5) Means to notify the administrative authority about any accidental
spillage of such materials;
(6) Demonstration that the proposed use and/or activity would employ,
to the maximum extent possible, best management practices
performance standards as set forth in § 165-53, to protect
groundwater quality in the WHPA and minimize the risk of potential
groundwater contamination.
B. The administrative authority shall review and shall approve or reject
any operations and contingency plan prior to approving or denying the
application for a land use change or activity.
C. Any operations and contingency plan submitted shall be available for
public review and comment.
§ 165-53 CHATHAM CODE § 165-55
154:342
this article shall constitute a separate and distinct offense independent of
the violation of any other section or subsection, or of any order issued
pursuant to this article.
§ 165-55 GARAGE SALES § 165-55
154:343

ARTICLE X
Historic District Preservation
[Added 7-25-1988 by Ord. No. 15-88; amended in its entirety
9-14-2000 by Ord. No. 14-2000]
§ 165-56. Purpose and objectives.
The purpose and objectives of this article are to assist implementation of
the historic preservation element of the Master Plan, to provide guidance
in achieving preservation of historic resources in the designated historic
district and to advance the following public purposes:
§ 165-57. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DEMOLITION — The partial or total razing or destruction of a historic site
or any improvement within a historic district.
EMERGENCY REPAIRS — Immediate repairs required in order to preserve
the continued habitability of the structure and/or the health and safety of its
occupants or others.
A. To safeguard the numerous historic buildings located within the Main
Street Historic District so that the architectural and cultural heritage
they reflect is preserved.
B. To encourage new construction or reconstruction which is compatible
in scale and design with existing structures and in keeping with the
character of historic districts and sites.
C. To promote the use of historic districts and historic sites for the
education, pleasure and welfare of the citizens of the Borough and its
visitors and to promote civic pride in the Borough's historic resources.
D. To foster private reinvestment in historic districts and sites and balance
the purposes of historic preservation with current needs.
E. To encourage preservation of sites of historic, archaeological, cultural,
social, and architectural significance.
F. To encourage the continued use of historic sites and structures in
historic districts and to facilitate their appropriate reuse.
G. To maintain and promote an appropriate and harmonious setting for
existing historic resources within the Borough.
H. To recognize and preserve historic resources in the Borough as an
essential element of municipal character and identity which contributes
to the reputation of Chatham Borough as a place of beauty and
architectural value.
§ 165-56 GARAGE SALES § 165-57
154:345
HISTORIC DISTRICT — One or more historic sites and intervening or
surrounding property significantly affecting or affected by the quality and
character of the historic site or sites.
HISTORIC PRESERVATION REVIEW REPORT — A written report issued
by the Commission pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-111 describing its review
of a proposed change to any property within a historic district or on a
historic site, which change has been referred to the Commission under the
provisions of § 165-62 of this chapter.
HISTORIC SITE — Any real property, man-made structure, natural object
or configuration or any portion or group of the foregoing which have been
formally designated in the Master Plan as being of historical,
archaeological, cultural, scenic or architectural significance.
MINOR APPLICATION FOR A PERMIT PERTAINING TO HISTORIC SITES
OR PROPERTY IN HISTORIC DISTRICTS — Any application referred,
pursuant to the provisions of § 165-62 of this chapter, by the permitting
official to the Commission, involving property in a historic district or on
a historic site, which does not, under the provisions of the said § 165-62,
require the making of a historic preservation review report. Minor
applications shall include, among other types of proposed work, requests
for approval of fences, lighting, paving or streetscape work, including
signage.57
ORDINARY MAINTENANCE AND REPAIRS — Repair of any deterioration,
wear or damage to the exterior of a structure or any part thereof in order
to return the same as nearly as practicable to its condition prior to the
occurrence of such deterioration, wear or damage with in-kind material and
quality workmanship. Ordinary maintenance should, if possible, include inkind
replacement of historic exterior elements or accessory hardware, using
the same materials and workmanship and having the same appearance.
PERMITTING OFFICIAL — The administrative officer or such other
municipal official authorized by statute or ordinance to issue permits for
activities described in this chapter in historic districts or at historic sites.
REPORT — Refers to the historic preservation review report.
REMOVAL — The partial or complete moving of a structure substantially
intact.
§ 165-58. Establishment of historic districts or sites.58
There is established the Main Street Historic District delineated on a map
entitled "Main Street Historic District, A Portion of the Borough of
Chatham," which is attached to and is hereby made a part of the current
Zoning Map of the Borough of Chatham, latest revision dated February 8,
1993. The Main Street Historic District map was included as part of the
Historic Preservation Element of the Borough's Master Plan, which element
57.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
58.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 165-57 CHATHAM CODE § 165-58
154:346
was approved by the Borough Planning Board on February 5, 1992, and
renewed in the 2000 reexamination report.59
§ 165-59. Historic Preservation Commission.
A. Responsibilities. The Historic Preservation Commission shall have the
following duties and responsibilities:
(1) To prepare a survey of historic sites of the Borough, pursuant to
criteria identified in the survey report.
(2) To make recommendations to the Planning Board on the historic
preservation plan element of the Master Plan and on the
implications for preservation of historic sites of any other Master
Plan elements.
(3) To advise the Planning Board on the inclusion of historic sites in the
recommended capital improvement program.
(4) To participate in the Technical Coordinating Committee and advise
the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-110.
(5) To provide Historic Preservation Review Reports, other writings
and oral testimony, pursuant to § 165-62 of this chapter, on the
application of the Zoning Ordinance provisions concerning historic
preservation.
(6) To carry out such other advisory, educational and informational
functions as will promote historic preservation in the Borough.
B. Establishment.
(1) Members. The Historic Preservation Commission, (hereinafter
referred to as "the Commission"), previously established by
ordinance and appointed by the Mayor, is hereby continued
consistent with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-107 et seq. The Commission shall
consist of five regular members and two alternate members.
Members shall serve without compensation. At least one member
shall be designated of each of the following classes:
(a) Class A: a person who is knowledgeable in building design and
construction or architectural history and who may reside
outside the Borough.
(b) Class B: a person who is knowledgeable or with a
demonstrated interest in local history and who may reside
outside the Borough.
59.Editor's Note: The map depicting the Main Street Historic District is on file in the
Borough Clerk's office.
§ 165-58 GARAGE SALES § 165-59
154:347
(c) Class C: citizens of the Borough who shall hold no other
municipal office, position or employment except for
membership on the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment. At least one Class C member, when possible,
should be the owner of commercial property within the
Borough.
(d) Alternate members shall meet the qualifications of Class C
members. At the time of appointment, alternate members shall
be designated as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." Of
the five regular members, a total of at least one less than a
majority shall be of Classes A and B.
(2) Terms.
(a) There shall be no change in the term of office of those
members serving on the Commission at the time this chapter
becomes effective.
(b) Notwithstanding any other provision herein, the term of any
member common to the Commission and the Planning Board
shall be for the term of membership on the Planning Board;
and the term of any member common to the Commission and
the Board of Adjustment shall be for the term of membership
on the Board of Adjustment.
(c) A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall
be filled within 60 days of the unexpired term only.
(3) Alternates. The alternate members may participate in discussions
of the proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or
disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall not be delayed in
order that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate
member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which
alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
(4) Rules of the Commission.
(a) The Commission shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman
from its members and select a Secretary who may or may not
be a member of the Commission or a municipal employee.
(b) The Secretary shall keep minutes and records of all meetings
and proceedings, including voting records, attendance,
resolutions, findings, determinations and decisions. All such
material shall be public records.
(c) All meetings shall comply with the Open Public Meetings Act
(N.J.S.A. 10:4-7 et seq.).
(d) No member of the Commission shall be permitted to act on any
matter in which he has, either directly or indirectly, any
personal or financial interest. Mere ownership or residence in
§ 165-59 CHATHAM CODE § 165-59
154:348
a designated historic district and/or ownership of a designated
historic site or nondesignated site shall not be deemed a
personal or financial interest unless a member resides or owns
property within 200 feet of property which is the subject of an
application.
(e) A member of the Commission may (after public hearing if he
requests it) be removed by the governing body for cause.
(5) Meetings; quorum.
(a) The Commission shall establish and post in Borough Hall a
regular schedule of a minimum of 10 meetings per year. The
Chairman or Vice Chairman may call additional meetings when
the regular meetings are inadequate to meet the needs of its
business, to handle emergencies or to meet time constraints
imposed by law.
(b) Informational meetings. Persons considering development
applications in a historic district or at a historic site are
encouraged to request an informal informational meeting with
the Commission or its Chairman, in order to describe the
proposed external changes and receive advice on how to
proceed under the appropriate provisions of this chapter
pertaining to historic preservation. It is especially important
that any applicant who plans to demolish or remove a building
or structure bring plans for a replacement building or
structure, even though they may be preliminary, before the
Commission at the earliest possible time. Such requests may
be made either directly to the Commission, to the
administrative officer or to the permitting official. The
Commission shall hold an informational meeting as soon as
possible after receipt of a request therefor.
(c) A quorum for the transaction of business shall consist of three
of the Commission's members, including the Chairman or, in
the Chairman's absence, the Vice Chairman.
(6) Budget. The governing body shall make provision in its budget and
appropriate funds for the expenses of the Historic Preservation
Commission. The Commission members shall serve without
compensation but shall be reimbursed for expenses incurred in the
performance of official business. The Commission may employ,
contract for and fix the compensation of experts and other staff and
services, as it shall deem necessary. The Commission shall obtain
its legal counsel from the Borough Attorney at the rate of
compensation determined by the governing body. Expenditures
pursuant to this subsection shall not exceed, exclusive of gifts or
grants, the amount appropriated by the governing body for the
Commission's use.
§ 165-59 GARAGE SALES § 165-60
154:349
§ 165-60. Designation of historic sites and districts. [Amended
8-8-2016 by Ord. No. 16-06]
§ 165-61. Referral from and reporting to Planning Board and Board
of Adjustment.
The permitting official, or, if the permitting official has failed to do so,
the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment shall forward to the Historic
Preservation Commission a copy of every application submitted to either
Board for development in historic zoning districts or on historic sites
A. The Main Street Historic District, as delineated and described in the
Master Plan, is hereby designated as a historic district in the Borough.
B. The location and boundaries of the Main Street Historic District are
hereby established as shown on the map entitled "Historic Districts
Map of the Borough of Chatham," dated October 22, 2014 and as
amended, which map is attached hereto and made a part of this chapter.
The Official Historic Districts Map shall be identified by the signature of
the Mayor, attested by the Borough Clerk and bearing the seal of the
Borough under the following words: "This is to certify that this is the
Official Historic Districts Map of the Borough of Chatham referred to in
§ 165-160 of the Borough Code of the Borough of Chatham, New
Jersey," together with the date of adoption. All notations, references
and other information shown on said map are incorporated by reference
herein and made a part hereof. The map is on file in the Borough Clerk's
office.
C. If, in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and the Master
Plan, changes are made to the location and/or boundaries of historic
sites or historic districts located within the Borough, such changes shall
be made on the Official Historic Districts Map promptly after the
amendment has been approved by the Mayor and Council, together
with an entry on as follows: "On (date), by official action of the Mayor
and Council, the following change(s) were made in the Official Historic
Districts Map of the Borough of Chatham: (brief description of the
nature of the change)," which entry shall be signed by the Mayor and
attested by the Borough Clerk.
D. Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the Historic Districts
Map of the Borough of Chatham which may from time to time be
published, the Official Historic Districts Map of the Borough of
Chatham shall be located in the office of the Borough Clerk and shall be
the final authority as to the current status of historic sites and historic
districts located within the Borough.
E. Any additional designated historic sites or historic districts and/or
changes in the designation of historic sites or historic districts shall be
effectuated by amendment of this chapter in accordance with the
procedures provided for under the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq., and the procedures adopted by the Commission.
§ 165-60 CHATHAM CODE § 165-61
154:350
designated on the Zoning or Official Map or in any component element of
the Master Plan.
§ 165-62. Applications for permits in historic districts or at historic
sites.
The permitting official shall forward to the Historic Preservation
Commission any application for a permit for development or other exterior
improvements or changes in appearance in a historic district or at a historic
site which does not require submission to the Planning Board or the Board
of Adjustment for action. This shall include any application for a permit
made by a person subsequent to the approval of that person's application
by the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment, where the newly proposed
development or other exterior improvements or changes in appearance
were not presented to or decided upon by the Board.
A. The Commission shall take no action on any part of an application
which, in its determination, involves the following:
(1) A change to the interior of a building or structure; or
(2) A proposed exterior change to a building or structure which is not
visible from a public right-of-way.
(3) Ordinary maintenance and repairs, as defined herein, to the
exterior of a structure.
B. The Commission may provide its advice, which shall be conveyed
through its delegation of one of its members or staff to testify orally at
the hearing on the application, and to discuss any written explanations
which may have been submitted.
A. The Commission shall take no action on any part of an application for a
permit which, in its determination, involves the following:
(1) A change to the interior of a building or structure; or
(2) A proposed exterior change to a building or structure which is not
visible from a public right-of-way; or
(3) Ordinary maintenance and repairs, as defined herein, to the
exterior of a structure.
B. Reports.
(1) The Commission shall prepare a Historic Preservation Review
Report with respect to the following types of applications for
permits:
(a) Demolition or removal. Any application for a permit to
demolish or remove a historic site or any improvement within a
historic district, or, if the applicant has demolished or removed
any such historic site without a permit, any application for a
§ 165-61 GARAGE SALES § 165-62
154:351
building permit to replace the demolished or removed
structure, must include detailed plans, including architectural
details, for any improvement which the applicant proposes
for the replacement of the said historic site or improvement.
The Commission may disapprove of but may not prohibit the
proposed demolition or removal. In its report, the Commission
shall include a review of the proposed replacement structure.
The Commission shall submit its report to the permitting
official; it shall be submitted within 45 days after the
permitting official's referral of the application to the
Commission. If, within the forty-five-day period, the
Commission recommends against the issuance of a building
permit or recommends conditions to the building permit to
be issued, the permitting official shall deny issuance of the
building permit or include the conditions in the permit, as the
case may be. Nothing herein shall prohibit an extension of time
by mutual agreement of the applicant, the Commission and
the Planning Board. Failure to report within the forty-five-day
period or any agreed upon extension period shall be deemed
to constitute a report in favor of issuance of the permit and
without the recommendation of conditions to the permit.
(b) Other applications requiring a report. The following
applications for issuance of permits pertaining to historic sites
or property in historic districts shall also require a historic
preservation review report:
[1] Applications which involve addition to or new construction
of a principal or accessory building or structure.
[2] Applications which involve a change in the exterior
appearance of any building, improvement, site, place or
structure by addition, reconstruction, alteration or
replacement. The exterior change must be visible from a
public right-of-way and is limited to character-defining
features. When considering applications involving changes
in exterior appearance, the Commission's report shall
contain advice and recommendations for the applicant in
regard to the appropriateness of the proposed action.
(2) The Commission shall submit its report, if any, to the Planning
Board. The Planning Board shall, within 45 days after the
permitting official's referral of the application to the Commission,
submit its written recommendations to the permitting official. If,
within the forty-five-day period, the Planning Board recommends
against the issuance of a permit or recommends conditions to the
permit to be issued, the Construction Official shall deny issuance of
the permit or include the conditions in the permit, as the case may
be. Nothing herein shall prohibit an extension of time by mutual
agreement of the applicant, the Commission and the Planning
Board. Failure to report within the forty-five-day period or any
§ 165-62 CHATHAM CODE § 165-62
154:352
§ 165-63. Design criteria and guidelines.
The design criteria and guidelines therefor contained in a document
prepared by the Chatham Borough Historic Preservation Commission
entitled A Design Guidelines Manual for Rehabilitation and New
Construction in the Main Street Historic District, dated 1994, are hereby
adopted for use by the Commission, the Planning Board, the Board of
Adjustment, and any other municipal official or body in evaluating any
matter before it involving a change in any property in the Main Street
Historic District.
§ 165-64. Emergency procedures.
agreed upon extension period shall be deemed to constitute a
report in favor of issuance of the permit and without the
recommendation of conditions to the permit.
C. Minor applications. In the case of a referral by the permitting official of
an application for a permit pertaining to historic sites or historic
districts which does not require a Historic Preservation Review Report,
it shall be considered a minor application for a permit pertaining to
historic sites or property in historic districts, as defined herein. The
Chairman or a subcommittee of the Commission may act in place of the
full Commission on a minor application. If the Chairman or the
subcommittee of the Commission determines that the proposed change
will substantially affect the characteristics of the historic site or historic
district, the Chairman or subcommittee may schedule the application
for a hearing before the full Commission. The Commission, Chairman or
subcommittee may then convey to the applicant, the permitting official
or the Planning Board, orally or in writing, any suggestions that the
Commission may have in connection with the historic preservation
aspects of the activity for which the applicant is seeking a permit. The
Commission or the Planning Board shall report to the permitting official
within 45 days after his referral of the application to the Commission.
A. When a structure or improvement requires immediate repair to
preserve the continued habitability of the structure and/or the health
and safety of its occupants or others, emergency repairs may be
performed in accordance with construction codes without first
obtaining a report from the Commission, or the Commission's advice.
Under such circumstances, the repairs performed shall be only such as
are necessary to protect the health and safety of the occupants of the
structure or others and/or maintain the habitability of the structure.
B. A request for the Commission's review shall be made simultaneously
with the onset of the emergency repairs. Such emergency work shall be
permitted only if the permitting official certifies the immediate
necessity for such permit issuance. Upon notice to one member of the
Commission by telephone, personal contact or other appropriate means
of communication, at least three members of the Commission shall
§ 165-62 GARAGE SALES § 165-64
154:353
§ 165-65. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the permitting official to determine whether an
application for development involves any activity which should also be the
subject of an application to the Commission for review. If the permitting
official determines that the application is subject to review by the
Commission, then the permitting official shall so inform the applicant and
the Commission. If the permitting official is other than the administrative
officer, then the permitting official shall also inform the administrative
officer.
§ 165-66. Violations, penalties and injunctive relief.
convene as soon as possible and shall proceed to review the application
and render its advice or its report as provided in this chapter.
A. Violations.
(1) If any person shall undertake any of the activities as described
herein within a historic district or on a historic site, without first
having obtained the report and/or other approvals as set forth
herein, such person shall be deemed in violation of this Article X.
(2) Upon learning of this violation, the Borough Zoning Official shall
personally serve upon the owner of the lot on which the violation is
occurring a notice describing the violation in detail and giving the
owner 10 days to abate the violation by seeking review of the
activity by the Commission. [Amended 3-11-2013 by Ord. No.
13-04]
(3) If the owner cannot be personally served within the municipality
with the said notice, a copy shall be posted on site and a copy sent
by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner at the last
known address as it appears on the municipal tax rolls.
B. Penalties. If any person shall undertake any of the activities described
in this section within a historic district or on a historic site, without first
having obtained the report and/or other approvals as set forth herein,
and if the owner has not attempted to abate the violation by seeking
review of the activity by the Commission, the person may be required to
restore the premises to the condition existing before the activity was
undertaken. In addition, the person shall be subject to the fines and
penalties set forth in Article XXII of this chapter.
C. Injunctive relief. In the event that any action which would permanently
and adversely change a historic district, or historic site, such as
demolition or removal of a structure, is about to occur without the
owner or his agent first having obtained the report and/or other
approvals as set forth herein, the Borough Zoning Official may apply to
the Superior Court of New Jersey for such injunctive relief as is
§ 165-64 CHATHAM CODE § 165-66
154:354
§ 165-67. Appeals.
Appeals to the Zoning Board of Adjustment pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70.2
and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-72 may be taken by any interested party affected by any
order, requirement, decision or refusal of the permitting official pursuant
to a report submitted by the Commission or Planning Board, in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-111. Such appeal shall be taken within 20 days by filing
a notice of appeal with the officer from whom the appeal is taken specifying
the grounds of such appeal. The officer from whom the appeal is taken
shall immediately transmit to the Zoning Board of Adjustment all the papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
§ 165-68. Other requirements unaffected.
The requirements of this chapter shall be considered to be in addition to and
in no case shall they be interpreted as a substitute for any other approval,
permit or other action as otherwise provided for.
§ 165-69. Notice.
Notice shall be made to all historic district property owners 30 days prior
to any change(s), addition(s), deletion(s), or revocation(s) affecting the
purposes and conditions set forth herein. Notice shall be made by copy sent
by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner at the last known
address as it appears on the municipal tax rolls.
§ 165-70. Interpretation.
This article shall be liberally construed to affect the purposes set forth
herein. In the event that this article conflicts with state law, state law shall
take precedence.
necessary to prevent the permanent and adverse change in the historic
district or historic site. [Amended 3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-04]
§ 165-66 GARAGE SALES § 165-70
154:355

ARTICLE XI
Flood Damage Prevention
[Amended 12-14-1981 by Ord. No. 21-81; 8-10-1987 by Ord. No.
9-87; 9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 11-91; 2-8-1993 by Ord. No. 3-93;
10-10-1995 by Ord. No. 15-95; amended in its entirety 7-9-2001 by
Ord. No. 01-13]
§ 165-71. Statutory authorization; findings of fact; purpose;
objectives.
A. Statutory authorization. The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has
in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et seq., delegated the responsibility to local
governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote public
health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Mayor
and Council of the Borough of Chatham, of New Jersey does ordain as
follows:
B. Findings of fact.
(1) The flood hazard areas of the Borough of Chatham are subject to
periodic inundation which results in danger to life and property,
health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and
governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood
protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which
adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
(2) These flood losses are caused by increased stormwater flows due to
development, loss of wetlands to absorb flows, and the cumulative
effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazard which
increase flood heights and velocities, and when inadequately
anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses that are inadequately
floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected from flood damage
also contribute to the flood loss.
C. Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this section to promote the
public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and
private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions
designed:
(1) To protect human life and health;
(2) To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
(3) To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general
public;
(4) To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
§ 165-71 GARAGE SALES § 165-71
154:357
§ 165-72. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this article its most reasonable application.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Construction Official's or Borough
Engineer's interpretation of any provision of this section or a request for a
flood variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH, or VO zone on a
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a 1% or greater annual
chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly
defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable
and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by
ponding or sheet flow.
(5) To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and
bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;
(6) To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize
future flood blight areas;
(7) To insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an
area of special flood hazard; and
(8) To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
D. Methods of reducing flood losses. In order to accomplish its purpose,
this article includes methods and provisions for:
(1) Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health,
safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which
result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or
velocities;
(2) Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction;
(3) Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels,
and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or
channel floodwaters;
(4) Controlling, filling, grading, dredging, and other development
which may increase flood damage; and
(5) Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which
will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood
hazards in other areas.
§ 165-71 CHATHAM CODE § 165-72
154:358
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any floor area of the building which is below adjacent
ground level for all of its perimeter.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is part of the structural system of the
building, part of which is intended through its design and construction to
collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the
elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood
hazard.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building (1) built in the case of a
building in an area of special flood hazard to have the top of the elevated
floor elevated above the ground level by means of piling, columns, posts,
piers, or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water, and (2) adequately
anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during
a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. In an area of special flood
hazard, elevated building also includes a building elevated by means of fill
or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the
unimpeded movement of floodwaters. 60
FLOODPLAIN — The stream channel plus any adjacent area which may
be covered by a flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion
control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term
describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which
provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural or nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to properties and structures which
reduce or eliminate flood damage to lands, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and contents of buildings.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
A. The overflow of inland or tidal water; and/or
60.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 165-72 GARAGE SALES § 165-72
154:359
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided in which
the Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as
the Flood Insurance Rate Map and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than 0.2
foot.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for the
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than the
basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other
applicable nonelevation design requirements.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
B.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or an area preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district; 61
B.
Individually listed on a State inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
61.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 165-72 CHATHAM CODE § 165-72
154:360
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION
— A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management
regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Start of construction for other than new
construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier
Resources Act (P.L. No. 97-348) includes substantial improvements and
means the date the construction permit was issued, provided the actual
start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date.
The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction
of a structure on a site such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such
as clearing, grading and filling nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings
or piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it
include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as
garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual state of construction
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part
A. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the longest
horizontal projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
C.
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
D.
§ 165-72 GARAGE SALES § 165-72
154:361
of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a
gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which exceeds
50% of the market value of the structure before the start of construction
of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred
substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The
term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE, FLOOD or VARIANCE, FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION —
Terms used interchangeably, meaning the grant of relief from the
requirements of this article which permits construction in a manner that
would otherwise be prohibited by this article.
§ 165-73. Applicability; basis for establishing areas of special flood
hazard; violations and penalties; interpretation; disclaimer of
liability.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure.
B.
A. Lands to which this article applies. This article shall apply to all areas of
special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the Borough of Chatham.
B. Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. The areas of
special flood hazard are identified by the Federal Insurance
Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled "The
Flood Insurance Study for the Borough of Chatham," with
accompanying flood Insurance Rate Maps, the effective date of which is
July 19, 2001. This report and the accompanying maps are hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article, and they
will be on file at the Chatham Borough Clerk's office at 54 Fairmount
Avenue, Chatham, NJ 07928.
C. Penalties for noncompliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be
constructed, located, extended, converted or altered until there has
been full compliance with this section and other applicable regulations
of the United States, the State of New Jersey, Morris county and the
§ 165-72 CHATHAM CODE § 165-73
154:362
§ 165-74. Development permit; appeals.
Borough of Chatham, and until issuance and filing of all required
permits and approvals with the Construction Official or the Borough
Engineer. Violation of the provisions of this article by failure to comply
with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and
safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute
a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply
with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be subject to
the penalties in § 165-173A for each violation, and in addition shall pay
all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained
shall prevent the Borough of Chatham from taking such other lawful
action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
D. Abrogation and greater restrictions. This article is not intended to
repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. However, where this article and other ordinance,
easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever
imposes the more stringent requirements shall prevail.
E. Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this article, all
provisions shall be:
(1) Considered as minimum requirements;
(2) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
(3) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
F. Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection
required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations.
Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may
be increased by man-made or natural causes. This article does not
imply that land outside the area of special flood hazards or used
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
G. This article shall not create liability on the part of the Borough of
Chatham, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance
Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
A. Establishment of development permit. A development permit shall be
obtained before construction or development begins within any area of
special flood hazard established in § 165-73B. Application for a
development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the
Construction Official or Borough Engineer and may include, but not be
limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature,
location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or
proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and
§ 165-73 GARAGE SALES § 165-74
154:363
the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is
required:
(1) Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all structures;
(2) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has
been floodproofed;
(3) Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet
the flood proofing criteria in § 165-75B(2); and
(4) Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development.
B. Designation of the Construction Official or Borough Engineer. The
Construction Official is hereby appointed to administer and implement
this article by granting or denying development permit applications in
accordance with its provisions. If he is unable to perform these
functions for any reason, they shall be performed by the Borough
Engineer.
C. Duties and responsibilities of the Construction Official or Borough
Engineer. Duties of the Construction Official or Borough Engineer shall
include, but not be limited to:
(1) Permit review.
(a) Review any application for a development permit and grant or
deny it after considering all technical evaluations, the factors
contained in Subsection D(1)(d)[1] through [11], inclusive, and
all other relevant factors and standards specified in other
portions of this article.
(b) Review all development permits to determine that all
necessary permits have been obtained from those federal,
state or local governmental agencies from which prior
approval is required.
(c) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway, and if so, to assure that
the encroachment provisions of § 165-75C(1) are met.
(2) Use of other base flood and floodway data. When base flood
elevation data and floodway data have not been provided in
accordance with § 165-73B, Basis for establishing the areas of
special flood hazard, the Borough Construction Official or Borough
Engineer shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood
elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other
source, in order to administer § 165-75B, Specific standards,
Subsection (1), Residential construction, and Subsection (2),
Nonresidential construction.
§ 165-74 CHATHAM CODE § 165-74
154:364
(3) Information to be obtained and maintained. The Construction
Official or Borough Engineer shall:
(a) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the
structure contains a basement.
(b) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
[1] Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean
sea level); and
[2] Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
§ 165-74A(3).
(c) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this article.
(4) Alteration of watercourses.
(a) Notify adjacent communities and the Department of
Environmental Protection prior to any alteration or relocation
of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to
the Federal Insurance Administration.
(b) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so the flood-carrying
capacity is not diminished.
(5) Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. Make interpretations where
needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of
special flood hazards, for example, where there appears to be a
conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions.
The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in
Subsection D.
D. Flood variance procedure.
(1) Flood Appeal Board.
(a) There is hereby established a Flood Appeal Board or Flood
Damage Prevention Appeal Board (the terms may be used
interchangeably) to hear and decide appeals and requests for
flood variances from the requirements of this article. The
membership of the Flood Appeal Board shall consist of the
members of the Borough Planning Board.
(b) The Flood Appeal Board shall hear and decide appeals when it
is alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision or
determination made by the Construction Official or Borough
Engineer in the enforcement or administration of this article.
§ 165-74 GARAGE SALES § 165-74
154:365
(c) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Flood Appeal Board, or
any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the Mayor and
Council of the Borough. Those aggrieved by the decision of the
Mayor and Council may appeal such decision to the Superior
Court of New Jersey, Law Division.
(d) In passing upon such applications, the Flood Appeal Board
shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors,
standards specified in other portions of this article, and:
[1] The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands
to the injury of others;
[2] The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
[3] The susceptibility of the proposed structure and its
contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on
the individual owner;
[4] The importance of the services provided by the proposed
structure to the community;
[5] The necessity to the structure of a waterfront location,
where applicable;
[6] The availability of alternative locations for the proposed
use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
[7] The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
[8] The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program of that area;
[9] The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
[10] The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of
wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
[11] The costs of providing governmental services during and
after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical,
and water systems, and streets and bridges.
(e) Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection D(1)(d) and the
purposes of this article, the Flood Appeal Board may attach
such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems
necessary to further the purposes of this article.
(f) The Construction Official or Borough Engineer shall maintain
the records of all appeal actions, including technical
§ 165-74 CHATHAM CODE § 165-74
154:366
§ 165-75. Provisions for flood hazard reduction.
information, and report any flood variances to the Federal
Insurance Administration upon request.
(2) Conditions for variances.
(a) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or
less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing
the items in Subsection D(1)(d)[1] through [11] have been fully
considered. As the lot size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the
technical justification required for issuing the variance
increases.
(b) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of
historic structures upon a determination that the proposed
repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a historic structure and the variance
is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character
and design of the structure.
(c) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if
any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge
would result.
(d) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood
hazard, to afford relief.
(e) Variances shall only be issued upon:
[1] A showing of good and sufficient cause;
[2] A determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
[3] A determination that the granting of a variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to
public safety, extraordinary public expense, create
nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public as
identified in Subsection D(1)(d), or conflict with existing
local laws or ordinances.
(f) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given
written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built
with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation and
that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the
increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor
elevation.
§ 165-74 GARAGE SALES § 165-75
154:367
A. General standards. In all areas of special flood hazard the following
standards are required:
(1) Anchoring.
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of
the structure.
(b) All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may
include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties
to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to
applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting
wind forces.
(2) Construction materials and methods.
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to
flood damage.
(b) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
(3) Utilities.
(a) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the system;
(b) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the systems and discharge from the systems into
floodwaters;
(c) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding; and
(d) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
(4) Subdivision proposals.
(a) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
(b) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems
located and constructed to minimize flood damage;
§ 165-75 CHATHAM CODE § 165-75
154:368
(c) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage
provided to reduce exposure to flood damage; and
(d) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for all subdivision
proposals.
(5) Enclosure openings. For all new construction and substantial
improvements that contain fully enclosed areas below the lowest
floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access
or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject
to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must
meet or exceed the following minimum criteria. A minimum of two
openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be
provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one
foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
or other covering or devices, provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
B. Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazards where base
flood elevation data have been provided as set forth in § 165-73B, Basis
for establishing the areas of special flood hazard or in § 165-74C(2), Use
of other base flood and floodway data, the following standards are
required.
(1) Residential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated to or above base flood
elevation.
(2) Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential
structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to the level of the base flood elevation; or
(a) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure
is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water;
(b) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
(c) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be
provided to the official as set forth in § 165-74C(3)(b).
(3) Manufactured homes.
§ 165-75 GARAGE SALES § 165-75
154:369
(a) Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
§ 165-75A(1)(b).
(b) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the top of the lowest floor is at
or above the base flood elevation.
C. Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in
§ 165-73B are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an
extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry
debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following
provisions apply:
(1) Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development, are prohibited, unless a
technical evaluation demonstrates that encroachment shall not
result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge.
(2) If Subsection C(1) is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements must comply with flood hazard reduction provisions
of § 165-75, Provisions for flood hazard reduction.
(3) In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation
data has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined
with all other existing and anticipated development, shall not
increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than
0.2 of a foot at any point.
§ 165-75 CHATHAM CODE § 165-75
154:370
ARTICLE XII
Design Standards
§ 165-76. Accessory buildings.
§ 165-76.1. Portable storage containers. [Added 12-10-2012 by Ord.
No. 12-17]
A. Accessory buildings as part of principal buildings. An accessory
building attached to a principal building shall be considered part of the
principal building and the total structure shall adhere to the yard
requirements for the principal building regardless of the technique of
connecting the principal and accessory buildings.
B. Accessory buildings not to be constructed prior to principal buildings.
No construction permit shall be issued for the construction of an
accessory building prior to the issuance of a construction permit for the
construction of the main building upon the same premises. If
construction of the main building does not precede or coincide with the
construction of the accessory building, the Construction Official shall
revoke the construction permit for the accessory building until
construction of the main building has proceeded substantially toward
completion.
C. Distance between adjacent buildings. The minimum distance between
an accessory building and any other building(s) on the same lot shall be
as prescribed in Articles IV through VIII.
D. Height of accessory buildings. The height of accessory buildings shall
be as prescribed in Articles IV through VIII.
E. Location. An accessory building may be erected in side and rear yard
areas only and shall be set back from side and rear lot lines as
prescribed in Articles IV through VIII, except that if erected on a corner
lot, the accessory building shall be set back from the side street to
comply with the setback line applying to the principal building for that
side street.
A. Purpose. This section regulates the placement of portable storage
containers or similar storage devices (commonly known as "portable
home storage unit/containers" or "PODS"®) in order to promote the
health and safety of the residents of the Borough of Chatham and to
preserve the aesthetic value of its neighborhoods.
B. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivations shall have the following meanings:
PORTABLE STORAGE CONTAINER — Any container, storage unit,
shed-like container or other portable structure that can be or is used
for the storage of personal property of any kind and which is located
for such purposes outside an enclosed building other than an accessory
building or shed complying with all building codes and land use
§ 165-76 GARAGE SALES § 165-76.1
154:371
requirements. This term shall not include roll-off or storage containers
with storage capacity of less than 150 cubic feet used for such purposes
as yard waste and debris removal.
C. Permit requirements.
(1) Permit required. The placement of a portable storage container in
any zoning district is allowed only upon issuance of a permit by the
Borough Zoning Official. Applications for a permit are available at
the Borough of Chatham's Construction Department. [Amended
3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-04]
(2) Exceptions. Where a portable storage container will be located on a
zoning lot for less than 72 hours, no permit is required. However,
the container company will be responsible for displaying
documentation on the portable storage container, in a conspicuous
place, indicating the delivery and removal dates and times.
(3) Timing. A portable storage container may not be placed on the
premises any time prior to 24 hours preceding the anticipated use
of the container.
(4) Duration. Portable storage containers are allowed to be placed on a
lot for a period not to exceed 90 consecutive days in any six-month
period.
(5) Permit display. Permits shall be displayed in plain view from the
nearest street.
(6) Permit cost: as set forth by resolution of the Mayor and Borough
Council.
D. General requirements for all zoning districts.
(1) No more than one portable storage container shall be permitted on
any lot.
(2) No portable storage container shall have dimensions greater than
16 feet in length, eight feet in width, or 8 1/2 feet in height.
(3) With the exception of the name, telephone number and address of
the container company and the permit, no signs or advertising may
be displayed on any portable storage container.
(4) No portable storage container shall be placed or located closer
than five feet to any side or rear lot line.
(5) Any portable storage container shall be located to the rear of the
front building line of the principal building facing a public street.
(6) Where there is no principal structure on a lot, including
construction sites, the portable storage container shall comply with
the front yard setback for that zoning district.
§ 165-76.1 CHATHAM CODE § 165-76.1
154:372
(7) Wherever possible, a portable storage container shall be placed on
a driveway or other impervious surface and not upon a lawn or
yard.
(8) If site conditions prevent locating the portable storage container in
conformity with Subsection D(4) through (6), the applicant may
request permission for the portable storage container to be placed
in such other location as the Borough Zoning Official permits,
provided that it is no closer than 10 feet to the paved portion of any
street and not obstructing any sidewalk. [Amended 3-11-2013 by
Ord. No. 13-04]
(9) Where a portable storage container is lawfully located in a
driveway or other area pursuant to Subsection D(7) or (8), the
applicant will attempt to locate it in a manner that allows for
adequate off-street parking.
(10) Portable storage containers may not be left open to view and are to
remain locked when not in use.
(11) Portable storage containers shall be in a condition free from rust,
peeling paint, and other forms of deterioration.
(12) Where applications are construction-related, applicants are
encouraged to move portable storage containers off site.
(13)No portable storage container stored anywhere other than a "POD"
facility shall contain any flammable, combustible, toxic or
hazardous materials.
(14) Upon reasonable notice, the permit holder shall permit the
inspection of the interior of any portable storage container by any
municipal official for compliance with this section.
(15) In the event of fire, hurricane or other natural disaster causing
substantial damage to a primary structure, a property owner may
apply to the Borough of Chatham for a reasonable extension of the
time that the portable storage container may be located on a lot.
E. Violations and penalties.
(1) Any person, firm or corporation that shall violate any provisions of
this section, upon conviction thereof by any court authorized by law
to hear and determine the matter, shall be subject to the penalties
provided in Chapter 1, § 1-14, as such court in its discretion may
impose. Each day that such violation exists shall constitute a
separate offense.
(2) The failure to remove a portable storage container at the end of the
lawful duration period may result in removal by the Borough of
Chatham of the container, without notice, and the cost of
administration and actual cost of its removal may be assessed
against the property on which the container was located and may
§ 165-76.1 GARAGE SALES § 165-76.1
154:373
§ 165-76.2. Ground-based mechanical equipment. [Added 4-13-2015
by Ord. No. 15-04]
be filed as a lien against such property by the Borough Tax
Collector.
A. Purpose. This section regulates the placement of ground-based
mechanical equipment in order to promote the health and safety of the
residents of the Borough of Chatham and to preserve the aesthetic
value of its neighborhoods.
B. Applicability. This section shall apply only in residential zoning districts
in the Borough.
C. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivations shall have the following meanings:
AUTOMATIC STANDBY GENERATOR — Is a gasoline-, propane- or
natural-gas-powered generator which is permanently connected to the
electrical system of a one- or two-family residential structure and only
operates to provide backup power to the residential structure in the
event of a power outage.
GROUND-BASED MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT — Is equipment
attached to the ground classified under the heading of heating, air
conditioning, plumbing, electrical work, including, but not limited to,
heating, ventilating and air-conditioning (HVAC) units as well as
automatic standby generators, as that term is defined herein.
D. Permit required.
(1) The placement of any ground-based mechanical equipment is
permitted only upon issuance of a permit by the Zoning Officer.
Applications shall be made on a form provided by the Borough
Clerk.
(2) A permit application shall be accompanied by an approved survey,
site plan or other drawing showing the proposed location in
relation to all structures and property lines along with any
additional information required the Zoning Officer deems
necessary in order to review the application.
(3) The fee for any permit required pursuant to this section shall be
established by duly adopted resolution of the Mayor and Borough
Council.
E. General requirements.
(1) No ground-based mechanical equipment may be located in any
front, side or rear yard, except as set forth elsewhere in this
section.
§ 165-76.1 CHATHAM CODE § 165-76.2
154:374
(2) All ground-based mechanical equipment shall be set back a
minimum of four feet from any property line.
(3) If located in a front yard, all ground-based mechanical equipment
shall be located outside of the required front yard setback.
(4) All ground-based mechanical equipment shall be set back a
minimum of 10 feet from any structure located on an adjacent
property.
(5) All ground-based mechanical equipment shall be appropriately
screened, and such screening shall be subject to approval from the
Zoning Officer.
(6) Ground-based mechanical equipment shall be located on the same
lot as the structure it serves.
(7) Ground-based mechanical equipment may be replaced in the same
existing nonconforming location, provided the replacement does
not increase the square footage of the equipment footprint by more
than 20%.
F. Testing of any automatic standby generators permitted pursuant to this
section may only be done between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday; and Saturday, from 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
Testing and operation during power failure shall be exempt from noise
regulation under the Borough Code.
G. Notwithstanding anything contained herein, all ground-based
mechanical equipment shall comply with the State Uniform
Construction Code Act, Uniform Fire Code or the manufacturer
specifications, whichever requires a greater separation distance.
H. The Zoning Officer shall deny or grant with or without conditions a
permit within seven days of receipt of permit application.
I. The Zoning Officer may impose such terms and conditions on a permit
as he/she deems necessary to secure the purposes of this section and as
appropriate to protect the general health, safety and welfare.
J. Any deviation from the bulk standards contained in this section shall
require a variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c.
K. The provisions of this section shall be administered and enforced by the
Zoning Officer, or his/her designated representative. Violations of this
section shall be punishable by a fine of up to $250 per day for the first
violation, up to $500 per day for a second violation, and up to $1,000
per day for a third and subsequent violation. The continuation of such
violation of each successive day shall constitute a separate offense, and
the person or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the
violation shall be punished as provided above for each separate offense.
§ 165-76.2 GARAGE SALES § 165-77
154:375
§ 165-77. Fences and sight triangles. [Amended 12-14-1981 by Ord.
No. 21-81]
A. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, all permitted fences shall
conform to the following standards: [Amended 1-27-2003 by Ord.
No. 03-01]
(1) If located anywhere in the exterior side yard of a corner lot or the
front yard of any lot, the height of the fence shall not exceed four
feet, and such fence shall be so constructed that at least 50%
thereof is open. [Amended 12-11-1995 by Ord. No. 17-95]
(2) If located in, along, adjacent to or parallel with an interior side line
of a corner lot or on either side line of any other lot or in any other
portion of the rear yard, and in all cases to the rear of the front
foundation line of the dwelling or structure erected upon said lot
the height of the fence shall not exceed five feet. [Amended
12-11-1995 by Ord. No. 17-95]
(3) If located along the rear property line which is also the rear
property line of the abutting property, a fence may be constructed
to a height of not in excess of six feet. If located along a rear
property line which is also the side property line of the abutting
property, a fence may be constructed to a height of not in excess of
five feet. [Amended 1-27-2003 by Ord. No. 03-01]
(4) Within the entire side and front yards, up to the property lines, of
lots in the M-1, M-2 and M-3 Industrial Districts, chain link fences
of a height no greater than six feet are allowed, unless the fence
would run along, adjacent to or parallel with any property line
which abuts a residential zoning district or a lot containing an
existing residential use, in which case the other appropriate
provisions of this section would apply. [Added 1-27-2003 by Ord.
No. 03-01]
(5) All fences shall be symmetrical in appearance, posts separated by
identical distances and constructed of fencing material conforming
to a definite pattern or size, and so constructed that the more
finished side of the fence shall be facing away from the owners of
property. [Amended 12-11-1995 by Ord. No. 17-95; 1-27-2003
by Ord. No. 03-01]
(6) No fence shall be constructed of masonry material, barbed wire or
any other material harmful to humans or animals, or of odd-sized
material of varying width, thickness or length. [Amended
1-27-2003 by Ord. No. 03-01]
(7) The height of a fence shall be determined by measuring from the
lowest point on the undisturbed ground under the fence. [Added
12-11-1995 by Ord. No. 17-95; amended 1-27-2003 by Ord.
No. 03-01]
§ 165-77 CHATHAM CODE § 165-77
154:376
§ 165-78. Lighting. [Amended 12-11-1995 by Ord. No. 17-95;
3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-0362]
(8) No fence shall be erected without a construction permit. In
considering applications for the erection of a fence, the
Construction Official may require a survey showing the proposed
location of the fence with respect to the existing property lines.
[Amended 12-11-1995 by Ord. No. 17-95; 1-27-2003 by Ord.
No. 03-01]
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A hereinabove, the
following provisions of this chapter shall be met:
(1) Buffer areas shall meet the requirements specified in
§ 165-164B(17).
(2) Off-street parking, loading, driveway areas shall meet the
requirements specified in § 165-82A.
(3) Swimming pools shall be fenced as specified in § 165-88D.
(4) Any fence situated within an officially designated Fire District shall
comply with all other applicable codes and ordinances.
(5) Sight easements shall be required at intersections, in addition to
the specified right-of-way width, in which no grading, planting or
structure shall be erected or maintained higher than two feet in
height above the edge of the roadway, except for street signs, fire
hydrants and light standards. The sight easement is defined as that
area outside the street right-of-way which is bounded by the
intersecting street sidelines and a straight line connecting sight
points, one located on each of the two intersecting street side lines
at a point 25 feet from the point of street line intersection, either
actual or projected. Such easement dedication shall be expressed
on the site plan as follows: "Sight easement conveyed for the
purposes provided and expressed in the Land Development
Ordinance of the Borough of Chatham". After approval of an
application for development calling for a sight easement, applicant
shall prepare an easement satisfactory to the Board and have it
executed and recorded. [Amended 12-11-1995 by Ord. No.
17-95]
A. Purpose.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect and promote the
health, safety, and welfare of Borough residents and businesses by
regulating the design and installation of lighting fixtures to achieve
the following objectives:
62.Editor’s Note: This ordinance originally adopted the provisions regarding lighting as
§§ 165-78.1 through 165-78.5, but such were redesignated as § 165-78A through E to fit
the organizational structure of Art. XII.
§ 165-77 GARAGE SALES § 165-78
154:377
(a) To protect against direct glare and excessive lighting;
(b) To provide safe roadways for motorists, cyclists, and
pedestrians;
(c) To mitigate light pollution and light trespass;
(d) To promote energy conservation by installing efficient and
cost-effective lighting;
(e) To provide lighting standards;
(f) To provide a superior aesthetic and design quality of lighting
and fixtures; and
(g) To eliminate the over illumination of commercial properties.
B. Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have
the following meanings:
BOARD — The Borough of Chatham Zoning Board of Adjustment or
Planning Board as appropriate.
FOOTCANDLE (fc) — A unit of illuminance on a surface one foot square
in area onto which there is a uniform flux of one lumen.
GLARE — The sensation produced by luminance within the visual field
that is sufficiently greater than the luminance to which the eyes are
adapted to cause annoyance, discomfort or loss in visual performance
and visibility.
HORIZONTAL ILLUMINANCE — The illuminance on a horizontal plane
expressed in footcandles (fc).
IESNA — Illuminating Engineering Society of North America, an
organization that recommends standards for the lighting industry.
ILLUMINANCE — The area of density of the luminous flux incident at a
point on a surface expressed in footcandles (fc).
LIGHT FIXTURE — An electrically powered illuminating device
installed outdoors emitting a total light source of more than 1,000
initial lumens per fixture (the equivalent of approximately a single sixtywatt
incandescent bulb), including but not limited to devices used to
illuminate any site, architectural structure or sign. The term "light
fixture" shall include the elements designed to give light output control,
such as a reflector or mirror, the refractor or lens, the ballast, the
housing, and the attachment of related parts.
LIGHT TRESPASS — Excessive illumination at an adjacent property
line that produces light spill and/or glare as measured by the Borough
Zoning Official or his/her designee at a point at the adjacent property
line at a height of six feet and facing the light fixture(s).[Amended
3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-04]
§ 165-78 CHATHAM CODE § 165-78
154:378
LUMEN — Measurement of light output. One lumen is equal to the
amount of light emitted by one candle that falls on one square foot of
surface located one foot away from the candle.
LUMINANCE — The quantity of light reflected or emitted towards an
observer, expressed in lumens per square foot.
NADIR — The vertical line projecting downward to the ground from the
center of a lens of a light fixture.
RESIDENTIAL — One- and two-family dwelling units.
SHIELDED LIGHT FIXTURE — A light fixture with cutoff optics that
allows no direct light emissions above a vertical cutoff angle of 90°
above nadir through the light fixture's lowest emitting part. Any
structural part of the light fixture providing this cutoff angle must be
permanently affixed.
TEMPORARY LIGHT FIXTURE — Any light fixture in place for 30 days
or less.
UNIFORMITY RATIO — The ratio of the brightest spot to the dimmest
spot, or the ratio of the average brightness to the minimum brightness.
VERTICAL ILLUMINANCE — The illuminance on a vertical plane
expressed in footcandles (fc).
C. General requirements.
(1) The provisions of this section shall not apply to the following:
(a) Decorative holiday lighting in residential districts and as
provided in § 165-99;
(b) Lighting required by law to be installed on surface vehicles and
aircraft;
(c) Temporary emergency lighting;
(d) Temporary light fixture(s) other than security lighting at
construction projects;
(e) Light fixtures emitting less than 1,000 lumens, except that all
light fixtures must meet the requirements of § 165-78E(1)(b)
and § 165-78C(3).
(f) Temporary light fixtures installed for less than 30 days except
that, where feasible, such lighting fixtures shall be shielded or
directed so as to avoid light trespass; and
(g) Government and municipal uses, including public schools,
municipal buildings, pools, recreation fields, parks and other
governmental uses.
(2) Height of light fixtures.
§ 165-78 GARAGE SALES § 165-78
154:379
(a) The height of a light fixture shall be measured from ground
level to its highest point and shall include the base of the light
fixture.
(b) The maximum height of a light fixture shall be 15 feet for
residential structures, but in no case higher than the principal
building(s) or structure(s); 20 feet for commercial structures,
but in no case higher than the principal building(s) or
structure(s); and a maximum height of a light fixture shall be
12 feet for walkways.
(3) Light trespass on residential property. It is the intent of this section
to regulate both light spillage and glare as light trespass. To control
light trespass, the maximum vertical illumination shall be no
greater than 0.1 vertical footcandle and no light fixture(s) shall
cause any glare, as determined by the Borough Zoning Official or
his/her designee, when measured at a point at the adjacent
property line at a height of six feet and facing the light fixture(s).
[Amended 3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-04]
(4) Plan requirements. Where required, a development application
shall include a lighting plan. The lighting plan shall clearly show
the following:
(a) The location and description of every light fixture, including
the aiming angle, mounting height and hours of operation.
(b) A description of the outdoor light fixture, including
specifications such as lamps, optics, cutoff angle, supports,
poles and manufacturer's catalog cuts for each type.
(c) Foundation details for light poles.
(d) A schedule providing for the reduction of on-site lighting
during the nonoperating hours to the levels necessary for
security purposes.
(e) Maintained horizontal illuminance in footcandles (after
depreciation) including the following:
[1] Maximum.
[2] Minimum.
[3] Average during operating and nonoperating hours.
[4] Average to minimum ratio.
(f) A computer-generated photometric grid showing the light
distribution pattern footcandle readings across the site and at
the property line at ten-foot intervals.
(5) Construction. All light fixtures shall be constructed in compliance
with applicable construction codes.
§ 165-78 CHATHAM CODE § 165-78
154:380
(6) Enforcement. Enforcement of the provisions of this section may be
made on the basis of a valid written complaint filed with the
Borough Zoning Official or his/her designee.
D. Nonresidential (commercial) uses.
(1) General.
(a) All parking areas and walkways thereto and appurtenant
passageways and driveways serving nonresidential uses shall
be adequately illuminated for security and safety purposes.
(b) Lighting colors and fixture types shall be consistent
throughout the site and shall complement the architectural
theme and landscaping of the site. Lighting levels shall not
exceed IESNA illuminance recommendations.
(c) Light sources shall be shielded light fixtures. Light fixtures
shall not be aligned or focused to illuminate above the
horizontal plane, except for fixtures described in
§ 165-78D(1)(d) below.
(d) Light fixtures used to illuminate flags shall only use a narrow
cone of light that will not extend beyond the illuminated flag.
(e) Outdoor light fixtures not essential for security purposes,
including but not limited to display lighting, shall be turned off
by 10:00 p.m. or within one hour after the business closes,
whichever is later and remain off during nonbusiness hours.
(f) All outdoor light fixtures, once properly installed, shall be
permanently affixed in the approved position.
(g) Notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter 165, the following
lighting used for advertising or promotion shall be prohibited:
[1] Searchlights.
[2] Laser lighting.
[3] Lights that pulse, flash, rotate or simulate motion.
[4] Lights that simulate traffic control signals.
[5] Tower lighting (unless required by the FAA).
(h) All light fixtures shall be subject to a post-development
inspection to determine compliance with the requirements of
this section.
(i) Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, no
light fixture, building mounted or freestanding, may exceed 12
feet in height within 25 feet of any abutting residential
property.
§ 165-78 GARAGE SALES § 165-78
154:381
(2) Ground-mounted building facade light fixtures.
(a) Where exterior building or vertical structure illumination is
permitted, it shall be approved by the Board based on the
following standards:
[1] The maximum illumination on any vertical surface or
angular roof structure shall not exceed 1.0 footcandle.
[2] If the building surface is lighted, only light fixtures
mounted on the building itself are permitted.
(3) Sign lighting.
(a) All signs and sign lighting shall also comply with the
requirements of § 165-102.
(4) Landscaping. Where landscaping is to be illuminated, the Board
shall first approve a landscape lighting plan. The plan shall include
cutoffs so that at least 90% of the light generated will be confined
to the landscaping. A timer shall control all such landscape lighting
and the Board shall approve the timing schedule.
(5) Parking areas.
(a) Parking lot lighting. Parking lot lighting shall provide adequate
illumination and minimize glare and light trespass. Parking lot
lighting shall be turned off by 10:00 p.m. or within one hour
after the business closes, whichever is later and remain off
during nonbusiness hours. Parking lot lighting shall meet the
following illumination standards (all levels in footcandles):
Parking Lots
Basic
(footcandles)
Minimum horizontal illuminance 0.2
Average horizontal illuminance 1.0
Average to minimum 5:1
Maximum to minimum 20:1
Minimum vertical illuminance 0:1
E. Residential uses.
(1) General.
(a) Existing light fixtures. Existing light fixtures that cause light
trespass should be adapted to comply with this section by
adding a properly designed hood or shield, or by reaiming the
fixture.
(b) Setback requirements. Light fixtures shall not be located
within the side yard setbacks or within the rear yard setbacks
§ 165-78 CHATHAM CODE § 165-78
154:382
§ 165-79. Lot configuration.
§ 165-80. Natural features.
or 20 feet of the rear property line, whichever area is less. The
total number of light fixtures located in front of the residential
structure, defined as including the front facade or the
residential structure and extending outward to the front
property line, shall be no more than five light fixtures. The total
number of light fixtures on the entire property shall be less
than 10 light fixtures.
(2) Motion-activated security lighting. Motion-activated security
lighting shall be controlled and activated by infrared sensors,
motion sensors, a security alarm system and/or a panic button and
shall be set to automatically turn off after a maximum period of
three minutes following activation.
(3) Decorative lighting.
(a) Whenever practicable, accent, architectural or building
lighting shall be directed downwards onto the building or
object and not toward the sky or onto adjacent properties.
Direct light emissions shall not be visible above the roofline or
beyond the building/object edge.
(b) Decorative lighting on landscaping and foliage shall be
confined to the target landscaping as much as possible and
conform to the limitations/definitions of the glare source.
A. Side lot lines shall be either at right angles or radial to street lines. No
side line in a residential zone shall be given more than one course
where it is evident that it was done solely for the purpose of compliance
with the side yard requirements for the affected lots. [Amended
12-11-1995 by Ord. No. 17-95]
B. Each lot must front upon an approved public street as approved in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-35. [Amended 12-11-1995 by Ord. No. 17-95]
C. Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of existing streets,
lots shall begin at such new street lines and all setbacks shall be
measured from such lines.
D. All lot corners of lots approved as part of a subdivision submission shall
be marked with a metal alloy pin or concrete monument of permanent
character.
A. Natural features such as trees, hilltops and views, natural terrain, open
waters and natural drainage ridge lines shall be preserved whenever
possible in designing any development containing such features.
§ 165-78 GARAGE SALES § 165-80
154:383
§ 165-81. Nonconforming lots, structures and uses.
B. No topsoil shall be removed from areas intended for lawn or open
space. Topsoil moved during the course of construction shall be
redistributed so as to provide at least four inches of cover to all such
areas, which shall be stabilized by approved seeding and/or planting.
C. A conscious effort shall be made to preserve all worthwhile trees and
shrubs which exist on the site. Stripping trees from a lot or filling
around trees on a lot shall not be permitted unless it can be shown that
grading or construction requirements necessitate removal of trees, in
which case those lots shall be replanted with trees to reestablish the
tone of the area in conformance with adjacent lots. All newly planted
shade trees shall be of nursery stock, shall have a minimum caliper of
two inches and shall be of a species approved by the Board with the
advice of the Borough Shade Tree Commission. In any case, a sufficient
number of shade trees shall be provided and planted to insure a
minimum of eight trees per acre of lot area for each lot. The proposed
location of all trees shall be indicated on the site plan and/or
subdivision submission.
D. Any development must conform with § 165-92 of this chapter and all
applicable state and federal environmental laws and regulations.
[Added 12-11-1995 by Ord. No. 17-95]
A. Whenever the owner of a lot which existed on October 15, 1953, has
dedicated or conveyed land to the Borough in order to meet the
minimum street width requirement of the Official Map or Master Plan of
the Borough, the Construction Official shall issue building and
occupancy permits for the lot whose depth and/or areas are rendered
substandard in area only because of such dedication and where the
owner has no other adjacent lands to provide the minimum
requirements. [Amended 2-8-1993 by Ord. No. 3-93]
B. Any nonconforming use or structure existing at the time of the passage
of an ordinance may be continued upon the lot or in the structure so
occupied, and any such structure may be restored or repaired in the
event of partial destruction thereof, so long as such restoration or
repair does not increase any nonconformity. [Amended 12-11-1995
by Ord. No. 17-95]
C. Repairs and maintenance work required to keep a structure in sound
condition may be made to a nonconforming structure or a structure
containing a nonconforming use. [Amended 2-8-1993 by Ord. No.
3-93]
D. If a nonconforming building or use is subsequently changed to a
conforming use, it shall not be altered again except in conformity with
the requirements of the district wherein such building or use is located.
[Amended 3-13-1989 by Ord. No. 2-89]
§ 165-80 CHATHAM CODE § 165-81
154:384
§ 165-82. Off-street parking, loading areas and driveways.
[Amended 12-26-1979 by Ord. No. 13-79]
E. The abandonment of a nonconforming building or use for a period of
one year shall be regarded as permanent abandonment and, thereafter,
the land or buildings shall not be reoccupied or used except in
conformity with the regulations of the district wherein such land or
building is located. [Amended 3-13-1989 by Ord. No. 2-89]
F. Nonconforming structures. No nonconforming structure shall be
enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, or structurally altered
in any manner without an appeal for variance relief and the granting of
such relief. If, however, an application for such development involves a
one- or two-family residence and said application itself does not violate
any of the provisions of this chapter, the applicant may be allowed to
proceed with the proposed development without an appeal for variance
relief and the granting of such relief. [Amended 2-8-1993 by Ord. No.
3-93]
G. Nonconforming uses. No structure containing a nonconforming use
shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed or structurally
altered in any manner without an appeal for variance and the granting
of such relief. [Amended 2-8-1993 by Ord. No. 3-93]
A. Residential uses.
(1) All driveways and parking areas serving one-family and two-family
dwellings shall be paved or graveled to handle adequately the
vehicles for which provision is made. No such driveway shall be any
closer to the side line of the property than two feet, and any such
driveway shall be at least eight feet in width. All driveways and
parking areas serving garden apartment dwelling units shall be
paved as specified by the Borough Engineer. [Amended
12-11-1995 by Ord. No. 17-95]
(2) The off-street parking facilities required for one-family, two-family
and garden apartment dwelling units shall be on the same lot or
parcel of land as the buildings they are intended to serve. A
multifamily dwelling, except in the AFD Affordable Housing Zones,
must have 1 1/2 parking spaces for each dwelling unit. [Amended
12-11-1995 by Ord. No. 17-95]
(3) No parking of vehicles shall be permitted in landscaped, lawn or
sidewalk areas nor, as to garden apartment dwelling units, in fire
lanes, buffer areas or within five feet from any property line.
(4) There shall be a maximum of two driveways on any lot crossing the
street line of the street in front of the residence. If there are two
such driveways, their center lines shall be spaced at least 45 feet
apart at the street line; they shall handle no more than two lanes of
traffic; no part of a driveway shall be less than 10 feet from the
§ 165-81 GARAGE SALES § 165-82
154:385
property side lines; and, in the case of a corner lot, no part of a
driveway shall be closer to the side line of the intersecting street
than 50 feet or 1/2 the lot frontage, whichever is greater, except
that in no case shall this distance have to exceed 100 feet.
(a) Driveways in excess of 16 feet width at the street line shall be
prohibited, except that two way driveways serving garden
apartment dwelling units shall be at least 24 feet wide.
(b) In the layout of all driveways, due consideration shall be given
to the proposed width, curbing, direction of traffic flow, radii of
curves and method of dividing traffic lanes. [Amended
12-11-1995 by Ord. No. 17-95]
(5) All parking areas serving garden apartment dwelling units shall be
designed to permit each vehicle to proceed to and from the parking
space provided for it without the moving of any other vehicle.
(6) No vehicle, boat, trailer, or other conveyance, except private
passenger vehicles, shall be parked or stored on a lot unhoused in
front of a line extending between the side lines of lot, parallel to the
street line and passing through the rear line of the principal
building. (If there be no principal building such prohibition shall
apply to the front half of the lot). On a corner lot, no such vehicles,
boat, trailer or other conveyance except private passenger
vehicles, shall be parked in front of lines extending through the
walls of the principal building which are farthest from both streets.
To the rear of such lines, only the following vehicles may be stored
unhoused or parked unhoused, provided they are operative and
currently licensed and inspected: [Amended 12-11-1995 by Ord.
No. 17-95]
(a) Private passenger vehicles.
(b) Motorcycles.
(c) One boat and trailer, or one house trailer or one camper trailer
or one body camper or one other vehicle equipped with
sleeping accommodations.
(7) No commercial vehicle which has a gross vehicle weight rating in
excess of 5,000 pounds shall be parked or stored outdoors
overnight in any residential zone, and only one such vehicle per lot
may be housed in such districts, provided it is housed within a
garage at all times. [Amended 3-13-1989 by Ord. No. 2-89]
(8) All detached single-family houses hereafter constructed shall have
at least a one-car enclosed garage. All detached single-family
houses having at least one garage or carport shall retain the same
or substitute at least a one-car enclosed garage. [Added
12-11-1995 by Ord. No. 17-95]
§ 165-82 CHATHAM CODE § 165-82
154:386
(9) Minimum required bicycle parking. One bicycle parking space shall
be provided for every 10 required off-street parking spaces. Such
bicycle parking shall be located and clearly designated in a safe
and convenient location, shall be designed to accommodate Ushaped
locking devices, and shall support bicycles in a stable
position without damage to wheels, frame, or other components,
and shall be securely anchored. [Added 9-10-2012 by Ord. No.
12-13]
B. Nonresidential uses.
(1) Each off-street parking area shall have a landscaped area at least
the size of a parking space for every 10 parking spaces, with 1/2 of
said landscaped spaces having shrubs no higher than three feet
and the other half having branches no lower than seven feet. Such
landscaped spaces shall be distributed throughout the parking area
in order to break the view of long rows of parked cars in a manner
not impairing visibility. Compliance with these provisions shall not
be construed as meeting the requirements of buffers as specified
elsewhere in this chapter. [Amended 12-11-1995 by Ord. No.
17-95]
(2) Lighting. Lighting used to illuminate off-street parking areas shall
be arranged to reflect the light away from residential premises and
streets and be in accordance with § 165-78.
(3) Surfacing and curbing. All parking and loading areas and access
drives shall be paved in accordance with a plan submitted to and
approved by the Borough Engineer. Such a plan will include the
following components: [Amended 12-11-1995 by Ord. No.
17-95]
(a) All off-street parking lots shall have adequate designations to
indicate traffic flow and parking spaces.
(b) All parking and loading areas and access drives shall be
provided with granite block curbing.
(4) Access. [Amended 12-11-1995 by Ord. No. 17-95]
(a) There shall be a maximum of two driveways on any lot crossing
the street line of the fronting street. If there are two such
driveways, their center lines shall be spaced at least 45 feet
apart at the street line; each shall handle no more than two
lanes of traffic; no part of a driveway shall be less than 10 feet
from the property side lines; and, in the case of a corner lot, no
part of a driveway shall be closer to the side line of the
intersecting street than 50 feet or one-half the lot frontage,
whichever is greater, except that in no case shall this distance
have to exceed 100 feet. [Amended 4-25-2005 by Ord. No.
05-09]
§ 165-82 GARAGE SALES § 165-82
154:387
(b) Two-way driveways shall be at least 24 feet wide; one-way
driveways shall be at least 12 feet wide. In the layout of all
driveways, due consideration shall be given to the proposed
width, curbing, direction of traffic flow, radii of curves and
method of dividing traffic lanes. Street curbing shall be
eliminated where it would otherwise cross the end of a
driveway. Driveway curbing may be flared into the street curb.
Due consideration should be given to compliance with state or
county regulations in opening driveways to streets.
(5) (a) No parking spaces or loading zones shall be permitted in fire
lanes, driveways, landscaped areas, aisles, buffer areas,
sidewalks, or turning areas, or less than five feet from any
property line. [Amended 12-11-1995 by Ord. No. 17-95]
(b) The off-street parking facilities required for nonresidential
uses, as permitted by this chapter, shall be provided within 200
feet of the building they are intended to serve, measured
between the nearest point of the off-street parking facilities
and the nearest point of the building. All such parking spaces
shall be owned, leased or otherwise under the control of the
user of the nonresidential use. Nothing in this chapter shall be
construed as including any municipal parking, operated/
maintained by the Borough of Chatham.
(c) No parking space or aisle shall extend into any front yard, or
within the setback line of the side yard adjacent to a street on a
corner lot.
(d) All loading zones shall be so designated. [Added 12-11-1995
by Ord. No. 17-95]
(6) Parking access. Provisions for parking spaces on a site plan must
also include adequate driveway and necessary turning areas for
handling the vehicles which will be using the site. Parking areas
shall be designated to permit each motor vehicle to proceed to and
from the parking space provided for it without requiring the
moving of any other motor vehicles. Where the angle of parking is
different on one side of the aisle than it is on the other, the larger
aisle width requirement shall prevail. [Amended 12-11-1995 by
Ord. No. 17-95]
(7) Calculation of parking space. When the computation to determine
the number of required parking spaces results in a requirement of
a fractional space, any fraction shall require one additional parking
space. [Amended 11-9-1987 by Ord. No. 15-87]
(8) Parking stall dimensions/layout. [Added 9-10-2012 by Ord. No.
12-13]
(a) Parking stalls shall be nine feet by 18 feet, except that stalls for
supermarkets or other uses where shopping carts are used
§ 165-82 CHATHAM CODE § 165-82
154:388
§ 165-83. Performance standards for all uses. [Amended 12-11-1995
by Ord. No. 17-95]
An application for a permit shall provide documentation that the intended
use will comply with the performance standards enumerated hereinbelow.
In the case of a structure being built where the future use is not known, a
construction permit may be issued with the condition that no certificate of
occupancy will be issued until such time as this documentation is submitted
with respect to the particular occupant.
shall be 10 feet by 18 feet and except for end to end parallel
parking as noted in Subsection B(8)(c) below.
(b) Hairpin striping shall be provided, where appropriate.
(c) End-to-end parallel parking shall have a minimum dimension of
eight feet by 23 feet.
(9) Compact parking stalls. [Added 9-10-2012 by Ord. No. 12-13]
(a) Up to 20% of stalls on any lot with over 50 spaces may be
reserved for compact cars with stall dimensions of eight feet by
16 feet and appropriate signage designating such stalls.
A. Electrical and electronic devices. Electrical and electronic devices shall
comply with all applicable statutes and regulations.
B. Heat. No use shall produce heat perceptible beyond the lot lines of the
lot containing the use.
C. Noise. Equipment shall be designed and operated so that noise levels
are in accordance with rules and regulations established by the New
Jersey State Department of Environmental Protection. [Added
4-25-2005 by Ord. No. 05-09]
D. Odor. No use shall produce odors perceptible beyond the lot lines of the
lot containing the use.
E. Storage and waste disposal. No materials or wastes shall be deposited
upon a lot in such form or manner that they may be transferred off the
lot by natural causes or forces, nor shall any substance be deposited
which can contaminate an underground aquifer or otherwise render
such underground aquifer undesirable as a source of water supply or
recreation, or which will destroy aquatic life. All materials or wastes
which might cause fumes or dust or which constitute a fire hazard or
which may be edible or otherwise attractive to rodents or insects shall
be stored indoors and enclosed in appropriate containers adequate to
eliminate such hazards.
F. Ventilation. No use shall obstruct the natural ventilation of adjacent
uses nor contaminate the air with excessive heat or odor. Further, no air
conditioners or exhaust fans shall be permitted to discharge exhausted
§ 165-82 GARAGE SALES § 165-83
154:389
§ 165-84. Principal use. [Amended 12-14-1981 by Ord. No. 21-81]
Unless otherwise specifically permitted in this chapter, no more than one
principal dwelling or building shall be permitted on one lot.
§ 165-85. Public utilities. [Amended 12-14-1981 by Ord. No. 21-81]
§ 165-86. Sanitary sewers and septic systems. [Amended
12-14-1981 by Ord. No. 21-81]
§ 165-87. Streets, curbs and sidewalks. [Amended 12-14-1981 by
Ord. No. 21-81]
air unless set back from all property lines 10 feet or equipped with
baffles to deflect the discharged air away from the adjacent use.
G. Vibration. There shall be no vibration which is discernible to the human
sense of feeling beyond the immediate lot.
A. All public services shall be connected to an approved public utilities
system where one exists. The developer shall arrange with the servicing
utility for the underground installation of the utilities' distribution
supply lines and service connections.
B. Easements for utility installation may be required. Such easements
shall be at least 20 feet wide and shall be located on the premises after
consultation with the utility companies and Borough departments
concerned. They shall to the fullest extent possible be centered on, or
adjacent to, rear or side lot lines. Easements shall be referred to on the
plan as follows: "Utility easement." Deeds of easement, after approval
of the Borough Engineer and the Planning Board, shall be executed and
recorded in the Morris County Clerk's Office. [Amended 12-11-1995
by Ord. No. 17-95; 3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-04]
A. If a public treatment and collection system is accessible or planned, the
developer shall construct facilities in such a manner as to make
adequate sewage treatment available to each lot and structure within
the development by said treatment and collection system.
B. Any treatment plant and collection system, shall be designed in
accordance with the requirements of the State Health Department or
Borough ordinances enforced by the Borough Board of Health,
whichever is more restrictive, and shall be subject to approval by the
Borough Board of Health. Individual on-lot septic systems are
prohibited. [Amended 12-11-1995 by Ord. No. 17-95]
A. Streets.
(1) All developments shall be served by public streets paved in
accordance with Borough specifications. The arrangement of
streets not shown on the Master Plan or Official Map, as adopted by
the Borough, shall be such as to provide for the appropriate
§ 165-83 CHATHAM CODE § 165-87
154:390
extension of existing streets and should conform with the
topography.
(2) When a new development adjoins land susceptible of being
subdivided, suitable provisions shall be made for access of the
remaining and/or adjoining tract to existing or proposed streets.
(3) In the event that a development adjoins or includes existing streets
that do not conform to widths as shown on the adopted Master Plan
and/or Official Map or the street width requirements of this
chapter, additional land along either or both sides of said street,
sufficient to conform to the right-of-way requirements, shall be
dedicated for the location, installation, repair and maintenance of
streets, drainage facilities, utilities and other facilities customarily
located on street rights-of-way. The necessary deeds of ownership
shall be furnished, and the dedication shall be expressed as follows:
"Street right-of-way granted permitting the entrance upon these
lands for the purposes provided for and expressed in the Land
Development Ordinance of the Borough of Chatham." This
statement shall in no way reduce the developer's responsibility to
provide, install, repair or maintain the facilities in the area
dedicated by ordinance and/or as shown on the plan and/or as
provided for by any maintenance or performance guarantees. If the
development is along one side only, 1/2 of the required extra width
shall be dedicated. Additionally, that portion of the existing street
or road adjoining or included within a site plan or major subdivision
shall be improved, including excavation, grading, base courses and
surfacing in accordance with the road improvement standards of
this chapter.
(4) In all developments, the minimum public street right-of-way shall
be at least 50 feet measured from lot line to lot line, but in no case
shall a new street that is a continuation of an existing street be
continued at a width less than the existing street although a
greater width may be required.
(5) Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as is possible
and in no case shall be less than 60° and approaches to all
intersections shall follow a straight line for at least 100 feet. No
more than two streets shall meet or intersect at any one point and
the center lines of both intersecting streets shall pass through a
common point.
(6) A cul-de-sac of a permanent nature (where provision for the future
extension of the street to the boundary of the adjoining property is
impractical or impossible) or of a temporary nature (where
provision is made for the future extension of the street to the
boundary line of adjoining property) shall be no more than 400 feet
on the curbline plus a utility and planting strip width of 10 feet
around the entire cul-de-sac for a total right-of-way radius of 50
feet. The center point for the radius shall be on the center line of
§ 165-87 GARAGE SALES § 165-87
154:391
§ 165-88. Swimming pools. [Amended 12-14-1981 by Ord. No.
21-81]
the associated street or if offset to a point where the radius
becomes tangent to the right curbline of the associated street.
(7) No street shall have a name which will duplicate or nearly duplicate
the name of an existing street that confusion results. The
continuation of an existing street shall have the same name.
Curvilinear streets shall change their names only at street
intersections. The Board shall reserve the right to approve or name
streets within a proposed development.
(8) The pavement width of streets and the quality of surfacing and base
materials shall adhere to the minimum standards set forth by the
Borough, County or State Engineer when said paving concerns
roads under their jurisdiction. [Amended 12-11-1995 by Ord.
No. 17-95]
(9) The approval of any map of land delineating streets by the
governing body of the Borough shall in no way be construed as an
acceptance of any street indicated thereon.
B. Curbs. Granite block curbing shall be installed along every street within
a development and at intersections with existing Borough, county or
state roads and shall meet the specifications, and be installed in a
manner, both as determined by the Borough Engineer. [Amended
12-11-1995 by Ord. No. 17-95]
C. Sidewalks and aprons.
(1) Sidewalks and aprons shall be required on both sides of all
proposed streets, unless specifically waived by the Planning Board.
(2) Sidewalks shall be at least four feet wide. Sidewalks and aprons
shall be concrete and shall be constructed in accordance with the
requirements specified by the Borough Engineer.
A. Pool area and location.
(1) The pool, its apron and any structures accessory to the pool shall be
included in determining lot coverage. The water surface area of a
private swimming pool hereafter constructed or enlarged shall not
exceed 25% of the actual rear yard area, such rear yard area being
determined for this purpose by projecting the rear line of the
residence building to the side lines of the lot and determining the
area to the rear of that line. No part of the surface area of a private
swimming pool shall be closer than 20 feet to the rear line nor
closer than 20 feet to the side line. In all cases the pool shall be
located behind the rear line of the existing structures adjacent
thereto. [Amended 12-11-1995 by Ord. No. 17-95]
§ 165-87 CHATHAM CODE § 165-88
154:392
(2) Where the pool is installed on a corner lot, the side nearest the
street shall be screened with shrubs no less than four feet in height
above ground level. [Amended 12-11-1995 by Ord. No. 17-95]
(3) No private swimming pool shall be less than 20 feet from any
sanitary disposal system or part thereof; provided, however, that
this requirement shall not apply to any property which is served by
and connected to a Borough sanitary system.
B. Use of public water. No public water shall be used in connection with
the operation of any private swimming pool during any time when
restrictions are imposed upon the use of such public water.
C. Discharge of water. If a catch basin for stormwater is readily accessible
to the premises upon which a private swimming pool is located, water
from the pool shall be emptied into such catch basin. Any permanent
connection to the municipal storm drain system shall be made only
upon permission of the Borough Administrator and under the
supervision of the Borough Engineer. No private swimming pool shall
be wholly or partially emptied into any sanitary sewer system, cesspool
or septic tank, nor in any manner that will create a hazard or nuisance
or cause surface water to flow upon the land of another or upon a public
road.
D. Fencing of private swimming pools. Every private swimming pool shall
be completely enclosed by a permanent substantial fence with a gate or
gates; these shall comply with Construction Code requirements, but in
any case they shall have a height of no less than four feet above ground
level. No aperture in such fence or any gate shall be more than three
inches in width. Such fence and any gate shall be so designed,
constructed and maintained as to prevent access to the pool by children
at any time except when the pool is in use under the supervision of the
possessor of the pool or by his permission. [Amended 12-11-1995 by
Ord. No. 17-95]
E. Artificial illumination. Any electric lights used in connection with a
private swimming pool shall be in full compliance with the provisions of
§ 165-78 of this chapter. [Amended 12-11-1995 by Ord. No. 17-95]
F. Filtration. Every pool shall be equipped with such filtration, circulation,
clarification and chlorination systems as may be required under
regulations of the Borough Board of Health to maintain the water in a
clean and healthful condition.
G. Construction permit. No swimming pool shall be erected without a
construction permit. Any application for a swimming pool shall be
accompanied by a survey prepared by a licensed surveyor or engineer
on which the licensed professional has located the proposed pool and
certified that said location is accurate; the certification shall also set
forth the area of the rear yard and the area of the pool and its accessory
structures as calculated by the licensed professional. After completion
§ 165-88 GARAGE SALES § 165-88
154:393
§ 165-89. Solid waste storage. [Amended 12-11-1995 by Ord. No.
17-95]
Each nonresidential building shall provide at least one solid waste pickup
area, either within the building or outside the building in the rear yard
area. All outside locations shall be obscured from view from parking areas,
streets and adjacent districts by a fence, wall, planting or combination
of the three as approved by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
§ 165-90. Water supply.
Water mains shall be constructed in such a manner as to make adequate
water service available to each lot or building within the development. The
entire system shall be designed in accordance with the requirements and
standards of the Borough. The system shall also be designed with adequate
capacity and sustained pressure in a looped system with no dead-end lines,
wherever possible.
§ 165-91. Use of yards by another buildings prohibited. [Amended
12-14-1981 by Ord. No. 21-81]
No open space provided around any principal building for the purposes of
complying with the front, side, rear or other yard provisions of this chapter
shall be considered as providing the yard provisions for another principal
building.
§ 165-92. Land disturbance. [Amended 11-9-1987 by Ord. No.
15-87]
of the pool, the licensed professional shall certify that the pool was
actually constructed in the location as indicated on the aforementioned
survey. [Amended 12-11-1995 by Ord. No. 17-95]
A. Permit required. Land disturbance, as defined in this chapter, shall not
be permitted and no person shall disturb any land except pursuant to
and where included in an approved site plan or valid building permit
issued pursuant to this chapter.
B. Application for permit as part of a more extensive application. When not
included as part of a more extensive application, an application for a
building permit to disturb land will be filed with the Construction
Official accompanied by at least a written description and sketch
showing the land disturbance proposed.
C. Action on application. If the Construction Official finds, based on the
initial application, that no soil removal is involved, and that the
disturbance will not change the topography or drainage of the
premises, such as to affect drainage on a neighbor's property, and that
no violation of any other law or regulation is proposed, he shall issue a
permit upon payment of the appropriate fee. When the application
§ 165-88 CHATHAM CODE § 165-92
154:394
indicates soil removal or fill may be involved, that a change in the
topography or drainage of the premises could occur, or that the
approval of the Morris County Soil Conservation District is required, he
shall refer the application to the Borough Engineer for review.63
D. Plot plan required. When the application is referred to the Borough
Engineer for review the applicant shall be advised and required to file,
in triplicate, a plot plan for the premises which said plot plan shall
contain:
(1) The location and description of all existing natural and man-made
features on the site, including existing and proposed contours,
existing and proposed drainage and surface water flows with
necessary profiles and cross sections, prepared by a professional
engineer licensed to practice in the State of New Jersey.
(2) The proposed dates for the commencement and completion of the
work.
(3) The name and address of the owner of the land.
(4) Lot and block numbers of the lands as shown on the current Tax
Map of the Borough.
(5) Reason for removing or filling in of any soil.64
(6) Type and quantity of any soil to be removed.
(7) Location to which soil is to be removed.
(8) Such other pertinent data as the Borough Engineer may deem
necessary.
(9) An engineer's estimate of the cost of the work to be performed.
E. Factors considered in reviewing applications.
(1) In considering and reviewing an application referred to him, the
Borough Engineer shall be guided by and take into consideration
the public health, safety and general welfare, and particular
consideration shall be given to the following:
(a) Soil erosion by water and wind.
(b) Drainage.
(c) Soil fertility.
(d) Lateral support slopes and grades of abutting streets and
lands.
(e) Land values and uses.
63.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
64.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 165-92 GARAGE SALES § 165-92
154:395
(f) Any other factors relevant to the coordinated, adjusted and
harmonious development of the Borough.
(2) If after considering the above factors the Borough Engineer
determines that the proposed disturbance, removal or
redistribution of soil will not be detrimental to the health, safety or
welfare of the Borough or its inhabitants, he shall approve the
plans. Upon approval of the plans, payment of fees and filing of the
bond, required by this chapter, the Construction Official shall issue
a soil disturbance permit. Notice of the grant or denial of the
application shall be given to the applicant within 45 days after a
complete application is filed.
F. Bond requirements. Where the approval of the Borough Engineer is
required, before a permit is issued, the applicant shall file with the
Borough Clerk a bond executed by the applicant as principal and by a
surety company licensed to do business in the State of New Jersey as
surety. The amount of the bond shall be for the total cost of the work to
be performed as estimated by the Borough Engineer. The bond shall be
conditioned as follows:
(1) That the permittee will complete the work authorized by the permit
in conformity with the terms of the permit and the provisions of this
chapter on or before the date of completion set forth in the
application.
(2) That the applicant will repair any public street, sidewalk, right-ofway,
structure or land which may be damaged as a result of the
work authorized by the permit.65
G. General provisions. Soil disturbance conducted under a permit issued
under this chapter shall be in accordance with the following
regulations:
(1) Operations shall be conducted so that there shall be no sharp
declivities, pits or depressions.
(2) Land shall be graded so as to conform to the contour lines and
grades approved and shall be cleared of debris.
(3) The top layer of soil to a depth of six inches shall not be removed
from the premises but shall be set aside and respread over the
premises when the remainder of the soil has been removed.
(4) All of the work described in this chapter shall be performed
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on any working day.
(5) Adequate measures shall be taken to prevent erosion or the
depositing of soil or surface runoff upon surrounding lands.
65.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 165-92 CHATHAM CODE § 165-92
154:396
§ 165-93. Satellite dish or antenna. [Added 12-9-1985 by Ord. No.
21-85]
(Reserved)
§ 165-94. Decks. [Added 9-23-2002 by Ord. No. 02-18]
H. Injunctive proceedings. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as to
prevent the Borough from taking injunctive proceedings to restrain
removal of topsoil as described in this chapter.
A. The floor of a deck shall at no point be more than eight feet above the
original ground elevation underneath.
B. No part of a deck shall be closer than 30 feet from the rear line of the
property.
C. A deck shall be set back at least three feet from the existing side yard of
the property, but in no case shall it be set back less than 12 feet from
the side line of the property.
D. In order to qualify for the 50% exemption from inclusion in lot coverage
which is provided for in the definition of lot coverage in § 165-10, a deck
must comply with the following requirements as well as those listed in
Subsections A through C above:
(1) There must be a minimum gap of 3/16 inch between any adjoining
floor boards of the deck.
(2) For the purpose of storm drainage, there shall be installed either:
(a) Uniformly graded crushed stone, in a bed six inches deep
under the deck, with any necessary filter fabric to prevent
clogging of the stone; or
(b) A dry well with an effective volume equal to six inches of
uniformly graded crushed stone times the area of the deck,
with any necessary piping and filter fabric to prevent clogging
of the stone.
§ 165-92 GARAGE SALES § 165-94
154:397

ARTICLE XIII
Signs
[Amended 12-14-1981 by Ord. No. 21-81; 12-9-1985 by Ord. No.
21-85; 11-9-1987 by Ord. No. 15-87; 4-12-1993 by Ord. No. 8-93;
2-27-1995 by Ord. No. 4-95; 4-25-2005 by Ord. No. 05-09; 5-23-2005
by Ord. No. 05-19; 10-24-2011 by Ord. No. 11-18; 3-11-2013 by Ord.
No. 13-04; 8-14-2017 by Ord. No. 17-08]
§ 165-95. Purposes.
The purposes of this article are to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare through reasonable, consistent and nondiscriminatory sign
standards. The sign regulations in this article are intended to encourage
the effective use of signs as a means of communication in the Borough of
Chatham; to maintain and enhance the aesthetic and historic environment
and the Borough's ability to promote sources of economic development and
growth; to improve pedestrian and traffic safety; to control the effect of
signs on adjacent public and private property; and to provide a means of
enforcement of the sign regulations.
§ 165-96. General.
§ 165-97. Permits required.
Unless otherwise provided in this article, no sign may be placed,
constructed, erected, or modified without the issuance of a sign permit.
§ 165-98. Exempt signs.
A sign permit shall not be required for the following signs:
A. A sign may be erected, placed, established, painted, constructed, or
maintained in the Borough only in conformance with the standards,
procedures, exemptions, and other requirements of this article.
B. All signs, unless specifically stated otherwise in this article, shall relate
to the use or occupancy of the property upon which the sign is located.
A. Temporary window signs in nonresidential districts, provided they are
not illuminated and do not exceed more than one square foot in area.
B. Official governmental agency signs, including traffic control signs,
traffic or directional signs, street signs, emergency, historical markers,
and signs posted by government agencies.
C. Light displays in nonresidential districts. Lights and decorations with
no commercial message are permitted in nonresidential districts from
October 15 to January 15, and no more than 10 days before and no more
than three days after any federal holiday. Such lights shall be small
clear or white bulbs and shall not blink or flash, and shall not extend
more than 15 feet from the ground level.
§ 165-95 GARAGE SALES § 165-98
154:399
§ 165-99. (Reserved)
§ 165-100. Signs in public right-of-way.
The only signs allowed in the public right-of-way shall be the following:
D. A contractor's identification sign, provided such signs shall not exceed
three square feet in sign area and three feet in height and shall be
located on the property where the work is being performed and only
during the period of such work.
E. Flags and emblems of a government or of a political, civic,
philanthropic, educational or religious organization.
F. Noncommercial signs on private property, provided that such signs
shall not exceed three square feet in sign area and three feet in height.
Noncommercial signs may be placed on private property for not more
than 30 days prior to an event date and must be removed within five
days following an event date, and in no case shall any such sign be
displayed for more than 35 days. Noncommercial signs as defined by
this subsection shall include political signs or signs expressing an
opinion on a noncommercial issue. Noncommercial signs placed in the
public right-of-way shall be subject to § 165-100F.
G. Portable signs.
(1) Portable signs shall not be located in any vehicular sight triangle
easement or in any area that creates a vehicular or pedestrian
hazard or inconvenience. No portable sign shall be located on any
public sidewalk or public street. In all nonresidential districts, one
portable sign shall be allowed per each single tax lot, except that a
corner tax lot may have two portable signs, one for each frontage.
(2) All portable signs shall be nonilluminated. The maximum size of the
sign shall be no more than five feet in height from the top of sign to
the ground, and no more than three feet wide. The sign may be
double-sided. All such signs shall be properly anchored, secured, or
weighted.
(3) Portable signs are defined in § 165-10.
A. Official governmental agency signs, including traffic control signs,
traffic or directional signs, street signs, emergency, historical markers,
and signs posted by government agencies.
B. Bus stop signs erected by a public transit company.
C. Informational signs of a public utility regarding its poles, lines, pipes, or
facilities.
D. Awnings, canopies, flags, or signs projecting over a public right-of-way
in conformity with the provisions of this article.
§ 165-98 CHATHAM CODE § 165-100
154:400
§ 165-101. Prohibited signs.
The following signs are prohibited in the Borough:
E. Emergency warning signs erected by a governmental agency, a public
utility company, or a contractor doing authorized or permitted work
within the public right-of-way.
F. Noncommercial signs, provided that such signs shall not exceed three
square feet in sign area and three feet in height. Noncommercial signs
may be placed in the right-of-way for not more than 30 days prior to an
event date and must be removed within five days following an event
date, and in no case shall any such sign be posted for more than 35
days. An exemption from the Borough Zoning Officer, which shall
include a listing of all intended signs and dates the signs will be in
place, shall be required prior to the placement of any noncommercial
sign in the right-of-way. Noncommercial signs as defined by this
subsection shall include political signs or signs expressing an opinion
on a noncommercial issue. Noncommercial signs placed on private
property shall be subject to § 165-98F.
G. Portable signs in conformance with § 165-98G.
H. Garage sale signs in conformance with Chapter 154 and § 165-106.
A. All signs not specifically permitted are prohibited.
B. Signs located or designed in such a manner so as to constitute a hazard
to pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
C. Inflatable signs.
D. Tethered balloons (except that noncommunicative decorative balloons
not greater than 12 inches in diameter are permitted as stated in
§ 165-101C).
E. Flashing, animated, fluttering or rotating signs (with the exception of
barber poles) or signs with the optical illusion of movement, including
running lights having the primary effect of calling attention to a
building or to elements of a building.
F. Wind signs, such as flags, pennants, or spinners [except as permitted
under §§ 165-98B(2) and 165-105I].
G. Signs with more display surfaces than the two faces of a freestanding
vertical sign. Examples of this type of prohibited sign are triangular or
three-dimensional signs.
H. Portable signs for commercial purposes (except as permitted under
§§ 165-98G and 165-106C).
I. Signs placed, inscribed or supported upon the roof or upon any
structure which extends above the roof or any building, except such
§ 165-100 GARAGE SALES § 165-101
154:401
§ 165-102. Construction, maintenance, lighting and design.
directional devices as may be required by Federal Aviation
Administration.
J. Any sign indicating that a property has been leased or sold, with such
language as (but not limited to) "sold," "leased," "too late" or "gone."
K. Billboards.
L. Signs incorporating projected images.
M. Signs that are temporarily or permanently affixed to standpipes, fire
escapes, light poles, utility and traffic sign poles, Borough flagpoles, or
any poles that are owned or operated by a governmental entity or public
utility, except for signs placed by such governmental entity or public
utility.
N. Signs that are temporarily or permanently erected on Borough-owned
property or within the right-of-way, except as provided herein.
O. Signs located within a sight triangle, except for traffic regulatory signs
posted by governmental agencies.
P. Internally illuminated signs using gas, chemical or fluorescent colors,
including white, where tubing is visible. This includes all signs
commonly described as neon, neon-like and/or fluorescent neon type.
LED signs are not permitted unless they are inlaid channel lighting.
Q. Signs that cause glare on adjacent property as set forth in § 165-78.
R. Signs for commercial purposes other than the use being made of the
premises on which the sign is located.
S. Beacons and searchlights.
A. Construction, maintenance, and lighting.
(1) All signs shall be constructed of permanent materials and shall be
permanently attached to the ground or a building by direct
attachment to a rigid wall, frame, or structure, except for window
signs, banners, flags and signs permitted under this article for a
limited period of time, and tethered balloons that are
noncommunicative decorative balloons not greater than 12 inches
in diameter, and which balloons shall be reasonably anchored to
avoid safety hazards.
(2) All signs shall be maintained in good structural condition and
appearance, in compliance with all building and electrical codes,66
and in conformance with this article at all times.
66.Editor's Note: See Ch. 111, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 165-101 CHATHAM CODE § 165-102
154:402
§ 165-103. General permit procedures.
The following procedures shall govern the application for and issuance of all
sign permits and the submission and review of master signage plans under
this article:
(3) Internally illuminated signs shall not be permitted in the B-3 and
B-4 Districts. In all other districts, internally illuminated signs shall
illuminate only the lettering or a logo, and the background shall be
opaque or dark.
B. Design guidelines. To the maximum extent possible, signs shall adhere
to the following design guidelines:
(1) On buildings designed for commerce, signs should fit in the existing
features of the facade, such as when facade bands of decorative
moldings create natural frames for signs. Signs should be aligned
with signs on adjacent storefronts.
(2) On lots with buildings built as residences but now put to
commercial use:
(a) Freestanding signs are preferred. If a sign must be placed on
such a building, it should be limited to one small identification
panel at each entrance.
(b) In all zone districts, external illumination of signs is preferred.
(3) Identification of the business should be the only message on the
principal sign. Verbiage may include three of the following: the
business name, the street address, the telephone number, the
website address, a short product identifier, and/or a logo or
emblem. Secondary signs in windows or the front door may inform
about products sold or services rendered.
(4) Good legibility communicates a sign's message quickly and easily.
The clearer the type style, the more readily it will be understood.
(5) Color contrast greatly influences legibility. The strongest impact
occurs with a dark background, and a dark and muted background
helps a sign fit more naturally into older buildings, especially if the
sign's colors complement those of the building's materials.
(6) Signs painted on windows are more legible in pale paint or gold
leaf.
A. Applications for sign permits of any kind and applications for approval
of a master signage plan shall be submitted to the Borough Zoning
Official on an application form or in accordance with application
specifications published by the Borough Zoning Official.
§ 165-102 GARAGE SALES § 165-103
154:403
§ 165-104. Master signage plan.
B. Fees. Each application for a sign permit or for approval of a master
signage plan shall be accompanied by the applicable fees, which shall
be established by the governing body of the Borough.
C. Completeness. Within 10 business days of receiving an application for a
sign permit, the Borough Zoning Official shall review it for
completeness. If the application is incomplete, the Borough Zoning
Official shall, within such ten-day period, send a notice to the applicant
setting forth the deficiencies in the application.
D. Action.
(1) Except as stated within this section, upon receipt of a complete
application, the sign permit shall be issued by the Borough Zoning
Official within 10 business days if the proposed signs conform in
every respect with the requirements of this article and, in the case
of a commercial use, with the applicable requirements for a master
signage plan. Before a sign permit is issued, applications will be
reviewed by the Sign Committee (a subcommittee of the Borough
Planning Board) and by the Borough's Historic Preservation
Commission, if the property is located within the Borough's
Historic District.
(2) If a requested sign or signage plan is rejected as noncompliant with
this article, the Borough Zoning Official shall, within 10 business
days of receipt of a complete application, specify the
noncompliance of the signs as compared with this article in a
written notice to the applicant. The applicant may appeal the
decision to the Zoning Board of Adjustment, or if the signage is part
of a development application, may request consideration of same
before the Borough's Board that has jurisdiction over the
development application.
E. Signage on development applications. Before acting on a development
application for a nonresidential use where installation or modification
of any sign is proposed, the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment, as
the case may be, shall, immediately after receipt of a complete
application, refer the master signage plan to the Borough Zoning
Official, who shall, within 10 business days, review the master signage
plan and submit his recommendations to the Board.
A. Any application for a sign permit in any nonresidential district shall be
accompanied by a master signage plan. A master signage plan shall also
be included in any development plan or site plan required by the
Borough for a proposed development in which the installation or
modification of any sign is proposed.
§ 165-103 CHATHAM CODE § 165-104
154:404
§ 165-105. Nonresidential districts.
The following signs are permitted in nonresidential districts:
B. The following information shall be included on a master signage plan
for each existing and proposed sign, with the exception of incidental
signs:
(1) Size and area.
(2) Letter style.
(3) Lighting.
(4) Color.
(5) Construction and materials, including the method of attachment
and dimensions of projection.
(6) Height of sign above grade.
(7) Location.
C. The master signage plan shall include a sketch or photograph showing
the dimensions of each facade, window, and canopy of the building to
which a sign is to be attached, in sufficient detail to show the location,
dimension and area of all existing and proposed permanent signs
affixed to the walls, windows, and awnings to the building. These
dimensions shall be shown either on the sketch or on the photograph.
D. In addition, for lots with existing or proposed freestanding signs, a plot
plan shall be submitted, showing the location of buildings, parking lots,
driveways, and landscaped areas, as well as the existing or proposed
signs.
E. The Borough Sign Committee may request color swatches and material
samples for review of any application.
A. Wall signs. Wall signs are permitted only on the facades of buildings
facing on a public street, public right-of-way or municipal parking lot.
The following restrictions shall apply:
(1) Number and size.
(a) The total area of all signs on a facade of a building that face a
public street, public right-of-way or municipal parking lot shall
not exceed 10% of the square footage of the ground floor
portion of the facade.
(b) In the M-1, M-2, and M-3 Districts, in the B-4 District, and in
the mall located at Block 29, Lot 9: One individual wall sign per
facade shall be permitted. If nonilluminated or externally
illuminated, a wall sign may have an area of up to 30 square
feet, or if internally illuminated, up to 20 square feet.
§ 165-104 GARAGE SALES § 165-105
154:405
(c) In the B-1, B-2, B-3, B-5, and B-6 Districts: One individual wall
sign per facade may have an area of up to 20 square feet. The
Planning Board may authorize one additional wall sign for a
building wall facing a municipal parking lot, subject to such
conditions as the Board may prescribe for size, placement, and
consideration of the view from any residential districts.
(d) For the purpose of this § 165-105, in a building whose ground
floor is divided side to side into separate units with separate
front entrances, each unit shall be treated as having a separate
front facade.
(e) If there is more than one building on a lot in a nonresidential
district and the building has a front facade facing a street, one
wall sign may be provided for each building as set forth for the
appropriate district in § 165-105A(1)(b) or (c) above.
(2) Placement and projection. A wall sign shall be located on the lintel
of commercial buildings, and should not obscure important
architectural details of the building. A wall sign shall not extend
beyond the ends of the wall surface on which it is placed and shall
be below the top of the first story, or below the top of the parapet of
the premises, or not over 17 feet above grade, whichever shall be
lower. A wall sign shall not project more than four inches beyond
the building facade.
(3) Lighting. Lighting for wall signs shall be as prescribed under
§ 165-102.
(4) All sign graphics, including lettering and logos, shall not exceed 12
inches in height.
B. Freestanding signs. The following restrictions shall apply:
(1) Except in the B-4 District, one freestanding sign shall be permitted
on any single tax lot, regardless of the number of establishments on
the property, except as follows:
(a) Freestanding signs shall not be permitted in the B-4 District.
(b) One additional freestanding sign (maximum of two
freestanding signs) shall be permitted when the property has
frontage on more than one public street, with no more than one
freestanding sign per street.
(c) One freestanding sign (maximum of two freestanding signs)
shall be permitted for each individual principal building on a
lot.
(2) Size. The area of freestanding signs is limited as follows:
§ 165-105 CHATHAM CODE § 165-105
154:406
(a) If nonilluminated, or if externally illuminated and constructed
of wood, material resembling wood or masonry materials, a
sign may not exceed eight square feet.
(b) Any other freestanding signs, including those internally
illuminated, may not exceed five square feet.
(c) If more than one business is located on a tax lot, the sign area
permitted shall be as follows:
[1] The single freestanding sign may be a directory sign with a
total area as regulated in § 165-105B(2)(a) or (b) above or,
a minimum of one square foot panel for each tenant,
whichever results in a smaller sign area; or
[2] The single freestanding sign may identify the building or
the primary occupant, and a nonilluminated directory wall
sign not exceeding one square foot per tenant may be
permitted on the ground floor facade.
(3) Height. The height of a freestanding sign shall not exceed seven
feet. Height shall be computed as the distance from the base of the
sign at normal grade to the top of the highest attached component
of the sign. Normal grade shall be construed to be the lower of the
existing grade prior to construction or the newly established grade
after construction, exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding, or
excavation solely for the purpose of locating the sign. In cases in
which the normal grade cannot reasonably be determined, sign
height shall be computed on the assumption that the elevation of
the normal grade at the base of the sign is equal to the elevation of
the nearest point of the crown of a public road or the grade of the
land at the principal entrance to the principal structure of the lot,
whichever is lower.
(4) Location. The sign shall be at least five feet from any property line.
Should there be less than 12 feet between the street front property
line and the building foundation, the sign shall be centered
between the building and the property line, but in no case closer
than three feet from the sidewalk or, if there is no sidewalk, the
property line. Signs shall not be placed within the area at a street
corner where there should be a sight easement as described in this
article.
(5) Lighting. Lighting shall be as prescribed under § 165-102.
(6) Sign verbiage and graphics.
(a) Verbiage placed on freestanding signs is limited to
identification of the business. Such verbiage shall identify the
business with the use of any three of the following: business
name, the street address, the telephone number, the website
address, a short product identifier, and/or or a logo or emblem.
§ 165-105 GARAGE SALES § 165-105
154:407
(b) All sign graphics, including lettering and logos, shall not
exceed eight inches in height.
C. Side or rear entrance signs. When a business, in addition to a front
entrance, also has a public entrance at the side or rear of a building and
no other side or rear wall sign, a nonilluminated or externally
illuminated sign identifying the occupant shall be permitted at such an
entrance, provided it does not exceed six square feet in area.
D. Awning or canopy signage.
(1) Verbiage placed on awnings or canopies shall be limited to
identification of the business. Such verbiage may identify the
business name, the street address, the telephone number, the
website address, a short product identifier, and/or a logo or
emblem. Such verbiage shall be limited to location on the fringe of
the awning or canopy, except that a business logo or emblem may
be placed on the slope of the awning or canopy as long as it is
centered and does not exceed 10% of the area of the awning or
canopy.
(2) Sign graphics, including lettering and logos, shall not exceed eight
inches in height.
(3) Awning and canopy signs may have an area of up to 10 square feet.
E. Projecting signs. In the B-4 District only, and only on streets abutting
Main Street, either one projecting sign per premises or the allowable
facade sign(s) shall be permitted. The projecting sign shall be hung
from the ground-floor facade at least 10 feet above ground level, shall
project no more than four feet from the building facade, have a total
area not exceeding four square feet, and illumination shall only be
external. The issuance and continuation of such a sign permit shall be
conditioned on the sign owner obtaining and maintaining in force
liability insurance for such a sign in such form and such amount as the
Borough Administrator may reasonably from time to time determine,
provided that the amount of such liability insurance shall be at least
$1,000,000 and shall name the Borough of Chatham as an additional
insured on such policy.
F. Incidental signs. Incidental signs of one square foot or less in area are
allowed, require no permit, and are not included in any maximum total
sign area or number of signs allowed on a single tax lot.
G. Window signs. In addition to the signs allowed elsewhere in this
§ 165-105, first-floor window signs are allowed, provided that no more
than one illuminated sign shall be placed in any first floor window. In
the B-4 District only, nonilluminated window signs are allowed in
second-floor windows. No window sign shall exceed three square feet in
area or 20% of the glazed area of any individual window, whichever
results in the smaller sign area. In calculating the maximum window
coverage as described herein, the figure used for any illuminated sign
§ 165-105 CHATHAM CODE § 165-105
154:408
§ 165-106. Residential districts.
In addition to those signs enumerated in § 165-98, the following signs
are permitted in residential districts and on wholly residential-use lots in
nonresidential districts:
will be twice its actual area. The area of window signs shall count
towards the total sign area permitted for wall signs pursuant to
§ 165-105A(1)(a).
H. Door signs. Door signs shall be subject to the following regulations:
(1) Signage on doors is permitted for up to 20% of the glass area.
(2) On the portion of the glass in the door between three feet from the
bottom of the door and five feet six inches from the bottom of the
door, signage on the glass is permitted for up to 10% of the glass
area in the above-described portion of the door, but said signage
shall not exceed one square foot.
I. Special event displays. Noncommunicative decorative flags, strings of
pennants (building mounted only), and banners of no more than 10
square feet shall be permitted as a display for a period of not more than
30 days at a time. Such displays shall be permitted for any business on
no more than two occasions in any calendar year, providing that a letter
of intent shall be reviewed and approved by the Zoning Official.
J. Decorative flag. One flag shall be permitted per business premises,
displaying only a generic logo or design (no lettering), and composed
only of a lightweight fabric or woven material (no plastic). No such flag
shall be larger than three feet by five feet and must be hung from the
ground floor facade at least 10 feet above ground level and project no
more than three feet from the building facade.
K. Traffic or directional signs. Such signs shall be permitted on private
property where necessary to safely and effectively convey persons to
their intended destination. Information on signs shall be directional
information and shall not contain any logos, emblems or other business
identifiers. The number of signs will be whatever is required to achieve
this goal. These signs shall be consistent with other site signage, and
shall be limited to four square feet in area and three feet in height. This
type of signage is also permitted on public property as set forth in
§ 165-100A.
A. Nameplates. Nameplates shall be permitted without a permit if
mounted flush on the wall near an entrance and bearing the name of the
family unit residing on the premises. Not more than one sign shall be
permitted for each family unit on the premises, and each sign may not
exceed 72 square inches in area.
B. Home occupation. A nameplate shall be permitted without a permit
bearing the name and/or business of the person engaged in a permitted
§ 165-105 GARAGE SALES § 165-106
154:409
§ 165-107. Nonconforming signs.
§ 165-108. Abandoned signs.
Any sign now or hereafter existing which no longer advertises a bona fide
business conducted, a product sold or is not used for a permitted use
hereunder shall be taken down and removed by the permittee, owner, agent
or person having the beneficial use of the building or structure or land
upon which such sign may be found within 10 days after written notification
from the Zoning Officer. The failure to keep a nonconforming sign painted
or in good repair for a period of six months shall constitute abandonment,
home occupation and residing at the premises, provided that such
signs shall not exceed one square foot in area. This nameplate may be
attached to a building or to a post, which post shall not exceed five
feet in height. Such signs may be lighted if it is determined after a
public hearing that the proposed illumination is reasonable. Conditions
may include the prevention of glare and the requirement that such
illumination be extinguished at a particular time.
C. Real estate, work-in-progress, and garage sale signs. One sign shall be
permitted without a permit so long as same does not exceed four square
feet pertaining to the lease or sale of, or work-in-progress on, or a
garage sale at, the lot or building, which sign shall be placed no nearer
to the street than three feet from the sidewalk or, if there is no
sidewalk, no nearer to the street than three feet from the front line of
the property. Any such sign shall be removed after the approval of a
CCO for the purchase of the premises, or completion of the work-inprogress,
or completion of the garage sale. A garage sale sign may be
displayed for no more than three days per property lot every six months
and one work-in-progress sign per property lot for no more than 30 days
every year.
D. Holiday lights, decorations and displays shall be permitted without a
permit.
A. All signs that are not in conformity with this article but were erected
prior to January 1, 1988, and not thereafter modified, or were
thereafter erected or modified pursuant to a proper sign permit or
other municipal approval, may remain, subject to being maintained in
good structural condition and appearance, and in compliance with all
building and electrical codes67 and property maintenance codes.68
B. Customary sign maintenance, sign repair, and changing of permanent
sign faces of nonconforming signs is allowed so long as structural
alterations are not made and the sign is not increased in size. Signs and
sign structures that are moved, replaced, or structurally altered must
be brought into conformance with this article.
67.Editor's Note: See Ch. 111, Construction Codes, Uniform.
68.Editor's Note: See Ch. 204, Property Maintenance.
§ 165-106 CHATHAM CODE § 165-108
154:410
and such sign may not be reused and must be removed. Said sign shall be
repainted or repaired as necessary within 10 days after written notification
from the Zoning Officer.
§ 165-109. Enforcement.
If any sign which is in violation of this article which is not removed within 24
hours after the Borough Zoning Official shall have given written notification
to any owner or occupant of the property or to the owner or any agent or
employee of the owner of the sign, that such sign is in violation, such owner
or occupant of the property or the owner of the sign, as the case may be,
shall be subject to prosecution under this article and to the penalties set
forth in § 165-173 hereto.
§ 165-108 GARAGE SALES § 165-109
154:411

ARTICLE XIV
Stormwater Management and Control
[Amended 12-14-1981 by Ord. No. 21-81; 2-8-1993 by Ord. No. 2-93;
12-11-1995 by Ord. No. 17-95; 4-25-2005 by Ord. No. 05-09;
3-27-2006 by Ord. No. 06-06]
§ 165-110. Title.
This article shall be known as and may be cited as the "Stormwater
Management Ordinance of the Borough of Chatham."
§ 165-111. Scope and purpose.
A. Policy statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge and pollutant
reduction through nonstructural or low-impact techniques shall be
explored before relying on structural best management practices
(BMPs). Structural BMPs should be integrated with nonstructural
stormwater management measures and proper maintenance plans.
Nonstructural measures include both environmentally sensitive site
design and source controls that prevent pollutants from being placed on
the site. Source control plans should be developed based upon physical
site conditions and the origin, nature and the anticipated loading of
potential pollutants. Multiple stormwater management BMPs may be
necessary to achieve the established performance standards for water
quality, quantity and groundwater recharge.
B. Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for "major
development" as defined in § 165-112, Definitions.
C. Applicability.
(1) This article shall be applicable to all site plans and subdivisions for
the following major developments that require preliminary or final
site plan or subdivision review:
(a) Nonresidential major developments; and
(b) Aspects of residential major developments that are not preempted
by the Residential Site Improvement Standards at
N.J.A.C. 5:21; and
(2) This article shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by the Borough of Chatham.
(3) Except in any case where zoning and variances are specifically
referred to, this article is adopted pursuant to Article 6 of the
Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37 et seq.
D. Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements.
Development approvals issued pursuant to this article are to be
considered an integral part of development approvals under the
§ 165-110 GARAGE SALES § 165-111
154:413
§ 165-112. Definitions.
development permit, subdivision and site plan review process and do
not relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits
or approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule,
act or ordinance. In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this article shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare. This article
is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other
ordinances, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law except
that, where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different
from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation or other
provision of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher standards
shall control.
A. For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words in the plural number include the singular and words
in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is
always mandatory and not merely directory.
B. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application.
The definitions below are the same as or based on the corresponding
definitions in the Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS) — The material contained
in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
prepared by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection,
Watershed Management, and any amendments thereto.
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the County
Board of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinance(s). The county review
agency may either be:
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
DESIGNATED CENTER — A state development and redevelopment plan
center as designated by the State Planning Commission such as urban,
regional, town, village or hamlet.
(1) A county planning agency; or
A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A.
58:16A-55.5, if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to
approve, conditionally approve or disapprove municipal
stormwater management plans and implementing ordinances.
(2)
§ 165-111 CHATHAM CODE § 165-112
154:414
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly
licensed in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may
include, but not necessarily be limited to, development of project
requirements, creation and development of project design and
preparation of drawings and specifications.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more
parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or structure, any
mining excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of
any building or other structure, or land or extension of use of land,
by any person, for which permission is required under the Municipal
Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. In the case of development
of agricultural lands, development means: any activity that requires a
state permit; any activity reviewed by the County Agricultural Board
(CAB) and the State Agricultural Development Committee (SADC); and
municipal review of any activity not exempted by the Right to Farm Act,
N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater,
sediments or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving water
body or to a particular point along a receiving water body.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREA — An area or feature which is
of significant environmental value, including but not limited to: stream
corridor; natural heritage priority site; habitat of endangered or
threatened species; large area of contiguous open space or upland
forest; steep slopes; and wellhead protection and groundwater
recharge areas. Habitats of endangered or threatened species are
identified using the Department's Landscape Project as approved by the
Department's Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments
by water, wind, ice or gravity.
HYDRAULICS — A science relating to the effects of flow of liquid in
motion.
HYDROLOGY — A science dealing with the properties, distribution,
and circulation of water on the surface of the land, in the soil and
underlying rocks and in the atmosphere.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer
of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — The process by which water seeps into the soil from
precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development that provides for
ultimately disturbing one or more acres of land. Disturbance for the
purpose of this rule is the placement of impervious surface or exposure
and/or movement of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting or removing of
vegetation.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Chatham.
§ 165-112 GARAGE SALES § 165-112
154:415
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, Borough of Chatham or political subdivision of this state
subject to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use
Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
filter backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge,
munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes,
radioactive substance [except those regulated under the Atomic Energy
Act of 1954, as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.)], thermal waste,
wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial,
municipal, agricultural, and construction waste or runoff, or other
residue discharged directly or indirectly to the land, groundwaters or
surface waters of the state or to a domestic treatment works. Pollutant
includes both hazardous and non-hazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates
into the ground and is not evapo-transpired.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension,
is being transported or has been moved from its site of origin by air,
water or gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a development is to occur or has
occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain
and snow) that runs off the land's surface is transmitted to the
subsurface or is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or
drainage facilities or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or
embankment and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A
stormwater management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a
detention basin or infiltration basin) retain water in a permanent pool
(a retention basin) or be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most
constructed stormwater wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater
recharge of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal nonstormwater
discharges into stormwater conveyances.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or
in storm sewers resulting from precipitation.
§ 165-112 CHATHAM CODE § 165-112
154:416
§ 165-113. Design and performance standards for stormwater
management measures.
§ 165-114. General stormwater management requirements for
major development.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs,
streams, wetlands and bodies of surface or ground water, whether
natural or artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or
subject to its jurisdiction.
WETLANDS OR WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated
by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient
to support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a
prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.
A. Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity and stormwater runoff quality standards in
§ 165-114. To the maximum extent practicable, these standards shall be
met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater management strategies
into the design. If these strategies alone are not sufficient to meet these
standards, structural stormwater management measures necessary to
meet these standards shall be incorporated into the design.
B. The standards in this section apply only to new major development and
are intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on water
quality and water quantity in receiving water bodies and maintain
groundwater recharge. The standards do not apply to new development
to the extent that alternative design and performance standards are
applicable under a regional stormwater management plan or water
quality management plan adopted in accordance with Department
rules.
A. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of a
major development in accordance with § 165-120.
B. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered species as
documented in the Department's Landscape Project or Natural
Heritage Database established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through
13:1B-15.150, particularly Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/or
Clemmys muhlenbergi (bog turtle).
C. The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity and stormwater
runoff quality requirements of § 165-114F and G:
(1) The construction of an underground utility line, provided that the
disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
§ 165-112 GARAGE SALES § 165-114
154:417
(2) The construction of an aboveground utility line, provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
(3) The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk
or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access
is made of permeable material.
D. A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity and stormwater runoff quality requirements
of § 165-114F and G may be obtained for the enlargement of an existing
public roadway or railroad, or the construction or enlargement of a
public pedestrian access, provided that the following conditions are
met:
(1) The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
(2) The applicant demonstrates through an alternatives analysis, that
through the use of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management strategies and measures, the option selected
complies with the requirements of § 165-114F and G to the
maximum extent practicable;
(3) The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements
of § 165-114F and G, existing structures currently in use, such as
homes and buildings, would need to be condemned; and
(4) The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under § 165-114D(3) above within
the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream, that would
provide additional opportunities to mitigate the requirements of
§ 165-114F and G that were not achievable on-site.
E. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
(1) To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in § 165-114F
and G shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies set forth at § 165-114E into the design. The
applicant shall identify the nonstructural measures incorporated
into the design of the project. If the applicant contends that it is not
feasible for engineering, environmental or safety reasons to
incorporate any nonstructural stormwater management measures
identified in § 165-114E(2) below into the design of a particular
project, the applicant shall identify the strategy considered and
provide a basis for the contention.
(2) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated
into site design shall:
§ 165-114 CHATHAM CODE § 165-114
154:418
(a) Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the
flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
(c) Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
(d) Minimize the decrease in the time of concentration from
preconstruction to postconstruction. "Time of concentration" is
defined as the time it takes for runoff to travel from the
hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point
of interest within a watershed;
(e) Minimize land disturbance, including clearing and grading;
(f) Minimize soil compaction;
(g) Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides;
(h) Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
(i) Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site in order to prevent or
minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. Such source controls include, but are not limited to:
[1] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems, including features
that satisfy § 165-114E(3) below;
[2] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
[3] Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
[4] When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24- 39 et seq., and implementing rules.
(3) Site design features identified under § 165-114E(2)(i)[1] above
shall comply with the following standard to control passage of solid
and floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of
this subsection, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment,
debris, trash and other floating, suspended or settleable solids. For
exemptions to this standard see § 165-114E(3)(c) below.
§ 165-114 GARAGE SALES § 165-114
154:419
(a) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a storm
drain or surface water body under that grate:
[1] The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways
Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
[2] A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven square inches or
is no greater than five-tenths inch across the smallest
dimension.
Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates
in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb opening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer
manholes, ditch grates, trench grates and grates of
spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground
surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges),
driveways, parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks,
lawns, fields, open channels and stormwater basin floors.
(b) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an
area of no more than seven square inches or be no greater than
two inches across the smallest dimension.
(c) This standard does not apply:
[1] Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
[2] Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in § 165-114G(1) are conveyed through any
device (e.g., end of pipe netting facility, manufactured
treatment device or a catch basin hood) that is designed,
at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
[a] A rectangular space 4.625 inches long and 1.5 inches
wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
[b] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch;
[3] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars, to
§ 165-114 CHATHAM CODE § 165-114
154:420
the elevation of the water quality design storm as specified
in § 165-114G(1); or
[4] Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register listed historic property.
(4) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in § 165-114F and G
shall be dedicated to a government agency, subjected to a
conservation restriction filed with the appropriate county clerk's
office, or subject to an approved equivalent restriction that ensures
that measure or an equivalent stormwater management measure
approved by the reviewing agency is maintained in perpetuity.
(5) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices (BMP) Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from
the address identified in § 165-117 or found on the Department's
website at www.njstoramwater.org.
F. Erosion control, groundwater recharge and runoff quantity standards.
(1) This subsection contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and
groundwater recharge and control stormwater runoff quantity
impacts of major development.
(a) The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and
implementing rules.
(b) The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
[1] The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations at § 165-115, either:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater management
measures maintain 100% of the average annual
preconstruction groundwater recharge volume for the
site; or
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff volume
§ 165-114 GARAGE SALES § 165-114
154:421
from preconstruction to postconstruction for the twoyear
storm is infiltrated
[2] The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
[a] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading.
"High pollutant loading areas” are areas in industrial
and commercial developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored or
applied; areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded
or stored; areas where hazardous materials are
expected to be present in greater than "reportable
quantities" as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR
302.4; areas where recharge would be inconsistent
with Department-approved remedial action work plan
or landfill closure plan; and areas with high risks for
spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facilities; and
[b] Industrial stormwater exposed to source material.
"Source material" means any material(s) or
machinery, located at an industrial facility that is
directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities, which
could be a source of pollutants in any industrial
stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source
materials include, but are not limited to, raw
materials; intermediate products; final products;
waste materials; by-products; industrial machinery
and fuels and lubricants, solvents and detergents that
are related to process, manufacturing or other
industrial activities that are exposed to stormwater.
[3] The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on
the groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid
adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a
naturally or seasonally high water table so as to cause
surficial ponding, flooding of basements or interference
with the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal
systems and other subsurface structures in the vicinity or
down gradient of the groundwater recharge area.
(c) In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for
stormwater runoff calculations at § 165-115, complete one of
the following:
[1] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that for stormwater leaving the site, postconstruction
§ 165-114 CHATHAM CODE § 165-114
154:422
runoff hydrographs for the two-, ten-, and one-hundredyear
storm events do not exceed, at any point in time, the
preconstruction runoff hydrographs for the same storm
events;
[2] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that there is no increase, as compared to the
preconstruction condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the two-, ten-, and onehundred-
year storm events and that the increased volume
or change in timing of stormwater runoff will not increase
flood damage at or downstream of the site. This analysis
shall include the analysis of impacts of existing land uses
and projected land uses assuming full development under
existing zoning and land use ordinances in the drainage
area.
[3] Design stormwater management measures so that the
postconstruction peak runoff rates for the two-, ten- and
one-hundred-year storm events are 50%, 75% and 80%,
respectively, of the preconstruction peak runoff rates. The
percentages apply only to the postconstruction
stormwater runoff that is attributable to the portion of the
site on which the proposed development or project is to be
constructed.
(2) Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the
definition of major development in § 165-112 shall be submitted to
the appropriate soil conservation district for review and approval in
accordance with the requirements of this section and any
applicable soil conservation district guidelines for stormwater
runoff quantity and erosion control. For the purposes of this
section, "agricultural development" means land uses normally
associated with the production of food, fiber and livestock for sale.
Such uses do not include the development of land for the
processing or sale of food and the manufacturing of agriculturally
related products.
G. Stormwater runoff quality standards.
(1) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
postconstruction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in stormwater
runoff by 80% of the anticipated load from the developed site,
expressed as an annual average. Stormwater management
measures shall only be required for water quality control if an
additional 1/4 acre of impervious surface is being proposed on a
development site. The requirement to reduce TSS does not apply to
any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated under a numeric
effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the New Jersey Pollution
Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in
a discharge specifically exempt under a NJPDES permit from this
§ 165-114 GARAGE SALES § 165-114
154:423
requirement. The water quality design storm is 1.25 inches of
rainfall in two hours. Water quality calculations shall take into
account the distribution of rain from the water quality design
storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation of the volume of
runoff may take into account the implementation of nonstructural
and structural stormwater management measures.
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(Minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(Inches)
Time
(Minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(Inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
(2) For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in
accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 165-117 or found on the Department's
website at www.njstormwater.org. The BMP Manual and other
sources of technical guidance are listed in § 165-117. Total
suspended solids (TSS) reduction shall be calculated based on the
removal rates for the BMPs in Table 2 below. Alternative removal
rates and methods of calculating removal rates may be used if the
design engineer provides documentation demonstrating the
capability of these alternative rates and methods to the review
agency. A copy of any approved alternative rate or method of
calculating the removal rate shall be provided to the Department at
the following address: Division of Watershed Management, New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, P.O. Box 418
Trenton, New Jersey, 08625-0418.
§ 165-114 CHATHAM CODE § 165-114
154:424
(3) If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required
80% TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize the
following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B — (A x B)/100
Where
R =total TSS percent load removal from application of both
BMPs
A =the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first BMP
B =the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second
BMP
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice
TSS Percent Removal
Rate
Bioretention systems 90%
Constructed stormwater wetland 90%
Extended detention basin 40% to 60%
Infiltration structure 80%
Manufactured treatment device See § 165-116C
Sand filter 80%
Vegetative filter strip 60% to 80%
Wet pond 50% to 90%
(4) If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the eighty-percent
TSS removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the
runoff from the subareas converge on site, in which case the
removal rate can be demonstrated through a calculation using a
weighted average.
(5) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the postconstruction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm.
In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible,
the design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the performance standards in § 165-114F and G.
(6) Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which may
be obtained from the address identified in § 165-117.
(7) In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent
any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FW1.
§ 165-114 GARAGE SALES § 165-114
154:425
(8) Special water resource protection areas shall be established along
all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B and perennial
or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the
County Soil Surveys, within the associated HUC14 drainage area.
These areas shall be established for the protection of water quality,
aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance, exceptional
recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance
and exceptional fisheries significance of those established Category
One waters. These areas shall be designated and protected as
follows:
(a) The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
[1] A three-hundred-foot special water resource protection
area shall be provided on each side of the waterway,
measured perpendicular to the waterway from the top of
the bank outwards or from the center line of the waterway
where the bank is not defined, consisting of existing
vegetation or vegetation allowed to follow natural
succession is provided.
[2] Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under § 165-114G(8)(a)[1] above
shall only be allowed where previous development or
disturbance has occurred (for example, active agricultural
use, parking area or maintained lawn area). The
encroachment shall only be allowed where applicant
demonstrates that the functional value and overall
condition of the special water resource protection area will
be maintained to the maximum extent practicable. In no
case shall the remaining special water resource protection
area be reduced to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the top of bank of the waterway or center
line of the waterway where the bank is undefined. All
encroachments proposed under this subsection shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(b) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through
the special water resource protection area and shall comply
with the Standard for Off-Site Stability in the Standards For
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey, established
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq.
(c) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
Standard For Off-Site Stability in the "Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established
§ 165-114 CHATHAM CODE § 165-114
154:426
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq., then the stabilization measures in accordance
with the requirements of the above standards may be placed
within the special water resource protection area, provided
that:
[1] Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet
of the Category One waterway;
[2] Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this
section shall achieve a ninety-five-percent TSS
postconstruction removal rate;
[3] Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on
the receiving waterway;
[4] The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable;
[5] A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and Soil Conservation
District staff to identify necessary stabilization measures;
and
[6] All encroachments proposed under this section shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(d) A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as an
element of a regional stormwater management plan or by a
municipality through an adopted municipal stormwater
management plan. If a stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to § 165-114G(8) has been approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection, then the provisions
of the plan shall be the applicable special water resource
protection area requirements for that waterway. A stream
corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to
§ 165-114G(8) shall maintain or enhance the current functional
value and overall condition of the special water resource
protection area as defined in § 165-114G(8)(a)[1] above. In no
case shall a stream corridor protection plan allow the
reduction of the special water resource protection area to less
than 150 feet as measured perpendicular to the waterway
subject to this subsection.
(e) Section 165-114G(8) does not apply to the construction of one
individual single-family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development on a lot receiving preliminary or final subdivision
§ 165-114 GARAGE SALES § 165-114
154:427
§ 165-115. Calculation of stormwater runoff and groundwater
recharge.
approval on or before February 2, 2004, provided that the
construction begins on or before February 2, 2009.
A. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
(1) The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
(a) The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS
National Engineering Handbook Section 4 — Hydrology and
Technical Release 55 — Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds; or
(b) The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational
Method for hydrograph computations.
(2) For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater
recharge, there is a presumption that the preconstruction condition
of a site or portion thereof is a wooded land use with good
hydrologic condition. The term "runoff coefficient" applies to both
the NRCS methodology at § 165-115A(1)(a) and the Rational and
Modified Rational Methods at § 165-115A(1)(b). A runoff coefficient
or a groundwater recharge land cover for an existing condition may
be used on all or a portion of the site if the design engineer verifies
that the hydrologic condition has existed on the site or portion of
the site for at least five years without interruption prior to the time
of application. If more than one land cover have existed on the site
during the five years immediately prior to the time of application,
the land cover with the lowest runoff potential shall be used for the
computations. In addition, there is the presumption that the site is
in good hydrologic condition (if the land use type is pasture, lawn
or park), with good cover (if the land use type is woods) or with
good hydrologic condition and conservation treatment (if the land
use type is cultivation).
(3) In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows or
culverts that may reduce preconstruction stormwater runoff rates
and volumes.
(4) In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design
engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or
volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces separately to
accurately compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff
from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected impervious
§ 165-114 CHATHAM CODE § 165-115
154:428
§ 165-116. Standards for structural stormwater management
measures.
cover, urban impervious area modifications as described in the
NRCS Technical Release 55 — Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds and other methods may be employed.
(5) If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management
measure is below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined
at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall take into account the
effects of tailwater in the design of structural stormwater
management measures.
B. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following:
(1) The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32 A Method for
Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
incorporated herein by reference as amended and supplemented.
Information regarding the methodology is available from the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual; at
http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at New Jersey Geological
Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427 Trenton, New Jersey
08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.
A. Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
(1) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
take into account the existing site conditions, including, for
example, environmentally critical areas; wetlands; flood-prone
areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high water table; soil type,
permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns; and
the presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
(2) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs and
ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the
intake to the outlet structure as appropriate and shall have parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars to the elevation of the
water quality design storm. For elevations higher than the water
quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure shall
be spaced no greater than 1/3 the width of the diameter of the
orifice or 1/3 the width of the weir, with a minimum spacing
between bars of one inch and a maximum spacing between bars of
six inches. In addition, the design of trash racks must comply with
the requirements of § 165-118B(1).
(3) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed and installed to be strong, durable and corrosion
resistant. Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions
§ 165-115 GARAGE SALES § 165-116
154:429
§ 165-117. Sources for technical guidance.
of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3,
5:21-7.4, and 5:21-7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement.
(4) At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin,
the orifice size shall be a minimum of 2.5 inches in diameter.
(5) Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins at
§ 165-118.
B. Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized, provided the
design engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its
design will accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater
recharge and water quality design and performance standards
established by § 165-114 of this article.
C. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements
of § 165-114 of this chapter, provided the pollutant removal rates are
verified by the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced Technology and
certified by the Department.
A. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed in Subsection A(1) and (2) below, which
are available from Maps and Publications, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton,
New Jersey, 08625; telephone (609) 777-1038.
(1) Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
as amended. Information is provided on stormwater management
measures such as bioretention systems, constructed stormwater
wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand
filters, vegetative filter strips and wet ponds.
(2) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
B. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures
can be obtained from the following:
(1) The Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey
promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and
incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be
obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee or
any of the soil conservation districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4.
The location, address and telephone number of each soil
§ 165-116 CHATHAM CODE § 165-117
154:430
§ 165-118. Safety standards for stormwater management basins.
conservation district may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625;
(609) 292-5540;
(2) The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, 732-932-9306; and
(3) The Morris County Soil Conservation District located at 560 West
Hanover Avenue, Morris Township, New Jersey [mailing address:
Morris County Courthouse, P. O. Box 900, Morristown, New Jersey
07963; telephone: (973) 285-2953; fax: (973) 285-8345].
A. This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety through
the proper design and operation of stormwater management basins.
This section applies to any new stormwater management basin.
B. Requirements for trash racks, overflow grates and escape provisions
(1) A "trash rack" is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
(a) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than six
inch spacing between the bars.
(b) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect
the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
(c) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of stage and
discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of the net
area of opening through the rack.
(d) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable and corrosion resistant and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(2) An "overflow grate" is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
(a) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
(b) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
(c) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable and corrosion resistant and shall be designed to
§ 165-117 GARAGE SALES § 165-118
154:431
§ 165-119. Requirements for a site development stormwater plan.
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(3) For purposes of this subsection, "escape provisions" means the
permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs or other features
that provide easily accessible means of egress from stormwater
management basins. Stormwater management basins shall include
escape provisions as follows:
(a) If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure.
With the prior approval of the reviewing agency identified in
§ 165-118C, a freestanding outlet structure may be exempted
from this requirement.
(b) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of
water deeper than 2.5 feet. Such safety ledges shall be
comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four feet to six feet
in width. One step shall be located approximately 2.5 feet
below the permanent water surface, and the second step shall
be located one to 1.5 feet above the permanent water surface.
See § 165-118D for an illustration of safety ledges in a
stormwater management basin.
(c) In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior
slope for an earthen dam, embankment or berm shall not be
steeper than 3 horizontal to 1 vertical.
C. Variance or exemption from safety standards. A variance or exemption
from the safety standards for stormwater management basins may be
granted only upon a written finding by the appropriate reviewing
agency (municipality, county or Department) that the variance or
exemption will not constitute a threat to public safety.
D. Illustration of safety ledges in a new stormwater management basin.
A. Submission of site development stormwater plan.
§ 165-118 CHATHAM CODE § 165-119
154:432
(1) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to this article, the applicant shall submit all of the required
components of the checklist for the site development stormwater
plan at § 165-119C below as part of the submission of the
applicant's application for subdivision or site plan approval.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this article.
(3) The applicant shall submit 14 copies of the materials listed in the
checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance with
§ 165-119C of this article.
B. Site development stormwater plan approval. The applicant's site
development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision, site
plan or development application review process by the Planning Board,
Zoning Board of Adjustment or official from which municipal approval is
sought. The Board and/or Borough Zoning Official shall consult the
Chatham Borough Engineer or other such engineer (as appropriate) to
determine if all of the checklist requirements have been satisfied and to
determine if the project meets the standards set forth in this article.
[Amended 3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-04]
C. Checklist requirements. The following information shall be required:
(1) Topographic base map. The reviewing engineer may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary. It is
recommended that the topographic base map of the site be
submitted which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the limits
of the proposed development, at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet
or greater, showing two-foot contour intervals. The map as
appropriate may indicate the following: existing surface water
drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible soils, perennial or
intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters, wetlands and floodplains along with their appropriate
buffer strips, marshlands and other wetlands, pervious or
vegetative surfaces, existing man-made structures, roads, bearing
and distances of property lines and significant natural and manmade
features not otherwise shown.
(2) Environmental Site Analysis. A written and graphic description of
the natural and man-made features of the site and its environs. This
description should include a discussion of soil conditions, slopes,
wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular
attention should be given to unique, unusual or environmentally
sensitive features and to those that provide particular
opportunities or constraints for development.
(3) Project description and site plan(s). A map (or maps) at the scale of
the topographical base map indicating the location of existing and
proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural
§ 165-119 GARAGE SALES § 165-119
154:433
facilities for stormwater management and sediment control and
other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show
areas where alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover,
including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high
groundwater elevations. A written description of the site plan and
justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be
provided.
(4) Land use planning and source control plan. This plan shall provide
a demonstration of how the goals and standards of §§ 165-113
through 165-116 are being met. The focus of this plan shall be to
describe how the site is being developed to meet the objective of
controlling groundwater recharge, stormwater quality and
stormwater quantity problems at the source by land management
and source controls whenever possible.
(5) Stormwater management facilities map. The following information,
illustrated on a map of the same scale as the topographic base map,
shall be included:
(a) Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon and
details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
(b) Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during
and after construction, including discharge provisions,
discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of
detention and emergency spillway provisions with maximum
discharge capacity of each spillway.
(6) Calculations.
(a) Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations
for the predevelopment and postdevelopment conditions for
the design storms specified in § 165-114 of this article.
(b) When the proposed stormwater management control measures
(e.g., infiltration basins) depend on the hydrologic properties
of soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report
shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The
number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall
be determined based on what is needed to determine the
suitability and distribution of soils present at the location of the
control measure.
(7) Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of § 165-120.
§ 165-119 CHATHAM CODE § 165-119
154:434
§ 165-120. Maintenance and repair.
(8) Waiver from submission requirements. The municipal official or
board reviewing an application under this article may, in
consultation with the Municipal Engineer, waive submission of any
of the requirements in Subsection C(1) through C(6) of this section
when it can be demonstrated that the information requested is
impossible to obtain or it would create a hardship on the applicant
to obtain and its absence will not materially affect the review
process.
A. Applicability. Projects subject to review as in § 165-111C of this article
shall comply with the requirements of § 165-120B and C.
B. General maintenance.
(1) The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development.
(2) The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventive
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris or trash removal; and the name,
address and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for preventive and corrective maintenance (including
replacement). Maintenance guidelines for stormwater
management measures are available in the New Jersey Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan
identifies a person other than the developer (for example, a public
agency or homeowners' association) as having the responsibility for
maintenance, the plan shall include documentation of such
person's agreement to assume this responsibility, or of the
developer's obligation to dedicate a stormwater management
facility to such person under an applicable ordinance or regulation.
(3) Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred
to the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential
development or project unless such owner or tenant owns or leases
the entire residential development or project.
(4) If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
§ 165-120B(2) above is not a public agency, the maintenance plan
and any future revisions based on § 165-120B(7) below shall be
recorded upon the deed of record for each property on which the
maintenance described in the maintenance plan must be
undertaken.
(5) Preventive and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and ice
§ 165-119 GARAGE SALES § 165-120
154:435
§ 165-120.1. Penalties.
removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
(6) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
§ 165-120B(2) above shall maintain a detailed log of all preventive
and corrective maintenance for the structural stormwater
management measures incorporated into the design of the
development, including a record of all inspections and copies of all
maintenance-related work orders.
(7) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
§ 165-120B(2) above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the
maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan and the
deed as needed.
(8) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
§ 165-120B(2) above shall retain and make available, upon request
by any public entity with administrative, health, environmental or
safety authority over the site, the maintenance plan and the
documentation required by § 165-120B(6) and (7) above.
(9) The requirements of § 165-120B(3) and (4) do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency.
(10) In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance and
repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the Municipal
Engineer or his designee. The municipality, in its discretion, may
extend the time allowed for effecting maintenance and repair for
good cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform
such maintenance and repair, the Borough of Chatham may
immediately proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the
responsible person.
C. Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof in the Municipal Court, be punishable by imposition
of the penalties set forth in § 165-173 and Chapter 1, § 1-14.
B. Each instance of engaging in a separate regulated activity in violation
of this article shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 165-120 CHATHAM CODE § 165-120.1
154:436
C. In addition, the Borough of Chatham may institute civil action for
injunctive or other relief to enforce the provisions of this article.
§ 165-120.1 GARAGE SALES § 165-120.1
154:437

ARTICLE XV
(Reserved)69
§ 165-121. through § 165-132. (Reserved)
69.Editor's Note: Former Art. XV, Tree Protection, added 9-10-2001 by Ord. No. 01-14, as
amended, was repealed 5-29-2018 by Ord. No. 18-06. See now Ch. 257, Tree Protection
and Preservation.
§ 165-121 GARAGE SALES § 165-121
154:439

ARTICLE XVI
Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
[Added 4-12-1999 by Ord. No. 5-99]
§ 165-133. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate the location, operation and
placement of wireless telecommunications ("WT") facilities within the
Borough of Chatham.
§ 165-134. Permitted locations. [Amended 7-24-2000 by Ord. No.
12-2000]
The only permitted locations for WT facilities in the Borough of Chatham
are as follows:
§ 165-135. General requirements for WT facilities.
A. This article is intended to meet the requirements of the
Telecommunications Act of 1996, while at the same time reasonably
regulating WT facilities within the Borough.
B. This article is also intended to protect the Borough from the visual or
other adverse impacts of these facilities, while encouraging their
unobtrusive development to provide comprehensive wireless
telecommunications services in the Borough, with its attendant benefits
to residents and businesses.
A. In the M (Industrial) Districts;
B. Upon proof satisfactory to the Planning Board that, if the applicant
locates the WT facility in an M District it will be unable to accomplish its
purposes as set forth in the application, the facility may be located on
an existing electric transmission tower within the Borough of Chatham
owned by Public Service Electric and Gas Co. or General Public Utilities
Co., or any successor thereof;
C. Upon proof satisfactory to the Planning Board that, if the applicant
locates the WT facility in either of the locations described in
Subsections A and B immediately above, it will be unable to accomplish
its purposes as set forth in the application, the facility may be located
on land or structures owned by the Borough of Chatham.
A. Siting priorities. Pursuant to the needs analysis required by § 165-137,
an application to install, construct, erect, move, reconstruct or modify
any WT antenna shall be subject to siting priorities as follows:
(1) If the analysis demonstrates that it is reasonably necessary to
install, construct, erect, move, reconstruct or modify a WT antenna
within the Borough of Chatham, then, subject to all other permitted
conditional use standards, the proposed WT antenna may be
§ 165-133 GARAGE SALES § 165-135
154:441
located upon an existing building or other structure within the
permitted locations.
(2) If the analysis demonstrates that it is not reasonably practicable to
install, construct, erect, move, reconstruct, or modify the proposed
WT antenna upon an existing building or structure within the
permitted locations, then, subject to all other permitted conditional
use standards, the proposed WT antenna may be located or
collocated upon an existing WT tower within these zones.
(3) If the analysis demonstrates that it is not reasonably practicable to
install, construct, erect, move, reconstruct and/or modify the
proposed WT antenna upon an existing WT tower within the
permitted locations, then, subject to all other permitted conditional
use standards, the proposed WT antenna may be located or
collocated upon a new WT tower to be constructed within the
permitted locations only.
B. WT antennas. WT antennas shall be consistent with the following
requirements:
(1) Microwave dishes, cones, or other antennas used for the purpose of
point-to-point microwave transmission or microwave links are
expressly prohibited.
(2) Platform mounted or side-arm mounted antennas of any kind are
expressly prohibited.
(3) Subject to the siting priorities set forth in Subsection A(1) above,
WT antennas may be mounted on existing buildings or other
structures or on WT towers, provided that:
(a) WT antennas mounted on existing buildings or other structures
shall not, when combined with the height of the building or
structure on which they are located, exceed the maximum
permitted height in the zone, or the height of the existing
building or structure, whichever is greater, except when
mounted on the face of new or existing mechanical rooms or
structures on the roof of the building, and
(b) WT antennas mounted on WT towers shall not extend beyond
the height limitations for such towers.
(c) WT antennas shall be constructed, finished, painted and
otherwise camouflaged so as to blend in with their background
and minimize their visual impact on the landscape.
C. WT towers. WT towers shall be consistent with the following
requirements:
(1) WT towers shall be limited to monopole designs only. New
construction of freestanding lattice towers and guyed towers of any
§ 165-135 CHATHAM CODE § 165-135
154:442
kind is prohibited, but this shall not prevent the mounting of WT
antennas on an existing freestanding lattice tower or guyed tower.
(2) WT towers shall be designed to permit collocation of additional
antennas.
(3) The maximum height of any WT tower and any WT antennas or WT
equipment mounted thereon, shall be 75 feet from the original
ground elevation, except that, where sufficient engineering data
clearly establish that existing trees or buildings will interfere with
the proper operation of the WT antennas at a height of 75 feet, the
maximum height from the original ground elevation may be 100
feet.
(4) No WT tower shall be lighted except as may be required by state or
federal law.
(5) No WT tower shall bear any signs, displays, or advertisements of
any kind except as may be required by state or federal law.
(6) WT towers shall be constructed, finished, painted or otherwise
camouflaged so as to blend in with their background and minimize
their visual impact on the landscape.
D. WT equipment and WT equipment compound. All WT equipment shall
be housed within a WT equipment compound, consistent with the
following requirements:
(1) WT equipment compounds shall be enclosed within a locked
security fence at least seven feet in height, unless located within or
on the roof of an existing building.
(2) No WT equipment housed in a WT compound shall exceed 12 feet in
overall height.
(3) WT equipment compounds, including the fence enclosure, shall be
constructed, finished, painted and otherwise camouflaged so as to
minimize their visual impact on the landscape.
(4) When WT equipment is installed on the roof of a building, the area
of the WT equipment and other structures permitted on the roof of
the building shall not exceed 25% of the total roof area.
(5) Landscaping shall be provided along the perimeter of the WT
equipment compound to provide a visual screen or buffer for
adjoining private properties and any public right-of-way. Required
front yard setback areas shall also be landscaped for the same
purpose. All WT equipment on the ground shall be screened by an
evergreen hedge seven to 10 feet in height at planting time. All WT
equipment not located on the ground shall be surrounded by a solid
fence high enough to hide the WT equipment from view.
§ 165-135 GARAGE SALES § 165-135
154:443
§ 165-136. Setback requirements for the location of WT facilities.
No WT facilities shall be located on their lot within the minimum setbacks
which are prescribed elsewhere in this chapter. No WT facilities shall be
located closer than a distance of 150 feet, measured along the ground, from
the following:
§ 165-137. Additional site plan requirements.
In addition to compliance with all applicable zoning and site plan
requirements, applications for approval of WT facilities shall include the
following:
E. The applicant shall demonstrate that all reasonable efforts were
employed to camouflage and minimize the visual impact of any WT
facilities installed or constructed pursuant to the provisions of this
subsection. All WT facilities shall be located to minimize visual impacts
on the surrounding area in accordance with the following standards. In
applying these standards, locations in a higher siting priority category
under Subsection A above shall be deemed more acceptable than
locations in lower siting priority categories.
(1) Sites for WT facilities must demonstrate that they provide the least
visual impact on residential areas and any public right-of-way. All
potential visual impacts must be justified with data to illustrate that
the selected site provides the best opportunity to minimize the
visual impact of the proposed facility.
(2) WT facilities shall be located to avoid being visually prominent
when viewed from residential areas and any public right-of-way.
Vegetation, tree cover, topographic features and/or other
structures, whether natural or manufactured, shall obscure the
facility to the maximum extent feasible.
(3) WT facilities shall be placed to ensure that historically significant
viewscapes, streetscapes and landscapes are not marred, impaired
or destroyed. The views of and vistas from architecturally,
historically and/or otherwise significant structures shall not be
impaired or diminished by the placement of WT facilities.
F. WT facilities shall fully conform with all applicable state, federal and
local laws.
G. Routine visits to WT facilities shall be limited to the hours of 8:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m.
A. The lot line of any lot on which is located any school or other licensed
educational facility.
B. The lot line of any lot used for residential purposes.
C. Any lot line which is also a dividing line between two zones.
§ 165-135 CHATHAM CODE § 165-137
154:444
§ 165-138. Conditional use permits. [Amended 3-11-2013 by Ord.
No. 13-04]
In addition to submission of all other forms, site plans, plans, and other
documentation required for an application by this chapter, all applicants
for a conditional use permit for the installation, construction, erection,
movement, reconstruction, or modification of any WT facilities shall also
submit a needs analysis. The needs analysis shall contain documentary
evidence demonstrating the need for the proposed installation,
construction, erection, movement, reconstruction or modification of any WT
facilities within the Borough. This evidence shall include, at a minimum:
A. A road and turnaround such as may be necessary to provide adequate
emergency and service access, using existing roads, public or private,
to the maximum extent practicable.
B. The color or colors of the proposed WT equipment and the camouflage
methods to be used.
C. A Visual Environmental Assessment Form ("Visual EAF") with particular
attention given to the visibility of the proposed WT facility from key
viewpoints identified in the Visual EAF, existing tree lines, and
proposed elevations.
D. A map showing:
(1) Existing WT facilities within the Borough of Chatham which are
owned, leased or otherwise under the custody, control, or use of the
applicant at the time of application; and
(2) Sites within the Borough of Chatham where WT facilities are
proposed or projected to be installed, constructed, erected, moved,
reconstructed and/or modified by or for the benefit of the applicant
within the next year.
E. A certified load analysis report for the existing building, structure or
WT tower, or for the proposed WT tower, upon which a WT antenna is
proposed to be located, indicating its ability to support the proposed
WT antenna and possible future, collocated WT antennas.
A. The WT service provider's wireless telecommunications network layout
and coverage area for a radius of at least five miles from the location
where the WT facilities are planned, identifying all locations:
(1) In operation as of the filing date of the conditional use permit
application;
(2) Under construction as of the filing date of the conditional use
permit application; and
(3) Pending approval before any licensing authority as of the filing date
of the conditional use permit application.
§ 165-137 GARAGE SALES § 165-138
154:445
B. All results and supporting data derived from tests which must be
conducted to determine before and after signal strength plots. These
results and data:
(1) Shall demonstrate the actual existing signal coverage in effect at
the time of application, contrasted with the proposed signal
coverage which would result from the proposed installation,
construction, erection, movement, reconstruction, or modification
of WT facilities within the Borough of Chatham; and
(2) Shall be certified by a qualified radio frequency engineer. The
Borough reserves the right to retain a radio frequency engineer on
its own behalf at applicant's expense to review the results or data
submitted by the application.
C. A search ring of the zone in which the WT facilities are proposed,
prepared by a qualified radio frequency engineer and overlaid on an
appropriate background map, demonstrating the area within the zone
where the WT facilities need to be located in order to provide
reasonably necessary signal strength and coverage to the target cell.
D. In connection with the signal strength plots and search ring described
above, the applicant must provide a report prepared by a qualified radio
frequency engineer which explains why the proposed location was
selected and which specifically addresses at a minimum:
(1) If the applicant proposes to install, construct, erect, move,
reconstruct or modify a WT antenna upon an existing structure or
building, including poles used for power, telecommunications and
the like, why it is reasonably necessary to locate that WT antenna
within the Borough of Chatham.
(2) If the applicant proposes to install, construct, erect, move,
reconstruct or modify a WT antenna upon an existing WT tower,
applicant must show:
(a) Why it is reasonably necessary to locate that WT antenna
within the Borough of Chatham; and
(b) Why it is not reasonably practicable to locate or collocate that
WT antenna upon an existing building or structure within the
zone.
(3) If the applicant proposes to install, construct or erect a WT antenna
upon a new WT tower, applicant must show:
(a) Why it is reasonably necessary to locate that WT antenna
within the Borough of Chatham;
(b) Why it is not reasonably practicable to locate or collocate that
WT antenna upon an existing building or structure within the
zone; and
§ 165-138 CHATHAM CODE § 165-138
154:446
§ 165-139. Permit standards.
The following criteria shall be considered by the Planning Board or, if
variances are requested, the Zoning Board of Adjustment, hereafter
referred to as the "approving authority," prior to the approval or denial of a
request for a conditional use permit for WT facilities. These criteria may be
used as a basis to impose reasonable conditions on the applicant.
(c) Why it is not reasonably practicable to locate or collocate that
WT antenna upon an existing WT tower within the zone.
(4) These requirements do not apply to changing the direction of any
existing WT antenna.
E. An affidavit from applicant or an officer of applicant describing the
frequency and power at which the proposed WT facilities are expected
to operate and the authority by which they were granted.
A. Aesthetics. WT facilities shall be located, buffered and camouflaged to
the maximum extent practicable and technologically feasible, to help
ensure compatibility with surrounding land uses. In order to minimize
any adverse aesthetic effect on neighboring residences to the greatest
extent possible, the approving authority may impose reasonable
conditions on the approval of the application, including the following:
(1) The approving authority may require the applicant to show that it
has made good-faith efforts to minimize the height of proposed
towers, to collocate on existing buildings, structures or WT towers,
or to locate proposed new WT towers near existing towers in an
effort to consolidate visual disturbances.
(2) The applicant must submit a copy of its policy and/or agreements
regarding collocation with other potential applicants on any
proposed WT tower.
(3) The approving authority may require the applicant to use
additional camouflage and/or otherwise modify the proposed
construction to minimize the visual impact of the WT facilities.
B. Radio frequency (RF) emissions. The proposed WT antenna shall be
operated such that exposure to the RF emissions in normally accessible
locations remains within Federal Communications Commission (FCC)
exposure guidelines and shall comply with other related state or federal
regulations or requirements.
C. Removal of WT facilities. The applicant shall agree to remove any WT
facilities if all or part of any such WT facilities becomes damaged and is
unrepaired for a period of six months, or ceases to be used for its
intended purpose for 12 consecutive months. The applicant must
comply with the following requirements:
§ 165-138 GARAGE SALES § 165-139
154:447
(1) The Borough of Chatham may, at its sole discretion, require the
applicant to provide a demolition bond to the Borough of Chatham
for the purpose of assuring the removal of any WT facilities in
accordance with the provisions of the section.
(2) The applicant will be responsible for providing, on an annual basis,
written estimates to the Borough of Chatham for the cost to
demolish and/or remove the WT facilities, and to restore the land
upon which it is located. Such estimates will be used to establish
whether any adjustment is required in the amount of the required
demolition bond.
D. Structural safety.
(1) Upon written request from the Borough of Chatham at any time,
during the application process or after the installation,
construction, erection, movement, reconstruction, or modification
of any WT facilities, the applicant shall provide a report from a
licensed professional engineer certifying as to the condition of the
WT facilities with respect to applicable structural safety standards.
(a) Such requests from the Borough shall not occur more often
than once every three years.
(b) If the engineer's report recommends that repairs or
maintenance are required, then a letter shall be submitted to
the Borough which shall contain a reasonable schedule for the
required repairs or maintenance.
(c) Upon their completion, a letter shall promptly be submitted to
the Borough of Chatham to certify same.
(2) In the event that the applicant fails to comply with these
requirements regarding structural safety, the Borough of Chatham
reserves the right, in addition to all of its other rights and remedies
available under state, federal and local law, to declare the applicant
in default of its obligations under this chapter.
(a) Should that occur, the applicant will have 30 days to notify the
Borough as to how it intends to cure its default, setting forth a
reasonable schedule for same.
(b) In the event the applicant fails to so notify the Borough, or fails
to cure as agreed, the Borough may draw on the applicant's
demolition bond and arrange for the removal and/or demolition
of the applicant's WT facilities: declare the WT facilities to be
abandoned and arrange for the public auction of the WT
facilities; and/or pursue such other remedies at law and in
equity as may be available.
(c) Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to limit the
applicant's liability for criminal prosecution.
§ 165-139 CHATHAM CODE § 165-139
154:448
§ 165-140. Additional requirements for location on existing
electrical transmission towers. [Added 7-24-2000 by Ord. No.
12-2000]
Additional requirements for WT facilities located on existing electric
transmission towers owned by Public Service Electric and Gas Co. or
General Public Utilities Co., or any successor thereof shall be as follows:
§ 165-141. Development of lots with limited allowable land
disturbance. [Added 5-10-2004 by Ord. No. 04-12]
Lots existing as of the effective date of this article in the R-1, R-2, R-3 and
R-4 Zones for which compliance with the terms of § 165-14G(1) would limit
the total area of allowable land disturbance to 3,000 square feet or less shall
be permitted to be developed as a conditional use; such development shall
be limited to one single-family detached dwelling unit and the accessory
E. The approving authority may retain technical consultants as it deems
necessary to provide assistance in the review of the application, the
technical support data, and the proofs and documents submitted to
demonstrate compliance with this article. The applicant shall bear the
reasonable costs associated with such review and consultation, which
cost shall be deposited in accordance with the Borough's escrow
provisions.
A. The WT Equipment Compound shall be located entirely within the
ground area at the base of the tower as defined by the location of the
bases of the legs of the tower.
B. The WT equipment shall be located within the WT compound either
underground or, if it is above ground, it shall comply with the standards
for site review which are set forth in § 165-26 of this chapter.
C. If more than one WT service provider is utilizing a tower for its WT
antennas, the WT equipment for all such providers shall be housed in
one structure.
D. No portion of the WT facilities, including the WT antennas, shall be
located more than four feet above the topmost part of the existing
tower.
E. No WT antenna shall be located on a tower at a height less than 50 feet
above grade level.
F. Any cables connecting the WT antennas to any other part of the WT
facility shall be made as inconspicuous as possible; the cables or the
channels in which they are enclosed shall be, as the result of painting or
by any other means, the same color as the color of the tower.
G. Applicant will prepare and submit with its application a diagram or map
showing the portion of the Borough from which can be seen, from
ground level, any portion of the proposed WT facility.
§ 165-139 GARAGE SALES § 165-141
154:449
uses permitted at § 165-14B(2), (3), (4) and (8) and shall comply with all of
the following criteria:
A. Total land disturbance permitted. The extent of the total land
disturbance on the entire lot shall not exceed 3,000 square feet over the
entire lot, regardless of the total area of the lot or the calculated usable
lot area. For the purposes of this § 165-141, "land disturbance" shall
mean any activity involving any intentional or unintentional, temporary
or permanent, placement, movement, addition, replacement,
relocation, removal, clearing, deposit or excavation of soil cover, earth,
rock, vegetation, construction debris, construction supplies or
construction equipment on an area of land, and including the creation
or expansion of a driveway or parking lot. Ordinary lawn care,
landscape maintenance and gardening activities are excluded, provided
that such activities do not alter the drainage, recharge capability or
topography of the land or involve the removal of existing trees as
defined at Article XV, Tree Protection (§ 165-121 et seq.).
B. Total impervious surface coverage. The total lot (impervious surface)
coverage shall not exceed 1,260 square feet over the entire lot,
regardless of the total area of the lot or the calculated usable lot area,
except that for the purposes of determining compliance with this
section only, the area under decks and cantilevered floor levels and on
top of retaining walls shall not be included in the calculation of the total
impervious surface coverage. This shall not exempt decks and
cantilevered floor levels from compliance with other applicable
requirements of this chapter. The total impervious surface coverage
permitted hereunder may be increased for the purposes of
accommodating driveway access requirements only, but in no case shall
the additional coverage permitted for this purpose exceed 500 square
feet over the 1,260 square feet maximum otherwise permitted.
C. Other development requirements. In addition to demonstrating
compliance with the foregoing requirements of this § 165-141
pertaining to the conditional use the applicant shall also demonstrate
compliance with the general requirements of this chapter including, but
not limited to, § 165-14G(3) through (10), but these general
requirements shall not be deemed to be standards and specifications
applicable to a conditional use.
D. Board review. Board review and approval of the conditional use
application shall be required, and shall encompass a review and
approval of the application's compliance with the general requirements
of § 165-14G(3) through (10), including the grading and stormwater
management plan and the landscaping and revegetation plan.
§ 165-141 CHATHAM CODE § 165-141
154:450
ARTICLE XVII
Conditional Uses
[Amended 12-14-1981 by Ord. No. 21-81]
§ 165-142. Review of by Planning Board; burden of proof on
applicant.
§ 165-143. Public utility uses.
A. Before a building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for
any conditional use as permitted by this chapter, application shall be
made to the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall grant or deny
said application within 95 days of submission of a complete application
by a developer to the administrative officer or within such further time
as may be consented to by the applicant.
B. The review by the Planning Board of a conditional use shall include any
required site plan review pursuant to this chapter. Public notice and a
hearing shall be required as stipulated in this chapter.
C. In all requests for approval of conditional uses, the burden of proof shall
be on the applicant. The Planning Board shall give due consideration to
all reasonable elements which could affect the public health, welfare,
safety, comfort and convenience such as, but not limited to, the
proposed use(s), the character of the area, vehicular travel patterns and
access, pedestrian ways, landscaping, lighting, signs, drainage, sewage
treatment, potable water supply, utilities and building and structure
location(s) and orientation(s).
A. For purposes of this chapter, the term "public utility uses" shall include
such uses as telephone dial equipment centers, power substations and
similar public utility facilities.
B. The proposed installation in a specific location must be reasonably
necessary for the satisfactory provision of service by the utility to the
neighborhood or area in which the particular use is to be located.
C. The design of any building in connection with such facilities must
conform to the general character of the area and not adversely affect
the safe, comfortable enjoyment of property rights in the zone in which
it is located.
D. Adequate fences and other safety devices must be provided in order to
comply with all applicable federal, state and municipal regulations.
[Amended 11-11-1996 by Ord. 16-96]
E. Sufficient landscaping, including shrubs, trees and lawns, shall be
provided and maintained.
F. Off-street parking shall be provided as determined by the Planning
Board during site plan review.
§ 165-142 GARAGE SALES § 165-143
154:451
§ 165-144. Banks.
§ 165-145. Outdoor eating and drinking establishments. [Amended
11-9-1987 by Ord. No. 16-96; 3-8-2004 by Ord. No. 04-06]
The following conditions shall apply to that portion of the customer service
or dining area provided outdoors:
§ 165-146. Service stations.
G. All of the area, yard, building coverage and height requirements of the
respective zone and other applicable requirements of this chapter must
be met.
A. For purposes of this chapter, the term "banks" shall not include drive-in
banking facilities unless sufficient room exists on the lot for both on-site
parking and queuing spaces for the drive-in windows.
B. Banks shall provide at least two parking spaces per teller window plus
two parking spaces per employee, plus two parking spaces for each
pedestrian automatic teller machine. Additionally, drive-in banks shall
provide room for at least six automobiles for each drive-in station for
queuing purposes. If a bank has a drive-up automatic teller machine, it
shall provide room for at least two automobiles for queuing purposes
for that machine. [Amended 11-11-1996 by Ord. No. 16-96]
C. Any applicant for a banking facility shall be prepared to furnish data to
the Planning Board indicating the adequacy of the proposed parking
and circulation plan and the ability of the public street network to
absorb the traffic which is expected to be generated by the facility.
D. All of the area, yard, building coverage, height, sign and buffer
requirements of the respective zone and other applicable requirements
must be met. [Amended 11-11-1996 by Ord. No. 16-96]
A. The area used for outdoor dining shall be set back:
(1) At least six feet from any street, driveway, vehicle accessway or
parking area.
(2) At least 25 feet from any residential zone boundary or use.
B. Any outdoor dining in a rear or side yard shall be substantially screened
from neighboring properties and parking areas by means of fences or
vegetation.
C. Outdoor lighting shall meet the requirements of § 165-78 of this
chapter.
D. No owner or occupant of any premises shall engage in or allow dining
on any public sidewalk without having first obtained a sidewalk dining
license, and such dining shall comply with the regulations contained in
Chapter 221 of the Code of the Borough of Chatham.
§ 165-143 CHATHAM CODE § 165-146
154:452
A. The minimum street frontage shall be 100 feet.
B. No service station shall be located within 300 feet of any dwelling or
within 1,000 feet of any firehouse, school, playground, church, hospital,
public building or institution.
C. All appliances, pits, storage areas and trash facilities other than
gasoline filling pumps or air pumps shall be within a building. Gasoline
filling pumps and air pumps shall be permitted within the required front
yard space of service stations but shall be no closer than 25 feet to any
street or lot line. All lubrication, repair or similar activities shall be
performed in a fully enclosed building and no dismantled parts shall be
displayed outside of an enclosed building.
D. No vehicle parts shall be stored on the premises except within an
enclosed and roofed building. No motor vehicle shall remain on the
premises outside an enclosed and roofed building, except for a motor
vehicle whose owner is awaiting its repair or disposition. In that case,
the said vehicle may remain on the exterior of the premises for a period
not exceeding seven days. [Amended 11-11-1996 by Ord. No.
16-96]
E. Landscaping shall be provided in the front yard area equal to at least
10% of the front yard area, and such landscaping shall be reasonably
distributed throughout the entire front yard area.
F. The exterior display and parking of motor vehicles, trailers, boats or
other similar equipment for sale or rent shall not be permitted as part of
a service station. No parking for a fee or car wash operation shall be
permitted.
G. Service stations shall provide six parking spaces for the first lift, wheel
alignment pit or similar work area and an additional three parking
spaces for each additional work area. Such spaces shall be separated
from the driveway and general apron areas which give access to the
gasoline and air pumps and service areas. No designated parking space
shall obstruct access to such facilities.
H. Service station canopies. Service station canopies may be either
detached or attached canopies. They shall be governed by the following
requirements: [Added 5-23-2005 by Ord. No. 05-1870]
(1) The lowest surface (equivalent to a ceiling) of a canopy shall be no
more than 14 feet above the lowest point of the finished surface
below it.
(2) No signs shall be permitted on the canopy.
(3) Lighting shall be in accordance with § 165-78 of this chapter, and
lighting fixtures shall be limited to the ceiling of the canopy.
70.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection H
as Subsection I.
§ 165-146 GARAGE SALES § 165-146
154:453
§ 165-147. Commercial recreation, entertainment and amusement
uses.
§ 165-148. Medical/dental offices. [Added 9-10-2012 by Ord. No.
12-1371]
(4) The canopy roof shall be of a gable, hip, gambrel or mansard type
design, or a flat roof with beveled sides. The angle of the beveling
of the sides of the flat roof shall be no less than 30° and no more
than 60° from the vertical.
(5) The side yard setback of a canopy shall be no less than 15 feet, and
the front yard setback of a canopy shall be no less than 12 feet.
I. All other applicable requirements of this chapter shall be met.
A. No land or structure shall be occupied or used for commercial
recreation, entertainment, or amusement purposes which is within 300
feet of any public school or church building.
B. For such uses parking spaces in addition to those required by § 135-24
shall be provided to the extent the total required by that section does
not equal one parking space for each three seats provided for
spectators or nonparticipants and in those uses involving public or
member participation, one parking space for each person who could
participate when the facility is fully utilized.
C. All other applicable requirements of this chapter shall be met.
A. A Parking Management Plan (PMP) shall be prepared by the applicant
and approved by the reviewing Board. The PMP shall:
(1) Be prepared by a qualified planner or engineer;
(2) Analyze parking demand based on projected employment and
specific operational parameters of the proposed use, as well as
based on ITE Parking Generation (most current edition) and/or data
collected locally for similar uses;
(3) Analyze available parking supplies to meet projected parking
demand for employees and customers; and
(4) Consider a range of solutions to address parking needs, including
the purchase of parking permits in Borough lots to address parking
needs for employees.
B. Maximum gross square footage per lot allotted to medical/dental office
use: 2,500 square feet.
71.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 165-48, Apartment units, added
11-9-1987 by Ord. No. 15-87.
§ 165-146 CHATHAM CODE § 165-148
154:454
§ 165-148.1. Educational instruction and recreational instruction.
[Added 9-10-2012 by Ord. No. 12-13]
§ 165-148.2. Institutional uses. [Added 9-10-2012 by Ord. No.
12-13]
C. Access shall be provided in such a manner that minimizes the creation
and/or need for new curb cuts.
A. A Parking Management Plan (PMP) shall be prepared by the applicant
and approved by the reviewing Board. The PMP shall:
(1) Be prepared by a qualified planner or engineer;
(2) Analyze parking demand based on projected employment and
specific operational parameters of the proposed use, as well as
based on ITE Parking Generation (most current edition) and/or data
collected locally for similar uses;
(3) Analyze available parking supplies to meet projected parking
demand for employees and customers; and
(4) Consider a range of solutions to address parking needs, including
the purchase of off-site parking permits in Borough lots to address
parking needs.
B. Maximum gross square footage per lot allotted to use: 2,500 square
feet.
A. Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet.
B. Minimum lot frontage: 100 feet.
C. Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
D. Maximum lot coverage: 65%.
E. Maximum height: 35 feet/2.5 stories except for churches; maximum
height for churches shall be 2.5 stories/40 feet for the principal
structure and 55 feet including steeples, spires, cupolas and other
similar ornamentation.
F. Required buffers: Any setback adjacent to a residential use or zone shall
be densely planted with a minimum fifteen-foot-wide buffer strip in
accordance with § 165-164B(17).
G. Minimum side yard setback: two feet for each one foot of principal
building height with a minimum side yard of 20 feet and an aggregate
minimum of 40 feet.
H. Minimum rear yard setback: 1.5 feet for each one foot of principal
building height with a minimum of 30 feet.
§ 165-148 GARAGE SALES § 165-148.2
154:455
§ 165-148.3. Oil and hazardous substance pipelines.72 [Added
8-14-2017 by Ord. No. 17-09]
I. Minimum front yard setback: one foot for every one foot of principal
building height with a minimum of 30 feet.
J. Parking. Off-street parking shall be allowed in rear and side yards only
with parking setback a minimum of 15 feet from any property line.
A. Definitions. The definitions set forth in Chapter 189 are incorporated by
reference as if fully set forth herein.
B. Use regulation. Oil and hazardous substance pipelines that do not
provide services to the general public and are not regulated by the New
Jersey Board of Public Utilities are prohibited in all residential and
affordable housing zone districts within the Borough and shall
constitute a conditional use in all other nonresidential zone districts
within the Borough subject to the conditional use standard set forth
herein.
C. Additional submission requirements. In addition to the checklist
submission requirements applicable to any application for development
under Chapter 165, a conditional use application for an oil and
hazardous substance pipeline shall include the following:
(1) Seventeen sets of plans showing the dimensions, valving frequency,
and proposed construction and siting of the oil and hazardous
substance pipeline, related appurtenances and facilities;
(2) Detailed cross-section drawings for all proposed pipeline public
street rights-of-way, closings and easements, wetlands and New
Jersey open waters crossings;
(3) A flow diagram showing the daily design capacity of the proposed
oil and hazardous substance pipeline;
(4) A description of any changes in flow in the oil and hazardous
substance pipeline once in operation;
(5) The proposed maximum operating pressure, in pounds per square
inch gauge (psig), at all points of change in elevation greater than
500 feet, or every 500 feet in length as a minimum; and
(6) Diagrams and descriptions of all pipeline monitoring facilities and
shut off/flow control valves proposed to be located in or closest to
the municipality.
D. Required setbacks. To promote the public health, safety, and general
welfare and to mitigate the aesthetic and environmental impacts of, and
minimize the potential damage or interruption to public and private
72.Editor's Note: Former § 165-148.3, Adult entertainment uses, added 7-12-2010 by Ord. No.
10-10, was repealed 6-22-2015 by Ord. No. 15-07.
§ 165-148.2 CHATHAM CODE § 165-148.3
154:456
§ 165-148.4. (Reserved)73
property from, oil and hazardous substance pipelines, the construction
and siting of oil and hazardous substance pipelines in the Borough shall
comply with the following setback requirements:
(1) Wellhead protection or sole source aquifer areas. Except as
otherwise set forth in this section, oil and hazardous substance
pipelines shall not be located within a sole source aquifer or in the
vicinity of a wellhead protection area ("WPA"), as is defined in
Article IX of Chapter 165 of the Code, and shall not be located
closer than: 2,500 feet in a Tier 1 WPA; 1,000 feet in a Tier 2 WPA;
and 500 feet in a Tier 3 WPA.
(2) One-hundred-foot setbacks. Except as otherwise set forth in this
section, oil and hazardous substance pipelines shall not be
constructed and sited closer than 100 feet from:
(a) Any wetlands regulated under federal or state law;
(b) Any year-round naturally occurring creek, stream, river,
private or public well, or pond, even if such water sources are
periodically dry;
(c) Any floodplain regulated under federal or state law; or
(d) Any building or structure located in a nonresidential zone
district.
(3) One-hundred-fifty-foot setbacks. Except as otherwise set forth in
this section, oil and hazardous substance pipelines shall not be
sited closer than 150 feet on level grade from any residential
dwelling or any residential or affordable housing zone district.
(4) Two-hundred-fifty-foot setbacks. Except as otherwise set forth in
this section, oil and hazardous substance pipelines shall not be
constructed and sited closer than 250 feet from any residential
dwelling or any residential or affordable housing zone district
where said property or zone district is located downhill from the
pipeline at a grade equal to or greater than 5%, except that no oil
and hazardous substance pipelines shall be located on slopes of a
grade equal to or greater than 15%.
(5) One-thousand-foot setbacks. Except as otherwise set forth in this
section, oil and hazardous substance pipelines shall not be sited
and constructed closer than 1,000 feet from any critical land use or
essential public facilities as those terms are defined in Chapter
189.
E. All oil and hazardous substance pipelines shall comply with the
requirements of Chapter 189 of this Code.
§ 165-148.3 GARAGE SALES § 165-148.4
154:457
73.Editor's Note: Former § 148.4, Tattoo parlors and body piercing establishments, added
7-12-2010 by Ord. No. 10-10, was repealed 6-22-2015 by Ord. No. 15-07.
§ 165-148.4 CHATHAM CODE § 165-148.4
154:458
ARTICLE XVIII
General Exceptions and Modifications
[Amended 12-14-1981 by Ord. No. 21-81]
§ 165-149. Sales of Christmas trees and holiday greens, flowers and
plants. [Amended 11-11-2002 by Ord. No. 02-22]
The annual sale of Christmas trees and holiday greens, flowers and plants is
permitted between November 15 and December 31 inclusive, provided that
:
§ 165-150. Public election voting places.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed as to interfere with
the temporary use of any property as a voting place in connection with a
municipal or other public election.
A. The commercial sale of Christmas trees and greens shall be restricted
to nonresidential zoning districts;
B. The sale on their own premises of Christmas trees and greens by
churches, schools or other nonprofit organizations may occur in any
zoning district; if any such nonprofit organizations do not own their own
property in the municipality, they may sell Christmas trees and greens
on property belonging to others, but in business or industrial districts
only; [Amended 11-11-1996 by Ord. No. 16-96]
C. No trees or greens shall be displayed nearer the property line than the
building setback line; however, retail establishments selling perishable
holiday greens, flowers and plants inside their stores may display or
store such merchandise outside on firmly anchored supports, provided
that such merchandise must:
(1) Not project more than two feet from the front facade of the
building;
(2) Be recessed at least six inches from each side of the retail
establishment;
(3) Be located in such a way that a four-foot passageway for
pedestrians on public sidewalks shall exist;
(4) Not make accessways to building entrances more narrow; or
(5) Not create dangerous conditions for pedestrians.
D. No sales or lighting of display areas shall continue after 10:00 p.m.; and
E. All trees, greens and displays described in this section, and debris, shall
be removed before midnight on December 31.
§ 165-149 GARAGE SALES § 165-151
154:459
§ 165-151. Public utility lines.
Public utility lines for the transportation and distribution and control of
water, electricity, gas, oil, steam, telegraph and telephone communications,
and their supporting members, other than buildings or structures, shall not
be required to be located on a lot nor shall this chapter be interpreted as to
prohibit the use of a property in any zone for the above uses.
§ 165-152. Fire escapes.
An open fireproof fire escape or stairway may project into a rear yard for a
distance not to exceed eight feet.
§ 165-151 CHATHAM CODE § 165-152
154:460
ARTICLE XIX
Zoning Board of Adjustment and Planning Board
§ 165-153. Establishment of Zoning Board of Adjustment.
[Amended 12-14-1991 by Ord. No. 21-81]
A. The Zoning Board of Adjustment heretofore created is continued and is
hereby established pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law as the
Zoning Board of Adjustment for the Borough. [Amended by Ord. No.
2-80]
(1) It shall consist of seven members, who shall be residents of the
Borough and shall be appointed by the governing body for terms of
four years, each computed from January 1 of the year of their
appointment, except full terms filled for the first time under this
section shall be so fixed (for four or less years) and so arranged that
to the greatest practicable extent the expiration of all terms will be
distributed evenly over the first four years after the initial
appointment.
(2) The governing body may also appoint two alternate members who
shall be residents of the Borough and shall be designated by the
governing body at the time of appointment as "Alternate No. 1 and
Alternate No. 2." They shall be appointed by the governing body for
terms of two years, each computed from January 1 of the year of
their appointment, except full terms filled for the first time under
this section shall be so fixed (for two or less years) and so arranged
that to the greatest practicable extent, the expiration of all terms
shall be distributed evenly over the first two years after the initial
appointment. Alternate members may participate in discussions of
the proceedings but not vote except in the absence or
disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall not be delayed in
order that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate
member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which
alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
B. No member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall hold any elective
position within the municipality.
C. Any vacancy on said Board occurring other than by expiration of term
shall be filled by appointment by the governing body of the municipality
to serve for the unexpired term of the member whose term shall
become vacant. A member may be removed by the governing body for
cause but only after public hearing and other requested procedural due
process protections.
D. Yearly, the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall organize by selecting from
among its regular members a Chairman and Vice Chairman. The Board
shall also select a Board Administrative Secretary who may or may not
be a member of the Board or a municipal employee. [Amended
3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-04]
§ 165-153 GARAGE SALES § 165-153
154:461
§ 165-154. Powers and jurisdiction of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment. [Amended 12-14-1991 by Ord. No. 21-81]
E. The governing body shall make provisions in its budget and appropriate
funds for the expenses of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
F. The office of Zoning Board of Adjustment Attorney is hereby created.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment may annually appoint to such office
and fix compensation or rate of compensation of an attorney at law of
New Jersey other than the Municipal Attorney.
G. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may also employ or contract for and fix
the compensation of such experts and other staff and services as it may
deem necessary. The Board shall not authorize expenditures which
exceed, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the
governing body for its use.
H. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall adopt such rules and regulations
as may be necessary to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of
this chapter.
I. Lack of quorum due to conflicts of interest. If the Board of Adjustment
lacks a quorum because any of its regular or alternate members is
prohibited by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 from acting on a matter due to the
member's personal or financial interest therein, Class IV members of
the Planning Board shall be called upon to serve, for that matter only, as
temporary members of the Board of Adjustment. The Class IV members
of the Planning Board shall be called upon to serve in order of seniority
of continuous service to the Planning Board until there are the
minimum number of members necessary to constitute a quorum to act
upon the matter without any personal or financial interest therein,
whether direct or indirect. If a choice has to be made between Class IV
members of equal seniority, the Chair of the Planning Board shall make
the choice. [Added 4-25-2005 by Ord. No. 05-09]
A. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the power to:
(1) Error or refusal. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the
appellant that there is error in any order, requirement, decision or
refusal made by an officer of the municipality based on or made in
the enforcement of this chapter.
(2) Exceptions or interpretations. Hear and decide, in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter, requests for interpretation of the
Zoning Map or Ordinance or for decisions upon other special
questions upon which the Board is authorized to pass by any land
development ordinance or official map.
(3) Variance of area or yard requirements. Where, by reason of
exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific piece of
property; or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions; or by
reason of other extraordinary and exceptional situation or
§ 165-153 CHATHAM CODE § 165-154
154:462
condition of such piece of property, the strict application of any
regulations of this chapter would result in peculiar and exceptional
practical difficulties or to exceptional and undue hardship upon the
developer of such property, grant, upon an application or an appeal
relating to such property, a variance from such strict application
of such regulation so as to relieve any difficulties or hardship;
provided, however, that no variance shall be granted under this
subsection to allow a structure or use in an otherwise restricted
district; and provided further that the proposed development does
not require approval by the Planning Board of a subdivision, site
plan or conditional use, in conjunction with which the Planning
Board shall review a request for a variance pursuant to this
chapter. [Amended 4-25-2005 by Ord. No. 05-09]
(4) Variance of use regulations. Grant a variance to allow a structure or
use in a district restricted against such structure or use in
particular cases and for special reasons, but only by affirmative
vote of at least 2/3 of the full authorized membership of the Board.
B. General provision. No variance or other relief may be granted under the
terms of this section unless such variance or other relief can be granted
without substantial detriment to the public good and will not
substantially impair the intent and purpose of the zone plan and Zoning
Ordinance. Any application to the Zoning Board of Adjustment under
this section may be referred to any appropriate person or agency,
including the Planning Board, for its report, provided that such
reference shall not extend the period of time within which the Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall act.
C. Other powers. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have such powers
as prescribed by law, including but not limited to, the following:
(1) Direct issuance of a building permit for the construction of a
building or structure within the bed of a mapped street or public
drainageway, flood control basin or public area as shown on a duly
adopted Official Map Ordinance of the municipality whenever one
or more parcels of land within said bed cannot yield a reasonable
return to the owner unless a building permit is granted. The Board
shall impose reasonable requirements as a condition of granting
the building permit so as to promote the health, morals, safety and
general welfare of the public.
(2) Direct issuance of a building permit for the construction of a
building or structure on a lot not abutting a street which is shown
on a duly adopted Official Map of the municipality or which is an
existing state, county or municipal street or highway, or a street
shown upon a plan approved by the municipal Planning Board, or a
street on a plan duly filed in the office of the County Recording
Officer. The Board may grant such relief only where the
enforcement of the statute requirement that a building lot abuts a
street would entail practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, or
§ 165-154 GARAGE SALES § 165-154
154:463
§ 165-155. Appeals and applications to Zoning Board of
Adjustment. [Amended 12-14-1981 by Ord. No. 21-81]
where the circumstances of the case do not require the building
or structure to abut a street. The Board shall impose requirements
or conditions that will provide adequate access for fire-fighting
equipment, ambulances and other emergency vehicles necessary
for the protection of the health and safety and will protect any
future street layout shown on the Official Map or on the general
circulation plan element of the Municipal Master Plan. [Amended
3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-04]
(3) The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the power to grant, to
the same extent and subject to the same restrictions as the
Planning Board, subdivision or site plan approval or conditional use
approval whenever the Zoning Board of Adjustment is reviewing an
application for approval of a variance pursuant to § 165-154A(4) of
this chapter; provided, however, that the exercise of subdivision
and/or site plan review by the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be
restricted to that lot (or lots) upon which the proposed variant use
is to be situated.
A. Appeal of decision of Borough Official and request for interpretation.
[Amended 3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-04]
(1) Appeal of decision of Borough Official.
(a) As provided under § 165-154A(1) of this chapter and N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70a and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-72a, an appeal may be taken
to the Borough Zoning Board of Adjustment by any interested
party affected by any decision or refusal made by a Borough
Official based on or made in the enforcement of Borough Code
Chapter 165 or the Borough's Official Zoning Map.
(b) A complete application under this § 165-155A(1) shall consist
of the following: the Borough's application for appeal of a
Borough Official's decision, Checklist F (with required
documents),74 the required filing fees and escrow as provided
under § 165-166, and such other documents and information as
may be required to define the action.
(c) An appeal from a Borough Official's decision or refusal shall be
filed within 20 days from the date of the decision or refusal
made by the Borough Official.
(d) An action under this § 165-155A(1) shall be filed with the
Borough Official from whom the appeal is taken with a copy to
the Administrative Secretary of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment. Filing fees and escrow monies pursuant to
74.Editor's Note: Said checklist is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 165-154 CHATHAM CODE § 165-155
154:464
§ 165-166 shall be provided to the Administrative Secretary of
the Zoning Board of Adjustment, who will record payment of
the fees and provide receipts.
(e) Within 10 days of the filing, the appellant shall serve a copy of
the complete application upon any interested party. Proof of
certified mailing with return receipt requested shall be
required to confer jurisdiction on the Zoning Board of
Adjustment. Notice requirements for an action under this
§ 165-155A(1) are stated in § 165-158E of this chapter.
(f) Within 10 days of the filing, the Borough Official from whom
the appeal is taken shall transmit all available papers
constituting the record of the underlying matter to the
Administrative Secretary for distribution to the Zoning Board
of Adjustment and to the appellant.
(g) If the appeal involves a matter which has been heard and
decided in an open public meeting, the appellant shall order
and pay for a certified transcript of the hearing, and shall file
same with the Administrative Secretary as soon as available.
(h) In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-73, the Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall render a decision on any application for
development filed under this § 165-155A(1) not later than 120
days from the date of the decision or refusal made by the
Borough Official.
(2) Request for interpretation.
(a) As provided under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70b, the filing of a request
for interpretation may be taken to the Borough Zoning Board
of Adjustment by any party seeking an interpretation of any
provision of Borough Code Chapter 165.
(b) A complete application pursuant to this § 165-155A(2) shall
consist of the following: the Borough's application for request
for interpretation, Checklist F (with all required documents),75
the required filing fees and escrow under § 165-166, and such
other documents and information as may be required to define
the action.
(c) A request for interpretation may be filed at any time, but any
decision reached by the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall not
be retroactively applied to existing construction or to a project
that has been finally approved by either the Borough's
Planning or Zoning Board of Adjustment.
(d) An action under this § 165-155A(2) shall be filed with the
Administrative Secretary of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
75.Editor's Note: Said checklist is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 165-155 GARAGE SALES § 165-155
154:465
Filing fees and escrow monies pursuant to § 165-166 shall be
delivered to the Administrative Secretary, who shall record the
payment of the fees and provide receipts.
(e) If a specific real property is identified with the request, notice
of the filing of a request for interpretation describing the
nature of the request shall be given by the applicant to the
property owner at least 10 days before the hearing. Proof of
service and certified mailing with return receipt requested
shall be filed to confer jurisdiction on the Zoning Board. Notice
requirements for an action under this § 165-155A(2) are stated
in § 165-158E of this chapter.
(3) Filing requirements for appeal of decision of Borough Official or
request for interpretation. Required items for filing of any action
under this § 165-155A shall include, but are not limited to, all items
under Checklist F76 as follows:
(a) Complete application and Checklist F;
(b) List of all owners of the land which is the subject of the action.
If owner is an entity, include a certificate of ownership listing
the names and addresses of each person holding an interest of
10% or more in the entity. N.J.S.A. 40:55D-48.2.
(c) Four copies of certification signed by all land owner(s)
consenting to the filing of the action.
(d) Four copies of a statement indicating the filing fees and
escrows, and receipt(s) evidencing payment of same to the
Borough.
(e) Writing of the Borough Official constituting the underlying
decision or action which is appealed;
(f) Writing setting forth the specified Borough Ordinance(s)
requested to be interpreted and any other information defining
the action;
(g) A statement describing the filing party's interest in, and
current status of such interest in, the land which is the subject
of the action;
(h) A list of names and addresses of witnesses to be presented and
their areas of expertise or lay testimony, if any are proposed;
(i) A sealed survey of the property which is the subject of the
action, showing all current existing improvements, dated
within the last 10 years of date of filing;
76.Editor's Note: Said checklist is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 165-155 CHATHAM CODE § 165-155
154:466
(j) A written statement describing the filing party's legal, zoning,
and planning position with respect to the action, including
specific reference to all applicable Borough ordinances or state
statutes requested to be considered;
(k) Plans, photographs, or other documents providing any pictorial
or supporting information to assist in rendering a decision on
the action;
(l) Written statement specifically describing why each waiver
requested in the Checklist should be granted; and
(m) All tangible evidence or items intended to be produced or
relied upon by the filing party at the hearing.
B. Applications for development before the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
Applications for development before the Borough's Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall be governed as follows: [Amended 3-11-2013 by
Ord. No. 13-04]
(1) Hearings for applications for development shall be conducted
before the Zoning Board in accordance with § 165-158D of this
chapter.
(2) As provided under § 165-154 of this chapter and N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70c and d and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-72b, a developer may file an
application for development with the Zoning Board of Adjustment
for action under any of its powers without prior application to a
Borough Official.
(3) Variance relief. All applications solely for variance relief to the
Zoning Board of Adjustment and not involving any related site plan,
subdivision, or conditional use proposal, shall be filed at least 30
days before the meeting of the Board at which hearing is desired. A
complete application shall include duplicate copies of all items set
forth in § 165-165B and the fees and escrows in accordance with
§ 165-166 of this chapter. The Board shall act upon the application
as stipulated under this chapter and pursuant to the Municipal
Land Use Law.
(4) Filing requirements for applications for development are stated in
§§ 165-162 and 165-163 of this chapter.
(5) Notice requirements for applications for development are stated in
§ 165-158E of this chapter.
(6) Fee and escrow requirements for applications for development are
stated in § 165-166 of this chapter.
(7) Availability of applications for development for inspection and
hearings for same shall be in accordance with § 165-158D of this
chapter.
§ 165-155 GARAGE SALES § 165-155
154:467
§ 165-156. Establishment of Planning Board. [Amended 12-14-1981
by Ord. No. 21-81]
(8) In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-73, the Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall render a decision on any application for
development filed under this § 165-155B not later than 120 days
from the date of submission of a complete application as confirmed
in the certificate of completeness issued to the applicant by the
Administrative Secretary of the Board. Failure of the Zoning Board
to render a decision within such one-hundred-twenty-day period, or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant,
shall constitute either a decision favorable to the applicant or
approval of the application, as the case may be.
C. (Reserved)77
D. Any appeal to the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall stay all proceedings
in furtherance of the action in respect to which the decision appealed
from was made unless the officer from whose action the appeal is taken
certifies to the Zoning the Board of Adjustment, after the notice of
appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in
the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life
or property. In such case proceedings shall not be stayed other than by
an order of the Superior Court upon notice to the officer from whom the
appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
E. In acting on any appeal, the Zoning Board of Adjustment may reverse or
affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the action, order, requirement,
decision, interpretation or determination appealed from and to that end
have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken.
A. A Planning Board is hereby established consisting of nine members of
the following four classes:
(1) Class I: The Mayor, or the Mayor's designee in the absence of the
Mayor. [Amended 4-25-2005 by Ord. No. 05-09]
(2) Class II: One of the officials of the municipality, other than a
member of the governing body, to be appointed by the Mayor,
provided that if there is an Environmental Commission, the
member of the Environmental Commission who is also a member of
the Planning Board as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 shall be
deemed to be the Class II Planning Board member if there is both a
member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment and a member of the
Board of Education among the Class IV members.
(3) Class III: A member of the Borough Council to be appointed by the
governing body.
77.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C, regarding the date for a decision, was repealed
3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-04.
§ 165-155 CHATHAM CODE § 165-156
154:468
(4) Class IV: Six other citizens of the municipality to be appointed by
the Mayor. The members of Class IV shall hold no other municipal
office, except that one member may be a member of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment and one may be a member of the Board of
Education. A member of the Environmental Commission who is also
a member of the Planning Board as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A
shall be a Class IV Planning Board member unless there be among
the Class IV members of the Planning Board both a member of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment and a member of the Board of
Education, in which case the member of the Environmental
Commission shall be deemed to be the Class II member of the
Planning Board.
B. The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond to the
Mayor’s official tenure, or if the member is the Mayor’s designee in the
absence of the Mayor, the designee shall serve at the pleasure of the
Mayor during the Mayor’s official tenure. The terms of the members
composing Class II and Class III shall be for one year or terminated at
the completion of their respective terms of office, whichever occurs
first, except for a Class II member who is also a member of the
Environmental Commission. The term of a Class II or Class IV member
who is also a member of the Environmental Commission shall be for
three years or terminate at the completion of his term of office as a
member of the Environmental Commission, whichever comes first.
[Amended 4-25-2005 by Ord. No. 05-09]
C. The term of a Class IV member who is also a member of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment or the Board of Education shall terminate
whenever he is no longer a member of such other body or at the
completion of this Class IV term, whichever comes first.
D. The terms of all Class IV members first appointed pursuant to this
chapter shall be so determined that to the greatest practicable extent
the expiration of such term shall be evenly distributed over the first four
years after their appointment and as determined by resolution of the
governing body; provided, however, that no term of any member shall
exceed four years and further provided that nothing here shall affect
the term of any present member of the Planning Board, all of whom
shall continue in office until the completion of the terms of four years
except as otherwise herein provided. All terms shall run from January 1
of the year in which the appointment was made.
E. If a vacancy of any class shall occur otherwise than by expiration of
term, it shall be filled by appointments as above provided for the
unexpired term.
F. The Planning Board shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from the
members of Class IV and select a Board Administrative Secretary who
may be either a member of the Planning Board or a municipal employee
designated by it. [Amended 3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-04]
§ 165-156 GARAGE SALES § 165-156
154:469
§ 165-157. Powers and jurisdiction of Planning Board. [Amended
12-14-1981 by Ord. No. 21-81]
G. The governing body shall make provisions in the budget and
appropriate funds for the expenses of the Planning Board.
H. The office of Planning Board Attorney is hereby created. The Planning
Board may annually appoint to such office and fix compensation or rate
of compensation of an Attorney-at-Law of New Jersey other than the
Municipal Attorney.
I. The Planning Board may also employ or contract for and fix the
compensation of such experts and other staff and services as it may
deem necessary. The Board shall not authorize expenditures which
exceed, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the
governing body for its use.
J. The Mayor may appoint two alternate members, who shall meet the
qualifications of Class IV members of the Planning Board. Alternate
members shall be designated at the time of appointment by the Mayor
as Alternate No. 1 and Alternate No. 2. The terms of the alternate
members shall be for two years except that the terms of the alternate
members shall be such that the term of not more than one alternate
member shall expire in any one year provided, however, that in no
instance shall the terms of the alternate members first appointed
exceed two years. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of
term shall be filled by the Mayor for the unexpired term only. [Added
3-10-1980 by Ord. No. 2-80]
K. Alternate members may participate in discussions of the proceedings
but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member of any class. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular
member may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a
choice must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate
No. 1 shall vote. [Added 3-10-1980 by Ord. No. 2-80]
L. Lack of quorum due to conflicts of interest. If the Planning Board lacks
a quorum because any of its regular or alternate members is prohibited
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23 or N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23 from acting on a matter due to
the member's personal or financial interests therein, regular members
of the Board of Adjustment shall be called upon to serve, for that matter
only, as temporary members of the Planning Board in order of seniority
of continuous service to the Board of Adjustment until there are the
minimum number of members necessary to constitute a quorum to act
upon the matter without any personal or financial interest therein,
whether direct or indirect. If a choice has to be made between regular
members of equal seniority, the Chair of the Board of Adjustment shall
make the choice. [Added 4-25-2005 by Ord. No. 05-09]
A. The Planning Board shall have the powers listed below in addition to
other powers established by law:
§ 165-156 CHATHAM CODE § 165-157
154:470
(1) Make, adopt, and from time to time amend a Master Plan for the
physical development of the Borough, including any areas outside
its boundaries which, in the Board's judgment, bear essential
relation to the planning of the Borough.
(2) Participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans
required by state or federal law or regulation.
(3) Assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous
planning process.
(4) Annually, at the direction of the governing body, may prepare a
program of municipal capital improvements projects projected over
a term of six years and amendments thereto and recommend same
to the governing body.
(5) Consider and make report to the governing body within 35 days
after referral as to any proposed development regulation submitted
to it and also pass upon other matters specifically referred to the
Planning Board by the governing body.
B. Whenever a proposed development requires approval of a subdivision,
site plan, or conditional use, pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law
and the Borough of Chatham’s Land Development Regulations, the
Planning Board shall have such other powers as prescribed by law,
including, but not limited to, its ancillary powers as set forth in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-60, described as follows: [Amended 8-11-2008 by Ord. No.
08-16]
(1) The power to grant variances pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(c);
(2) The power to direct the issuance of a permit for a building or
structure in the bed of a mapped street or public drainage way,
flood control basin, or public area pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34;
(3) The power to direct the issuance of a permit for a building or
structure not related to a street pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36.
C. Parking layout review. When an existing commercial or industrial
building is rebuilt or remodeled, a building permit shall not be issued
until the existing and proposed parking layout and management of
same has been submitted to the Borough Planning Board for review and
approval. For this review, a parking plan shall be required in
accordance with § 165-163C. If the applicant relies upon legal
preexisting nonconformities in its parking, such position shall be set
forth in writing and details and submitted for review. [Added
3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-04]
D. Application for change of permitted use with waiver of site plan. The
Planning Board may waive the filing of a site plan as follows: [Added
3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-04]
§ 165-157 GARAGE SALES § 165-157
154:471
(1) The Planning Board may waive the filing and review of a site plan
as required under this chapter if the application is limited to a
change of permitted use as defined in § 165-10.
(2) Notice is not required for an application for change of permitted
use, as is permitted under the Municipal Land Use Law.
E. Required items for application for change of permitted use. Required
items for filing of an application for change of permitted use with
request for waiver of filing of site plan, § 165-157D, shall include, but
are not limited to, all items under Checklist E78 as follows: [Added
3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-04]
(1) Completed and signed application and all applicable checklists;
(2) Certification signed by all landowner(s) consenting to the
application;
(3) A statement indicating the filing fees and escrows pursuant to
§ 165-166 and receipt(s) evidencing payment of same to Borough;
and
(4) The most recent site plan, if one exists, together with an affidavit of
the property owner that there have been no changes at the
property as depicted on the site plan.
F. Applications for development before the Planning Board. Applications
for development before the Borough's Planning Board shall be
governed as follows: [Added 3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-04]
(1) Hearings for applications for development shall be conducted
before the Planning Board in accordance with § 165-158D of this
chapter.
(2) As provided under § 165-157 of this chapter and N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70c, a developer may file an application for development
with the Planning Board for action under any of its powers.
(3) Variance relief. All applications solely for variance relief to the
Planning Board and not involving any related site plan, subdivision,
or conditional use proposal, shall be filed at least 30 days before
the meeting of the Board at which hearing is desired. The Board
shall act upon the application as stipulated by law.
(4) Filing requirements for applications for development are stated in
§§ 165-162 and 165-163 of this chapter.
(5) Notice requirements for applications for development are stated in
§ 165-158E of this chapter.
78.Editor's Note: Said checklist is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 165-157 CHATHAM CODE § 165-157
154:472
§ 165-158. Provisions applicable to both Planning Board and
Zoning Board of Adjustment.
(6) Fee and escrow requirements for applications for development are
stated in § 165-166 of this chapter.
(7) Availability of applications for development for inspection and
conduct of hearings for same shall be in accordance with
§ 165-158D of this chapter, and in accordance with the Municipal
Land Use Law, the Open Public Records Act and the Open Public
Meetings Act. Availability of records for Planning Board matters
shall also be in accordance with the duly adopted Rules and
Regulations of the Planning Board, as amended from time to time.
The Rules and Regulations of the Planning Board are Attachment 2
to this Chapter 165.79
(8) The time for the Planning Board to render a decision on an
application for development shall be in accordance with the
Municipal Land Use Law. All time periods shall run from the date of
submission of a complete application for development as confirmed
in the certificate of completeness issued to the applicant by the
Administrative Secretary of the appropriate Board. The time of
hearing and of the decision may be extended with the consent of
the applicant.
A. Conflicts of interest. No member of the Planning Board or Zoning Board
of Adjustment shall act on any matter in which he has either directly or
indirectly any personal or financial interest. Whenever any such
member shall disqualify himself from acting on a particular matter, he
shall not continue to sit with the Board on the hearing of such matter
nor participate in any discussion or decision relating thereto.
B. Meetings.
(1) Meetings of both the Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall be scheduled no less often than once a month, and
any meeting so scheduled shall be held as scheduled unless
cancelled for lack of applications for development to process or
other business. [Amended 4-25-2005 by Ord. No. 05-09]
(2) Special meetings may be provided for at the call of the Chairman or
on the request of any two Board members, which shall be held on
notice to its members and the public in accordance with all
applicable requirements.
(3) Other than a call for adjournment, no action shall be taken at any
meeting without a quorum being present, said quorum to be the
majority of the full authorized membership of the Board.
79.Editor's Note: Said rules and regulations are on file in the Borough offices.
§ 165-157 GARAGE SALES § 165-158
154:473
(4) All actions shall be taken by majority vote of a quorum except as
otherwise required by a provision of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
(5) All meetings shall be open to the public. Notice of all such meetings
shall be given in accordance with the requirements of the Open
Public Meeting Law, c. 231, Laws of New Jersey, 1975 (N.J.S.A.
10:4-6 et seq.).
C. Records.
(1) Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall
include the names of the persons appearing and addressing the
Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment, and of the
persons appearing by attorney, the action taken by the Planning or
Zoning Board, the findings, if any, made by it and reasons therefor.
The minutes shall thereafter be made available for public
inspection during the normal business hours at the office of the
administrative officer. Any interested party shall have the right to
compel production of the minutes for use as evidence in any legal
proceedings concerning the subject matter of such minutes.
(2) A verbatim recording shall be made of every hearing. The
recording of the proceedings shall be made by either stenographer,
mechanical or electronic means. The municipality shall furnish a
transcript or duplicate recording in lieu thereof on request to any
interested party at his expense.
D. Public hearings.
(1) The Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case
may be, shall hold a hearing on each application for development.
Each Board shall make the rules governing such hearings.
(2) Any maps and documents for which approval is sought at a hearing
shall be on file and available for public inspection at least 10 days
before the date of the hearing during normal business hours in the
office of the administrative officer. The applicant may produce
other documents, records or testimony at the hearing to
substantiate or clarify or supplement the previously filed maps and
documents.
(3) The officer presiding at the hearing, or such person as he may
designate, shall have power to administer oaths and issue
subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the
production of relevant evidence, including witnesses and
documents presented by the parties, and the provisions of the
County and Municipal Investigations Law, P.L. 1953, c. 38 (N.J.S.A.
2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
(4) The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the
presiding officer, and the right of cross-examination shall be
§ 165-158 CHATHAM CODE § 165-158
154:474
permitted to all interested parties through their attorneys, if
represented, or directly, if not represented, subject to the
discretion of the presiding officer and to reasonable limitations as
to time and number of witnesses.
(5) Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the hearing,
but the board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence.
E. Public notice of a meeting.
(1) Public notice of a hearing shall be given for the following
applications for development:
(a) Any request for a variance.
(b) Any request for conditional use approval.
(c) Any request for the issuance of a permit to build within the bed
of a mapped street or public drainageway or on a lot not
abutting a street. [See § 165-154C(1) and (2).]
(d) Any request for site plan or subdivision approval involving one
or more of the aforesaid elements.
(e) Any request for preliminary subdivision approval.
(f) Any appeal of the decision of a Borough Official pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70a or request for interpretation pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70b. [Added 3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-04]
(2) The Board Administrative Secretary of the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, shall notify the
applicant at least two weeks prior to the public hearing at which
the application will be discussed. Notice of a hearing requiring
public notice shall be given by the applicant at least 10 days prior
to the date of the hearing in the following manner: [Amended
3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-04]
(a) By publication in the official newspaper of the municipality, if
there be one, or in a newspaper of general circulation in the
municipality.
(b) To all owners of real property as shown on the current tax
duplicate located within 200 feet in all directions of the
property which is the subject of the hearing, which notice shall
be given by serving a copy thereof on the property owner, as
shown on the current tax duplicate, or his agent in charge of
the property; or by mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to
the property owner at his address as shown on the said current
tax duplicate. It is not required that a return receipt be
obtained. Notice is deemed complete upon mailing (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-14).
§ 165-158 GARAGE SALES § 165-158
154:475
(c) Notice to a partnership owner may be made by service upon
any partner; notice to a corporate owner may be made by
service upon its president, a vice president, secretary or other
person authorized by appointment or by law to accept service
on behalf of the corporation.
(d) To the Clerk of any adjoining municipality or municipalities
when the property involved is located within 200 feet of said
adjoining municipality or municipalities, which notice shall be
given by personal service or certified mail.
(e) To the County Planning Board when the application for
development involves property adjacent to an existing county
road or proposed road shown on the County Official Map or the
County Master Plan or adjoins other county land.
(f) To the Commissioner of Transportation of the State of New
Jersey when the property abuts a State highway.
(g) To the Director of the Division of State and Regional Planning
in the Department of Community Affairs when the hearing
involves an application for development of property which
exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling units, in which case the
notice shall include a copy of any maps or documents required
to be on file with the administrative officer.
(3) Upon the written request of an applicant, the Borough Tax Assessor
shall, within seven days, make and certify a list from said current
tax duplicates of names and addresses of owners within the
Borough to whom the applicant is required to give notice. The
applicant shall be charged the fee provided in Chapter 129, Fees,
Article III, § 129-15D(4) for said list and shall be entitled to rely
upon the information contained in such list, and failure to give
notice to any owner not on the list shall not invalidate any hearing
or proceeding. Additionally, the applicant shall be responsible for
giving proper notice to all property owners pursuant to Subsection
E(2)(b) above who do not reside within the Borough. [Amended
4-25-2005 by Ord. No. 05-09]
(4) The applicant shall file an affidavit or proof of service with the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be.
(5) The notice shall state the date, time and place of the hearing and
the nature of the matters to be considered, and an identification of
the property proposed for development by street address, if any, or
by reference to lot and block numbers as shown on the current tax
duplicate in the Municipal Tax Assessor's Office, and the location
and times at which any maps or documents for which approval is
sought are available for inspection.
F. Lapse of permits. After the Construction Official has issued a permit,
other than temporary or occupancy permits, or after the Zoning Board
§ 165-158 CHATHAM CODE § 165-158
154:476
of Adjustment or Planning Board has varied the provisions of this
chapter, the permit so issued or the variance so granted shall lapse
after the expiration of one year if no substantial construction has
taken place in accordance with the plans on the basis of which such
permit was issued or variance granted, and a new permit or variance
shall be obtained before the construction is started, except that after
public hearing and finding that the delay is due to reasonable cause,
the Zoning Board of Adjustment or Planning Board may grant one or
more extensions for additional periods not exceeding six months each.
[Amended 3-13-1989 by Ord. No. 2-89]
G. Overlapping jurisdiction of Boards. The Planning Board and Zoning
Board of Adjustment have the powers specified in Article XIX of this
chapter. Certain of the respective powers of the Planning Board and
Zoning Board of Adjustment overlap. The overlapping powers are as
follows: [Added 3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-04]
(1) Planning Board. The Planning Board shall have the power to act in
lieu of the Zoning Board of Adjustment and subject to the same
extent and restrictions of the Zoning Board of Adjustment on the
following matters:
(a) Grant variances pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c from lot area,
or from dimensions and setbacks requirements of a lot,
provided that relief pursuant to this subsection from lot area
requirements shall not be granted for more than one lot;
(b) Direct issuance of a permit for a building or structure in the
bed of a mapped street, public drainageway, flood control
basin, or public area, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34;
(c) Direct issuance of a permit for a building or structure not
related to a street, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36.
(2) Zoning Board of Adjustment. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall
have the power to grant, to the same extent and subject to the same
restrictions as the Planning Board, site plan, subdivision, or
conditional use approval when reviewing an application for
approval of a use variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d.
H. Notice of decision. Notice of any decision regarding an application for
development by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as
the case may be, shall be given in the following manner: [Added
3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-04]
(1) The Municipal Land Use Law shall govern the time within which
the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may
be, shall render its decision on an application for development, as
well as the time for the appropriate Board to adopt the
memorializing resolution evidencing the Board's decision. An
applicant may consent to extensions of time in writing or on the
record in open public meeting.
§ 165-158 GARAGE SALES § 165-158
154:477
§ 165-159. Appeal of use variance approvals to Borough Council.
[Amended 12-14-1981 by Ord. No. 21-81; 3-11-2013 by Ord. No.
13-04]
(2) A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the Board within 10 days
of the date of decision to the applicant, or if represented, then to
the attorney, without separate charge. A copy of the decision shall
also be mailed to any interested party who has requested it and
who has paid the fee prescribed by the Borough for such service.
(3) A brief notice of every final decision shall be published in the
official newspaper of the Borough. Such publication shall be
arranged by the Administrative Secretary of the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, and paid for by
the applicant. The notice shall be sent to the official newspaper for
publication within 10 days of the date of any such decision.
(4) A copy of the decision shall also be filed in the office of the Borough
Planning Department, who shall make a copy of such filed decision
available to any interested party upon payment of a fee calculated
in the same manner as those established for copies of other public
documents in the Borough.
I. Conditions of approval. Conditions of approval may be contained in the
final adopted resolution of the applicable Board. An applicant shall
ensure compliance with all conditions of approval, by submission of
legal documents, revised plans, other governmental approvals, and
other necessary documents, for review and approval by the appropriate
Board's professionals. Board professionals shall issue compliance
reports when necessary. The responsible Board Chairman, Board
Secretary, and Administrative Board Secretary shall execute and
witness documents as necessary for recording and filing with the
county. [Added 3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-04]
J. Time limits and extensions of time. Time limits for submissions required
as a condition of approval may be set forth in the memorializing
resolution of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the
case may be, and/or governed by the Municipal Land Use Law.
Extensions of such time shall be governed by the Municipal Land Use
Law. [Added 3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-04]
A. Any interested party may appeal the approval of a use variance (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d) by the Zoning Board of Adjustment, to the Borough
Council.
B. Such appeal shall be made within 10 days of the date of newspaper
publication notice of the Zoning Board’s final approval by resolution,
pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law. The appeal shall be made by
serving the Borough Clerk in person or by certified mail with a notice of
appeal specifying the grounds thereof and the name and address of the
appellant and his/her attorney, if represented. Within the time set forth
§ 165-158 CHATHAM CODE § 165-159
154:478
in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-17c, the appellant shall arrange and pay for a
transcript for use by the Borough Council and shall deliver seven copies
of the transcript to the Borough Clerk.
C. Notice of the meeting of the Borough Council to review the record
below shall be given by the Borough Clerk by personal service or
certified mail to the appellant, to all those entitled to notice of a
decision pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10 and to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, at least 10 days before the date of the meeting when the
appeal will be heard. The parties may submit oral and written
arguments on the record at such meeting, and the Borough Council
shall provide for verbatim recording of such meeting.
D. The appeal shall be decided by the Borough Council only upon the
record established before the Zoning Board of Adjustment. The
Borough Council shall conclude a review of the record below not later
than 95 days from the date of receipt of the transcript of the hearing,
unless the appellant consents in writing to an extension of such time
period. Failure of the Borough Council to hold a hearing, conclude a
review of the record below, and render a decision within such time
period shall constitute a decision affirming the action of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment.
E. The Borough Council may reverse, remand, or affirm, wholly or in part,
or may modify the final decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment. The
affirmative vote of a majority of the full authorized membership of the
Borough Council shall be necessary to reverse, remand, or modify any
final action of the Board. The Borough Council’s vote and decision shall
be rendered by way of a written resolution or by an oral decision made
at an open public meeting which has been recorded verbatim.
F. Notice of any decision by the Borough Council regarding an appeal of
the grant of a use variance shall be given in the following manner:
(1) A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the Borough Clerk within
10 days of the date of decision, without separate charge, to the
appellant, or, if represented, then to the attorney, and to the
applicant who was granted the use variance by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment. A copy of the decision shall also be mailed to any
interested party who has requested it and who has paid the fee
prescribed by the Borough for such service.
(2) A brief notice of every final decision shall be published in the
official newspaper of the Borough within 10 days of the date of any
such decision. Such publication shall be arranged by the Borough
Clerk, and paid for by the appellant.
(3) A copy of the decision shall also be filed in the office of the Borough
Clerk and in the office of the Borough Planning Department, and
such filed decision shall be available to any interested party upon
payment of a fee calculated in the same manner as those
established for copies of other public documents in the Borough.
§ 165-159 GARAGE SALES § 165-159
154:479

ARTICLE XX
Application Procedures and Requirements
[Amended 12-14-1981 by Ord. No. 21-81; 11-9-1987 by Ord. No.
15-87; 2-8-1993 by Ord. No. 3-93; 2-27-1995 by Ord. No. 4-95;
3-12-2007 by Ord. No. 07-01; 3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-0480]
§ 165-160. Applicability to types of applications.
A. Subdivision review. All subdivisions, as defined under § 165-10, are
subject to the review procedures specified in this chapter.
B. Site plan review required. No construction permit shall be issued for
any change of permitted use as defined in this chapter, or for any
construction of a structure or additional parking spaces at residential,
business, or industrial properties, or for the addition of driveways and/
or paving at commercial business or industrial properties, until a site
plan has been reviewed and approved by the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment, as the case may be.
C. Site plan review is not required or may be waived as follows:
(1) Board approval of a site plan shall not be necessary for a detached
single-family or two-family dwelling unit used solely for residential
purposes and its accessory building(s) on a single lot;
(2) The Borough Zoning Official may waive the review of a site plan
when the application is limited to the construction or modification
of signs for an existing use and where such signs meet the
requirements of Article XIII of this chapter;
(3) The Planning Board may waive the review of a site plan in
connection with an application for change of permitted use as
provided under § 165-157D and E;
(4) The Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case
may be, may waive the review of a site plan if the construction is of
no more than 100 square feet of additional floor area and/or the
construction of no more than two additional parking spaces.
D. Final approvals. All applications that have received preliminary
approval from the appropriate Board shall be required to seek and
obtain final Board approval within the time set forth under the
Municipal Land Use Law. Filing requirements for such applications for
development seeking final approvals are set forth under §§ 165-161C
and 165-162C.
E. Concept plan review. Review of a conceptual sketch or plan of a
proposed subdivision or site plan is not required but is strongly
80.Editor's Note: This ordinance also revised and added various provisions from former
§§ 165-160, Notice of decision, as amended, and 165-161, Jurisdiction of responsibility
during development application review, as amended, to §§ 165-158 and 165-159; said
ordinance also relocated § 165-160 from Art. XIX to Art. XX.
§ 165-160 GARAGE SALES § 165-160
154:481
recommended. The submission of a concept plan affords the applicant
the opportunity to discuss the proposal in its formative stages and
receive the nonbinding advice of the Planning Board, Zoning Board
of Adjustment, or an authorized subcommittee of either Board, as the
case may be. A concept plan may be submitted to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment or an authorized subcommittee of the Zoning Board only
as part of a use variance application. Procedures for submission for a
concept review are as follows:
(1) An applicant seeking a review of a concept plan shall submit an
application for review, plans or drawings depicting the concept,
duplicate copies of documents as required by the Borough Zoning
Official or his/her designee, and the required fees and escrows in
accordance with § 165-166 of this chapter. Checklist C must also be
submitted for a review of a concept plan.
(2) At the direction of the Zoning Official additional copies of the
submission may be forwarded to other committees, individuals,
offices, and/or agencies for review and comment. In those instances
where an application for site plan, subdivision, or use variance is
being reviewed by the Zoning Board of Adjustment, the Zoning
Official shall forward a copy of same to the Planning Board for its
information and comment.
(3) Details required in a concept plan and submissions are as follows:
(a) The submitted sketch shall be based on Tax Map information or
some other similarly accurate base and shall be neatly and
accurately drawn. The following information shall be included
unless waived by the Board as unnecessary to arrive at an
informed decision;
(b) Title block, including the name of the subdivision or
development, municipality and county and the name, address,
and telephone number of the subdivider or developer;
(c) Scale and North arrow;
(d) Date of original preparation and of each subsequent revision
thereof, and name of preparer;
(e) Existing block and lot number(s) of the lot(s) to be subdivided
or developed, as they appear on the Borough Tax Map;
(f) Subdivision or development boundary line delineated;
(g) The location of existing and proposed lines, streets, buildings
(with an indication as to whether existing buildings will be
retained or removed), parking spaces, loading areas,
driveways, proposed buffer and landscaped areas,
watercourses, railroads, bridges, culverts, drain pipes, steep
slopes in excess of 15%, and any natural features such as
§ 165-160 CHATHAM CODE § 165-160
154:482
§ 165-161. Filing requirements for applications for development.
wetlands and treed areas, both within the tract and within 200
feet of its boundary;
(h) The approximate location and approximate width of all existing
and proposed utility or other easements;
(i) Protective covenants or deed restrictions that may affect the
proposed subdivision or development;
(j) Such other items as the Zoning Official may determine are
necessary for adequate review of the concept by the
appropriate Board.
(4) At the applicant's request, the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, may hear and review a concept
plan submission at a regularly scheduled meeting and give the
applicant an opportunity to briefly present the concept plan. No
notice is required for such hearing and no expert testimony is
required. The Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as
the case may be, may give suggestions and recommendations to the
applicant for consideration. No binding determinations or decisions
shall be rendered, and no resolution shall result from a review of a
concept plan.
A. General requirements. The following provisions apply to all applications
for development, whether pending before the Borough Planning Board
or the Borough Zoning Board of Adjustment.
(1) Checklists. Every application for development shall be
accompanied by the appropriate checklist(s). The following
checklists are made a part of this chapter, and are incorporated as
Attachment 3 to this chapter:81
(a) Checklist A: General Requirements for All Applications For
Development.
(b) Checklist B: "C" Variances for Decks and Fences on Single-
Family and Two-Family Residential Properties.
(c) Checklist C: Plan Requirements for All Applications for
Development Conceptual Site Plan and/or Subdivision Review
Preliminary Site Plan or Subdivision Approval and All
Variances (Not Covered in Checklist B).
(d) Checklist D: Requirements for Final Site Plan and/or Final
Minor or Major Subdivision Use with Request for Waiver of
Site Plan Before Borough Planning Board.
81.Editor's Note: The checklists are on file in the Borough offices.
§ 165-160 GARAGE SALES § 165-161
154:483
(e) Checklist E: Application for Change of Permitted Use with
Request for Waiver of Site Plan Before Planning Board.
(f) Checklist F: Request for Interpretation of Borough Ordinance
or Appeal from Decision of Borough Official Before Zoning
Board of Adjustment.
(2) Every initial filing of an application for development shall minimally
provide the following documents and submissions: complete
application; applicable checklist(s); landowner consents; survey
and site photographs showing existing conditions; plans and maps
describing and depicting the proposed development and approvals
sought; environmental, wetlands, stormwater management, traffic,
and parking studies; any prior approvals issued by the Borough
Zoning Board of Adjustment or the Borough Planning Board, and
proof of payment of municipal charges, fees, and escrows.
(3) Payment of municipal fees. Every initial filing of an application for
development shall be accompanied by proof that no taxes,
assessments for local improvements, water charges, sewer fees, or
any other municipal fees, are due or delinquent with regard to the
property which is the subject of the application.
(4) If any required document or submission is not filed with the initial
filing, a written checklist waiver request shall be submitted to
address the absence of the document or submission and the
reasons for each request for checklist waiver.
(5) All parts of the application shall be readable and legible, or such
part shall be rejected and required to be refiled.
(6) Failure to provide any of the above submissions shall result in the
application being deemed incomplete and require refiling.
B. Submission requirements. The following are submissions required for
all applications for development as defined in § 165-10, whether
pending before the Borough Planning Board or the Borough Zoning
Board of Adjustment:
(1) Complete application for development with completed checklist(s)
as applicable;
(2) Payment of all required application fees and escrows;
(3) Any prior resolutions or approvals issued by the Borough Zoning
Board of Adjustment or the Borough Planning Board;
(4) Letters, statements, and/or reports from the Borough Shade Tree
Commission, Historic Preservation Commission, Environmental
Commission, and Sign Committee, as applicable;
(5) List of approvals and references required to be obtained from other
governmental agencies;
§ 165-161 CHATHAM CODE § 165-161
154:484
(6) Stormwater management study and drainage calculations, and
plans showing depiction and conformance with Article XIV of this
chapter, including all existing and proposed stormwater
management installations;
C. Requirements for final approvals. An application for development
seeking final approvals shall be accompanied by the following
documents:
(1) Application and Checklist D and required documents listed therein;
(2) Board Administrative Secretary's list of all applicable application
filing fees and escrows and payment of same, pursuant to
§ 165-166;
(3) Certification from the Tax Collector that all taxes and assessments
are paid to date;
(4) Certificate of consent signed by all property owners consenting to
the filing of the application for development;
(5) All prior resolutions of approval regarding the subject property
issued by the Borough Planning Board or the Borough Zoning
Board of Adjustment;
(6) List of all other governmental approvals obtained to date, and
copies of all permits, approvals, and exemptions for each
governmental unit;
(7) Written narrative and other documents explaining any changes to
the plans or the application that are different than what was
approved in the Board's preliminary approval, and certifying that
no new variances have been created by any change to the
preliminary plans and approvals.
(8) A statement from the Borough Engineer that he is in receipt of a
map showing all utilities in exact location and elevation, that he/she
has examined the drainage plan and found that the interests of the
Borough and of neighboring properties are adequately protected,
and that he/she has identified those portions of any utilities already
installed and those to be installed;
(9) A statement from the Borough Engineer that all improvements
installed prior to application have been inspected as provided in
§ 165-167 of this chapter, and that such improvements meet the
requirements of the Borough. Any improvements installed prior to
application for final approval that do not meet or exceed Borough
standards shall be factored into the required performance
guarantee;
(10) The applicant shall certify in writing to the Board that he/she has
installed all improvements in accordance with the requirements of
§ 165-161 GARAGE SALES § 165-161
154:485
§ 165-162. Requirements for contents of plans and other items.
this chapter and/or that he/she has posted a performance
guarantee in accordance with § 165-167 of this chapter;
(11) Plans in accordance with §§ 165-162 and 165-163, as necessary and
required, including engineering plans and details, architectural
details and renderings;
(12) As-built survey in accordance with § 165-163A;
(13) All recorded document or maps as required under the Board's
preliminary approval;
(14) Any document or other item required under the Board's
preliminary approval; and
(15) Such other submissions as may be necessary for the applicable
Board to render final decision.
A. General contents of plans. Plans shall meet or contain the following
general requirements:
(1) All plans shall be neatly and accurately drawn, each plan page shall
be consecutively numbered, and each plan page shall contain a
descriptive label;
(2) An identification block showing the project name, the name and
address of applicant, the street address and the existing and
proposed Borough tax block and lot numbers for each property
(such lot numbers having been preliminarily approved by the
Borough Tax Assessor);
(3) Plans shall be drawn and certified in accordance with New Jersey
Administrative Code (N.J.A.C.) 13:40-7 and 13:41-4, by a licensed
professional engineer, architect, land surveyor and/or landscape
architect, and shall bear the signature, seal, license number, and
address of the person certifying the plan, and the original date of
preparation of each plan page, and the date(s) of any revisions to
each plan page;
(4) Architectural, patio, and deck drawings may be prepared by the
applicant and/or the applicant's designee, and shall bear the
signature and address of the applicant, a descriptive label of each
plan page, the date of preparation, and the date(s) of any revisions;
(5) Each submission shall be on one of three of the following standard
sheet sizes: eight inches by 13 inches, 15 inches by 21 inches, or 24
inches by 36 inches. If one sheet is not sufficient to contain the
entire territory, the map may be divided into separate sheets, with
reference on each sheet to the adjoining sheets;
§ 165-161 CHATHAM CODE § 165-162
154:486
(6) Each submission, other than a key map, shall be prepared using a
minimum of scale of one inch equals 30 feet for a tract up to one
acre in size; or one inch equals 50 feet for a tract between one and
40 acres in size; or one inch equals 100 feet for a tract between 40
and 150 acres in size; or one inch equals 200 feet for a tract of 150
acres or more;
(7) A key map on the first page of plans, showing the entire tract and
its relation to the surrounding areas, at a scale of one inch equals
not less than 2,000 feet;
(8) A North arrow on each page;
(9) Reference meridian;
(10) Zoning analysis on first page of plans, containing a list of required,
existing, and proposed zoning conditions, with notations necessary
to identify how the proposed development conforms, what, if any,
variances are requested, and what, if any, waivers from design
standards are requested, for each proposed tax lot;
(11) The applicant's submission shall show all existing and proposed
dimensions necessary to confirm conformity to this chapter's
requirements, such as allowable, existing, and proposed values for
lot area, lot frontage, lot width, lot depth, front yard setback, side
yard setback, rear yard setback, total lot coverage, lot coverage
ratio, total building coverage, building coverage ratio, floor area
spaces, and floor area ratio, and such other items as required under
this chapter. The required values shall be shown in a coverage table
and a zoning table on the site plan sheet;
(12) The applicant's submission shall show existing and proposed
additional floor area for each floor, basement, attic, porch area, and
garage area, and proposed additional floor area for the basement
and each floor and attic. The required values shall be shown in a
coverage table and a zoning table on the site plan sheet;
(13) A signature block on the first page of plans as required under the
Municipal Land Use Law, and the New Jersey Administrative Code,
Title 13, as follows:
Plan of (short descriptive of project)
Street address
Block Lot Tax Map No.
Zone Scale
Applicant name
I CONSENT to the filing of this plan with the
Board of the Borough of Chatham
§ 165-162 GARAGE SALES § 165-162
154:487
Landowner
Date signed
Name/title
Applicant
Date signed
Name/title
I HEREBY CERTIFY that I have prepared this Plan and that all
dimensions and information are correct.
Name
Date signed
Title and License Number
I HAVE REVIEWED this Plan and certify that it meets all codes
and ordinances under my jurisdiction.
Borough Engineer
Date signed
To be signed after the issuance of a construction permit: I
HEREBY CERTIFY that all the required improvements have been
installed or a bond posted in compliance with all applicable codes
and ordinances.
Borough Engineer
Date signed
These plans have been approved by the
Board of the Borough of Chatham by Resolution entered on
Chairman
Name
Date signed
Witness to Chairman's
signature:
Administrative Secretary
Name
Date signed
B. Detailed contents of plans. Plans shall contain the following details:
§ 165-162 CHATHAM CODE § 165-162
154:488
(1) Except as otherwise stated, dimensions shall be shown in feet and
inches; area values shall be shown in square footage; and ratios
shall be shown as a percentage to two decimal places;
(2) Width, depth, and height dimensions shall be shown in feet and
inches;
(3) Bearing and dimensions of each boundary line and the angle
between intersecting lines, shown in degrees, minutes, and
seconds;
(4) Indication of any reference corners and location and kind of each
existing and proposed permanent property monument;
(5) Location of any zoning district boundaries within 200 feet of the
proposed development;
(6) Location of any municipal boundaries within 200 feet of the
proposed development;
(7) Proposed location and size (width and depth) of all principal and
accessory structures and fixtures and improvements of any kind
whatsoever, including recreational facilities, driveways and other
pathways of any kind, fences, walls, patios, decks, utility units, and
overhangs from structures;
(8) Proposed front, side, and rear yard setbacks, and second story
overhanging setbacks, with distances shown in feet to two decimal
places;
(9) Lot frontage, lot width, lot depth, building height, and setbacks;
(10) Square foot area of all existing and proposed lots;
(11) Any street or roadway access and proposed directions of travel;
(12) The proposed location and size (width and depth) of base height,
from proposed ground elevation to top element;
(13) The location and size and description of any signs, in accordance
with Article XIII;
(14) The location, size, and description of any exterior lighting, with
direction of illumination, power, and candlepower diagram,
showing conformance with § 165-78;
(15) Depiction of all locations, size and description of all existing and
proposed utilities;
(16) Floor plans and gross floor areas (both total and footprint);
(17) Facade (elevation) drawings of proposed and improved buildings;
(18) Spot elevations (at building corners) and first floor building
elevation;
§ 165-162 GARAGE SALES § 165-162
154:489
(19) Fences and walls: locations, dimensions, materials;
(20) Curbing, sidewalks, driveways, loading area: locations and
dimensions;
(21) Location of existing and proposed refuse storage locations,
including descriptions of structures, enclosure type and
dimensions, and volume of storage provided;
(22) Identification of all existing and proposed public improvements,
easements, rights-of-way, and restrictions of record, with accurate
metes and bounds descriptions for same;
(23) Depiction of any existing natural features on the property and
within 200 feet of each boundary line;
(24)Wetlands, wetlands delineations and buffers, watercourses,
conservation areas and easements, wellheads, floodplain areas,
underground tanks, and other environmental items;
(25) Existing and proposed stormwater management structures, dry
wells, culverts, outlets, and other details for stormwater drainage
and management;
(26) Steep slopes, elevations, and calculations, in accordance with
§ 165-14D(2), D(3), and G;
(27) Location of all existing and proposed loading and unloading
area(s), whether off site or on site at the subject property;
(28) Parking layout plan in accordance with § 165-163C.
(29) Location and species of all existing trees and groups of trees with
caliper of eight inches or more as measured three feet from ground
level;
(30) Landscaping plan showing location and species of all proposed
landscaping, including shade trees, screening, and buffer areas, in
accordance with § 165-163D;
(31) Soil erosion and sediment control plan;
(32) Such other items as are necessary to fully depict and describe the
proposed development.
C. Specific contents of plans for final approvals. Plans submitted for an
application for development seeking final approvals shall contain the
following specific details:
(1) All details stipulated in § 165-162A and B of this chapter, as they
are applicable and necessary to the final design, construction, and
approvals requested;
§ 165-162 CHATHAM CODE § 165-162
154:490
§ 165-163. Contents of other documentary submissions.
(2) All additional plan revisions and/or details that were imposed as
conditions at the time of the Board's preliminary approval, or
imposed as a result of requirements of construction codes and
permits;
(3) A complete set of as-built plans, including depiction of all utilities;
(4) A signed and certified as-built survey, with permanent monuments;
(5) Detailed architectural and engineering data including:
(a) An architect's drawings of each building or a typical building,
showing front, side and rear elevations;
(b) Cross sections, profiles and established grades of all streets,
aisles, lanes and driveways, as approved by the Borough
Engineer;
(c) Plans and profiles of all storm and sanitary sewers and water
mains, as approved by the Borough Engineer;
(d) All dimensions of the exterior boundaries of any subdivision
shall be balanced and closed to a precision of one to 10,000
and the dimensions of all lot lines to within one to 20,000. All
dimensions, angles, and bearings must be tied to at least two
permanent monuments not less than 300 feet apart and all
information shall be indicated on the plan. At least one corner
of the subdivision shall be tied to USGS benchmarks with data
on the plan as to how the bearings were determined;
(6) Such other plan submissions and details as may be necessary to
obtain final approval of the Board.
A. Contents of survey. Every survey submitted for an application for
development shall contain the following:
(1) The survey shall be neatly and accurately drawn, and showing the
property lot(s) at a scale of one inch equals 30 feet;
(2) The survey submission shall be drawn on one of three of the
following standard sheet sizes: eight inches by 13 inches, 15 inches
by 21 inches, or 24 inches by 36 inches;
(3) The survey shall be drawn by a licensed professional engineer and/
or land surveyor and shall bear the signature, seal, license number,
and address of the person certifying the survey, and shall show the
date(s) of preparation and of any revisions. Preparation of the
survey shall include a visit to the lot to ensure that all current
features are accurately drawn;
§ 165-162 GARAGE SALES § 165-163
154:491
(4) The survey shall be dated within five years of the date of the
application for development, and shall be accompanied by a
current affidavit of no change from the property owner, stating that
the survey shows current and up-to-date existing conditions;
(5) The survey shall contain the following details:
(a) Location and size (width and depth) of all principal and
accessory structures and fixtures and improvements of any
kind whatsoever, including recreational facilities, driveways
and other pathways of any kind, fences, walls, patios, decks,
utility units, and overhangs from structures;
(b) A North arrow, abutting street names, the Borough tax block
and lot numbers, and the property owners;
(c) Dimensions of all the exterior boundaries;
(d) Boundary lines shall be balanced and closed to a precision of
one to 20,000;
(e) Bearing of each boundary line and the angle between
intersecting lines;
(f) Bearings shall be in degrees, minutes, and seconds;
(g) Indication of any reference corners;
(h) Location and kind of each permanent property monument;
(i) Front, side, and rear yard setbacks, and second story
overhanging setbacks;
(j) Setback distances shall be shown in feet to two decimal places.
(6) Final as-built survey shall depict all improvements, appurtenances,
easements, access rights, and shall depict permanent monuments,
if same were required to be installed by law or under the direction
of the Borough Engineer or the approving Board.
B. Contents of traffic impact study.
(1) In any application for development, a traffic impact study shall be
provided when determined to be necessary by the Borough
Engineer, Borough Zoning Official, or by the applicable Board, due
to specific and/or unique site and/or roadway conditions.
(2) A traffic study shall be prepared by a licensed professional
engineer with expertise in traffic and parking matters and shall
show the name, address, and license of the preparer, the date of
preparation, and the date(s) of any revisions. The extent of the
study area and those intersections and other areas to be analyzed
will vary depending upon the size and nature of the proposed
project and the amount of traffic to be generated.
§ 165-163 CHATHAM CODE § 165-163
154:492
(3) The traffic impact study shall describe all traffic and parking
impacts that the application for development will have on
surrounding roads. It shall include the following elements:
(a) Level of service of existing surrounding roads;
(b) Estimated peak hourly traffic to be generated;
(c) Assignment of estimated peak hourly traffic by percentage and
volume to surrounding roads;
(d) Determination of unused capacity of surrounding roads during
peak hours;
(e) Trip generation calculations based upon the ITE Trip
Generation Manual (most current edition available), including
pass-by trip calculations. If other data sources are used to
project site traffic, the basis of the trip generation must be
approved by the Borough Engineer;
(f) Recommendations for necessary road improvements, such as
acceleration and deceleration lanes and traffic control devices
or signage recommended for public roads or highways
surrounding the site;
(g) Any other information necessary for the Board to make a
reasonable judgment as to the impacts of increased traffic or
parking in the area of the proposed development.
C. Contents of parking layout plan/parking management report.
(1) Parking management reports shall be required for all
nonresidential and multifamily residential site plan applications
that require parking variances. In any application for development,
a parking layout plan and/or a parking management report shall be
provided when required by the Borough Engineer, Borough Zoning
Official, or by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment,
as the case may be, or as required for conditional uses.
(2) A parking layout plan and/or a parking management report shall be
prepared by a licensed professional engineer, planner, or surveyor
with expertise in parking. A parking layout plan shall be prepared
by a licensed professional engineer or surveyor with expertise in
parking. The plan shall show the name, address, and license of the
preparer, the date of preparation, and the date(s) of any revisions.
(3) If an existing master parking plan has been approved for the site, a
copy of same shall be provided as part of the application for
development.
(4) A parking layout/circulation plan for shall contain the following
information:
§ 165-163 GARAGE SALES § 165-163
154:493
(a) All existing parking and traffic circulation, whether or not
existing parking area is properly striped, and changes
proposed by the application to be depicted,
(b) Indication of number of parking spaces, dimensions of spaces,
and designation of handicapped spaces,
(c) Description and location of traffic signage within the site and
for entry and exit of site;
(d) Dropoff and pickup areas if necessary;
(e) Fire and emergency zones;
(f) Pedestrian circulation;
(g) Loading zones if required;
(h) Any other information necessary for the Planning Board or the
Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, to make a
reasonable judgment as to the impacts of increased parking in
the area of the proposed development.
(5) A parking management report shall include the following:
(a) Parking requirements as set forth in this chapter for the
proposed development, existing or new parking development
proposed to be utilized by the applicant, and existing usage of
parking by others;
(b) Analysis of parking demand based on projected employment
and specific operational parameters of the proposed use, as
well as based on ITE Parking Generation (most current edition)
and/or data collected locally for similar uses;
(c) Analysis of available parking supplies to meet projected
parking demand for employees and customers;
(d) Consideration of range of solutions to address parking needs,
including the purchase of parking permits in Borough lots to
address parking needs for employees.
(e) A discussion of the site plan elements and proposed
operations, including but not limited to, sight distances,
parking, circulation, loading space, site access design and
location, pedestrian elements, and recommended traffic
control measures;
(f) Any other information necessary for the Board to make a
reasonable judgment as to the impacts of increased parking in
the area of the proposed development.
D. Contents of landscaping plan.
§ 165-163 CHATHAM CODE § 165-163
154:494
(1) In any application for development, a landscaping plan shall be
provided when determined to be necessary by the Borough
Engineer, Borough Zoning Official, or by the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be.
(2) A landscaping plan shall be prepared by a licensed professional
engineer, landscape architect, or surveyor with expertise in
landscaping. The plan shall show the name, address, and license of
the preparer, the date of preparation, and the date(s) of any
revisions.
(3) A landscaping plan shall show location and species of all proposed
landscaping, including shade trees, screening, and buffer areas,
and shall conform to and depict the following:
(a) Buffer areas are required along all lot lines in nonresidential
districts where the lot lines abut residential uses or residential
zoning district lines, except where the lot lines coincide with
an existing railroad right-of-way. Each permitted use shall
provide and maintain attractively landscaped grounds and
suitable screening in order to safeguard the character of
adjacent districts.
(b) The buffer areas shall have a minimum width of 15 feet. Buffer
areas shall be measured horizontally and at right angles to
either a straight line or to the tangent lines of curbed lot lines.
Buffer areas shall be maintained and kept clear of all debris,
rubbish, weeds, and tall grass. No above-surface structure or
activity, no storage of materials, and no parking of vehicles
shall be permitted in the buffer area. All buffer areas shall be
planted and maintained with grass or ground cover, together
with a dense screen of trees, shrubs, or other plant materials
meeting the following requirements:
[1] The plants used in the buffer area shall be hemlock,
Austrian pine, or white pine, be of high-quality nursery
stock, and be free of insects and disease. The plants shall
be at least six feet in height when planted and shall be of
such a density to provide a visual screen along the entire
length of the buffer area between the nonresidential use(s)
and the abutting residential use(s) and/or district(s);
[2] In addition to the plants, a six-foot screening fence, such
as a close-split cedar pole or basket-weave fence, may also
be required;
[3] When plants are used in conjunction with a screening
fence, the plants shall be planted in a single row. When a
screening fence is not required, the plants shall be planted
in two staggered rows;
§ 165-163 GARAGE SALES § 165-163
154:495
§ 165-164. (Reserved)
§ 165-165. Review for completeness; waivers; scheduling;
submission copies.
[4] All landscaping and buffer areas shall be permanently
maintained and plant material which does not live shall be
replaced within one year or one growing season;
[5] The buffer area shall not be broken unless specifically
approved by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be;
(c) Such elements as may be required under § 165-14G(a) for
steep slope re-vegetation and land disturbance;
(d) Such other elements as shall be necessary as determined by
the Borough Zoning Official, or the applicable Board.
A. A review to determine if a filing is complete as defined in § 165-10 shall
be conducted as follows:
(1) Within 45 days after initial submission of an application for
development, applicable checklist(s) (with waivers requested), and
all required submissions, the Zoning Official or his/her designee
shall review the submission and notify the applicant in writing that
the application for development is deemed complete or incomplete.
If incomplete, the Zoning Official or his/her designee shall specify
the required ordinance and/or checklist items that are required. If
the Zoning Official or his/her designee deems the application for
development a complete application, the Administrative Secretary
of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case
may be, shall issue a certificate of completeness and schedule the
matter for public hearing(s).
(2) If the Zoning Official or his/her designee determines that an
application is incomplete, the applicant shall be afforded the
opportunity to submit a complete application by submitting the
additional items or make a continuing request for waiver. If a
supplemental submission is made, the Zoning Official or his/her
designee shall thereafter have 45 days to review and comment on
the supplemental submission, after which the Borough Zoning
Official or his/her designee shall notify the applicant in writing that
the application for development is deemed a complete application
or remains incomplete. If complete, the Administrative Secretary of
the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may
be, shall issue a certificate of completeness. Thereafter, the
Administrative Secretary of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall schedule the matter for public hearing(s).
§ 165-163 CHATHAM CODE § 165-165
154:496
(3) Within 45 days of receipt of a complete application, as confirmed in
the certificate of completeness issued to the applicant by the
Administrative Secretary of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, the matter shall be scheduled for
hearing and the appropriate Board shall determine whether any
continued checklist waiver request shall be granted or denied, or
can be met with testimony within the substantive hearings, which
waiver testimony and substantive hearings can be held at the same
time. If the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the
case may be, denies a checklist waiver request, the applicant shall
be given an opportunity to submit such additional materials as the
Board has determined are necessary. The Board may determine to
allow the substantive hearing(s) to begin and to continue same to
allow for additional submission by the applicant.
(4) Though a prehearing application may be deemed complete, the
applicant is still required to prove before the Board that the
applicant is entitled to the requested checklist waivers and
approvals. The Board may subsequently require correction of any
information or submission of additional information as reasonably
necessary to make an informed decision.
B. Filing of application.
(1) At the time of the initial filing of any application for development,
the following items shall be filed by the applicant:
(a) Sixteen copies of the application (completed);
(b) Sixteen copies of each applicable checklist(s) (completed);
(c) Sixteen copies of all plans, maps, surveys, and photographs;
(d) Sixteen copies of traffic, parking, environmental, or other
reports, if applicable;
(e) In general, four copies of all other submitted documents;
(f) All items specified in the applicable checklist that apply to the
application submitted;
(g) Additional copies as may be requested by the Administrative
Secretary of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, or the Borough Zoning
Official;
(2) All parts of the application, plans, and submissions shall be legible
and readable.
C. Every application shall be accompanied by the fees and escrows in
accordance with § 165-166 of this chapter.
§ 165-165 GARAGE SALES § 165-165
154:497

ARTICLE XXI
Fees, Guarantees, Inspections and Off-Tract Improvements
[Amended 12-14-1981 by Ord. No. 21-81]
§ 165-166. Fees and escrow deposits. [Amended 4-27-1987 by Ord.
No. 6-87]
A. The following fees and deposits shall be paid by every applicant for
development within the Borough of Chatham, Morris County, New
Jersey, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
B. The type of application for development as hereinafter provided shall be
those applications which may be submitted to the Planning Board or the
Zoning Board of Adjustment for consideration pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
C. Every application for development shall be accompanied by two
separate checks payable to the Borough of Chatham: one for the
application charge, and the other for establishment of an the escrow
account in connection with a development matter, in accordance with
the following schedule: [Amended 12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 12-92;
8-8-2011 by Ord. No. 11-14; 3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-04]
Type of Application
Application Charge
Plus Escrow
Minor subdivision $200 + $25 for each
additional lot
$1,250
Major subdivision $400 + $25 for each
proposed lot, with
maximum of $2,500
$2,500
Major subdivision
final approval
$100 + $25 for each
lot, with maximum of
$1,500
$1,500
Site plan preliminary
approval
A minimum fee of $400,
or 2% of the estimated
cost of development or
$2,500, whichever is
less
$2,500
Site plan final
approval
50% of the preliminary
approval fee
$1,500
Parking layout review $150 $750
Technical review $100 + $25 for each
meeting
$750
Conditional use $250 $1,250
(D) Variances $400 $1,250
(C) Variances $275 $1,250
§ 165-166 GARAGE SALES § 165-166
154:499
Type of Application
Application Charge
Plus Escrow
Waiver of site plan in
connection with
change of permitted
use
$250 $1,250
Request for
interpretation to
Zoning Board of
Adjustment
$150 $1,250
Appeal of Borough
Zoning Official to
Zoning Board of
Adjustment
$150 $1,250
Appeal to governing
body
$200 $1,250
D. In the case of applications involving more than one category of
application for development, such as an application for site plan or
subdivision approval coupled with a variance, the application charge
shall be the highest of the applicable charges, plus 50% of all other
applicable charges.
E. The application charge is a nonrefundable flat fee to cover
administrative expenses. On applications for site plan approval, the
applicant shall submit a statement in support of the calculation of the
application charge, which statement shall be subject to review by the
Board. The escrow account is established to cover the cost of
professional services, including engineering, legal and other expenses
connected with the review of submitted materials. Escrow account
funds not utilized in the review process will be returned to the
applicant.
(1) As invoices are received from time to time by the Board or by the
Borough from the professional consultants of the Board or the
Borough (attorney, planner, professional engineer, traffic engineer,
and others, who are employed to review the application for
development), the Chief Financial Officer of the municipality will
immediately request the applicant in writing to pay such additional
amount in the escrow account to equal the initial deposit plus all
outstanding directly related professional fee invoices. The Chief
Financial Officer will review the account at least monthly to insure
that the escrow fund is maintained at the prescribed level.
(2) As the invoices of the professional consultants are reviewed and
approved for payment by the Board and Council, the Chief
Financial Officer will pay 90% of the approved invoices from the
escrow account (the remaining 10% being paid by the municipality
from its general fund).
§ 165-166 CHATHAM CODE § 165-166
154:500
F. The Board hearing the application shall not proceed with any hearing
and shall not take any action (except to deny an application because of
nonpayment of fees) and shall not release any signed maps, site plans,
or plans, without first obtaining from the Chief Financial Officer a
certification that the applicant has paid all required charges and escrow
amounts. [Amended 3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-04]
G. Upon completion of the processing of an application for development
(whether by way of withdrawal, denial, approval, conditional approval
or other disposition), the Chief Financial Officer will, as soon as
practicable, either invoice the applicant for any remaining fees that
may be due (after deducting the 10% to be paid by the municipality) or
return any excess funds on hand to the applicant.
H. Upon request in writing, the Chief Financial Officer will provide the
applicant with a statement of the escrow account and with copies of all
professional consultants' fee invoices related to the application. The
applicant may request a hearing as to the reasonableness and/or
necessity of any of the costs incurred. If such request is received in
writing, the Council will hold a hearing with respect to the issues raised
by the applicant at the next available public meeting. The professional
consultants involved will be advised of the pending hearing. The failure
of the applicant to protest an invoice shall not be construed to be an
acknowledgment of the reasonableness of the invoice in the event the
issue should arise in any later proceeding.
I. Upon receipt of approval of the development plan, and as a condition
thereto, the applicant shall pay to the Borough as a deposit with respect
to professional inspection fees the sums required under the schedule
that appears below. In the case of a development plan involving
improvements that are intended to be accepted by the municipality, the
estimated construction costs shall be approved by the Borough
Engineer and the Mayor and Council. In the case of nonmunicipal
improvements (such as the improvements within a site-planned area),
the estimated construction costs shall be approved by the Borough
Engineer and the Board acting on the application.
Estimated Construction Cost of
Site Plan and Subdivision Items to
Be Inspected by the Engineer
Inspection Charge
(percent of construction
cost)
Less than $5,000 3%
$5,000 to $10,000 $150 plus 2% of excess over
$5,000
Over $10,000 $275 plus 2% of excess over
$5,000
§ 165-166 GARAGE SALES § 165-166
154:501
§ 165-167. Guarantees and inspections. [Amended 4-27-1987 by
Ord. No. 6-87; 3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-04; 2-11-2019 by Ord. No.
19-01]
In the event that the actual reasonable costs of inspection exceed
the deposit set forth herein, the Chief Financial Officer will invoice
the applicant for the difference. The applicant will not be deemed to
have satisfied the conditions of development plan approval unless said
invoice is paid in full. The Chief Financial Officer will promptly notify
the Construction Official of any deficiency with respect to the payment
of said fees. The Construction Official will not issue a certificate of
occupancy or any other permit until such invoice is paid in full.
J. Upon request in writing, the Chief Financial Officer will provide the
applicant with a statement of the escrow account and with copies of any
professional fee invoices relating to the inspection of the development.
The applicant may request a hearing as to the reasonableness of any of
the invoices. If such request is received in writing, the hearing will be
held by the Council at the next available public meeting. The failure of
the applicant to protest an invoice shall not be construed to be an
acknowledgment of the reasonableness of the invoice in the event the
issue should arise in any later proceeding.
A. Before recording final subdivision plats or recording of minor
subdivision deeds or as a condition of final site plan approval or as a
condition to the issuance of a zoning permit pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-65, the Borough Zoning Officer, Planning Board, or Zoning
Board of Adjustment may require and shall accept, in accordance with
the standards adopted herein, for the purpose of assuring the
installation and maintenance of certain on-tract improvements:
(1) The furnishing of a performance guarantee in favor of the Borough
in the amount equal to 120% of the cost of only those improvements
required by an approval or developer's agreement, ordinance, or
regulation to be dedicated to the Borough, and that have not yet
been installed, which cost shall be determined by the developer
and approved by the Borough Engineer, according to the method of
calculation set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4, for the following
improvements as shown on the approved plans or plat: streets,
pavement, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, street lighting, street trees,
surveyor's monuments, as shown on the final map and required by
the "Map Filing Law," P.L. 1960, c. 141,82 water mains, sanitary
sewers, community septic systems, drainage structures, public
improvements of open space, and any grading necessitated by the
proceeding improvements. The performance guarantee may also be
required to include, at the discretion of the Borough Zoning Officer,
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, a guarantee for the
installation of privately owned perimeter buffer landscaping. At the
82.Editor's Note: See now N.J.S.A. 46:26B-1 et seq.
§ 165-166 CHATHAM CODE § 165-167
154:502
developer's option, a separate performance guarantee may be
posted for the privately owned perimeter buffer landscaping. The
developer shall prepare an itemized cost estimate of the
improvements covered by the performance guarantee for review
and approval by the Borough Engineer, which improvements shall
be appended to each performance guarantee posted by the obligor.
(2) The developer shall post with the Borough, prior to the release of
the performance guarantee, a maintenance guarantee in an
amount equal to 15% of the cost of the installation of the
improvements covered under the performance guarantee, along
with the following private site improvements: stormwater
management basins, inflow and water quality structures within the
basins, and the outflow pipes and structures of the stormwater
maintenance system, if any, which itemized cost shall be
determined by the developer and approved by the Borough
Engineer according to the method of calculation set forth in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.4. The term of the maintenance guarantee shall be for a
period not to exceed two years and shall automatically expire at the
end of the established term.
(3) The furnishing of a "safety and stabilization guarantee" in favor of
the Borough to ensure that the Borough has an adequate guarantee
to return the property that has been disturbed to a safe and stable
condition or otherwise implement measures to protect the public
from access to an unsafe or unstable condition. The Borough shall
be permitted to access the guarantee when site disturbance has
commenced and, thereafter, all work on the development has
ceased for a period of at least 60 consecutive days following such
commencement for reasons other than force majeure; and work has
not recommenced within 30 days following the provision of written
notice by the municipality to the developer of the municipality's
intent to claim payment under the guarantee. At the developer's
option, the safety and stabilization guarantee may be included as a
line item for safety and stabilization in the performance guarantee
rather than in the form of a separate guarantee. The amount of the
safety and stabilization guarantee shall be calculated pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4 as follows:
(a) Five thousand dollars for the first $100,000 of bonded
improvement costs; plus
(b) Two and a half percent of bonded improvement costs in excess
of $100,000 up to $1,000,000; plus
(c) One percent of bonded improvement costs in excess of
$1,000,000.
B. The time allowed for installation of the bonded improvements for which
the performance guarantee has been provided may be extended by the
governing body by resolution. As a condition or part of any such
§ 165-167 GARAGE SALES § 165-167
154:503
extension, the amount of any performance guarantee shall be increased
or reduced, as the case may be, to an amount not to exceed 120% of the
cost of the installation as determined by the developer and approved by
the Borough Engineer according to the method of calculation set forth
in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4 as of the time of the passage of the resolution.
C. If the required bonded improvements are not completed or corrected in
accordance with the performance guarantee, the obligor and surety, if
any, shall be liable thereon to the Borough for the reasonable cost of the
improvements not completed or corrected, and the Borough may, either
prior to or after receipt of the proceeds thereof, complete such
improvements.
D. Upon substantial completion of all required street improvements
(except for the top course) and appurtenant utility improvements and
the connection of same to the public system, the obligor may notify the
governing body in writing by certified mail addressed in care of the
Borough Clerk of the completion or substantial completion of bonded
improvements and shall send a copy thereof to the Borough Engineer.
The request shall indicate which bonded improvements have been
completed and which bonded improvements remain uncompleted in the
judgment of the obligor. Thereupon the Borough Engineer shall inspect
all bonded improvements of which such notice has been given and shall
file a detailed report, in writing, with the governing body, indicating
either approval, partial approval or rejection of such improvements
with a statement of reasons for any rejection. The cost of the
improvements as approved or rejected shall be set forth.
E. Determination of governing body.
(1) The governing body, by resolution, shall either approve the bonded
improvements determined to be complete and satisfactory by the
Borough Engineer, or reject any or all of these bonded
improvements upon the establishment in the resolution of cause for
rejection, and shall approve and authorize the amount of reduction
to be made in the performance guarantee relating to the
improvements accepted, in accordance with the itemized cost
estimate prepared by the Borough Engineer and appended to the
performance guarantee. This resolution shall be adopted no later
than 45 days after receipt of the list and report prepared by the
Borough Engineer. Upon adoption of the resolution by the
governing body, the obligor shall be released from all liability
pursuant to its performance guarantee with respect to those
approved bonded improvements, except for that portion adequately
sufficient to secure completion or correction of the improvements
not yet approved; provided that 30% of the amount of the total
performance guarantee and safety and stabilization guarantee
posted may be retained to ensure completion and acceptability of
all improvements. The safety and stabilization guarantee shall be
reduced by the same percentage as the performance guarantee is
§ 165-167 CHATHAM CODE § 165-167
154:504
being reduced at the time of each performance guarantee
reduction.
(2) For the purpose of releasing the obligor from liability pursuant to
its performance guarantee, the amount of the performance
guarantee attributable to each approved bonded improvement
shall be reduced by the total amount for each such improvement, in
accordance with the itemized cost estimate which formed the basis
of the performance guarantee and appended to the performance
guarantee pursuant to Subsection A of this section, including any
contingency factor applied to the cost of installation. If the sum of
the approved bonded improvements would exceed 70% of the total
amount of the performance guarantee, then the municipality may
retain 30% of the amount of the total performance guarantee and
safety and stabilization guarantee to ensure completion and
acceptability of bonded improvements, as provided above, except
that any amount of the performance guarantee attributable to
bonded improvements for which a "temporary certificate of
occupancy guarantee" has been posted shall be released from the
performance guarantee even if such release would reduce the
amount held by the municipality below 30%.
F. If any portion of the required improvements is rejected, the approving
authority may require the obligor to complete such improvements, and,
upon completion, the same procedure of notification as set forth in this
section shall be followed.
G. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to limit the right of the
obligor to contest by legal proceedings any determination of the
governing body or the Borough Engineer.
H. Inspection fees.
(1) The obligor shall reimburse the municipality for reasonable
inspection fees paid to the Borough Engineer for the foregoing
inspection of the improvements which shall not exceed the sum of
the amount set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53. The municipality may
require the developer to post the inspection fees in escrow in an
amount calculated as follows:
(a) Except for extraordinary circumstances, the greater of $500 or
5% of the cost of improvements subject to a performance
guarantee; plus
(b) An amount not to exceed 5% of the cost of private site
improvements not subject to a performance guarantee, which
cost shall be determined pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4.
(2) If the Borough determines that the amount in escrow for the
payment of inspection fees, as calculated herein, is insufficient to
cover the cost of additional required inspections, the Borough may
require the developer to deposit additional funds in escrow,
§ 165-167 GARAGE SALES § 165-167
154:505
provided that the Borough delivers to the developer a written
inspection escrow deposit request which informs the developer
of the need for additional inspections, details the items or
undertakings that require inspection, estimates the time required
for those inspections, and estimates the cost of performing those
inspections.
I. In the event that final approval is by stages or sections of the
development pursuant to Subsection a of Section 29 of the Municipal
Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38), the provisions of this section shall
be applied by stage or section.
J. Temporary certificate of occupancy.
(1) In the event that the developer shall seek a temporary certificate of
occupancy for a development, unit, lot, building, or phase of
development, as a condition of the issuance thereof, the developer
shall furnish a separate guarantee, referred to herein as a
"temporary certificate of occupancy guarantee," in favor of the
Borough in an amount equal to 120% of the cost of installation of
only those improvements or items which remain to be completed or
installed under the terms of the temporary certificate of occupancy
and which are required to be installed or completed as a condition
precedent to the issuance of the permanent certificate of
occupancy for the development, unit, lot, building or phase of
development and which are not covered by an existing
performance guarantee. Upon posting of a temporary certificate of
occupancy guarantee, all sums remaining under a performance
guarantee, required pursuant to § 165-167 of the Chatham Code,
which relate to the development, unit, lot building, or phase of
development for which the temporary certificate of occupancy is
sought shall be released.
(2) The scope and amount of the temporary certificate of occupancy
guarantee shall be determined by the Borough Zoning Officer,
Borough Engineer, or any other Borough official designated by
ordinance. The temporary certificate of occupancy guarantee shall
be released by the Borough Zoning Officer, Borough Engineer, or
any other Borough official designated by ordinance upon the
issuance of a permanent certificate of occupancy with regard to the
development, unit, lot, building, or phase as to which the
temporary certificate of occupancy relates.
K. If the property or any part of same is sold, or otherwise conveyed to a
successor developer prior to the completion and acceptance of all
improvements, an assignment of developer's agreement and new
performance, maintenance or other guarantees shall be required from
the new owner or successor developer. Upon the transfer of ownership
of property that is the subject of a construction permit, and prior to
beginning or continuing work authorized by the construction permit,
the new owner or successor developer shall file with the building
§ 165-167 CHATHAM CODE § 165-167
154:506
§ 165-168. Off-tract improvements.
department an application for a permit update to notify the building
department of the name and address of the new owner or successor
developer and of all other changes to the information previously
submitted to the building department. The building department shall
not approve the application for a permit update until it receives
notification from the governing body or its designee that the new
owner or successor developer has furnished adequate replacement
performance, maintenance or other guarantees and assignment of
developer's agreement.
A. Improvements to be constructed at the sole expense of the subdivider
or developer. In cases where the need for an off-tract improvement is
created by the proposed subdivision or site plan and where no other
property owners receive a special benefit thereby, the Planning Board
may recommend to the governing body that it require the subdivider or
developer, as a condition for subdivision or site plan approval at the
subdivider's or developer's expense, to acquire lands outside of the
subdivision or tract and improve and dedicate such lands to the
Borough or the County, or, in lieu thereof, require the subdivider or
developer to deposit with the Borough a sum of money sufficient to
allow the municipality to acquire and to improve such lands.
B. Other improvements.
(1) In cases where the need for any off-tract improvement is created by
the proposed subdivision or site plan and where the Planning Board
determines that properties outside the subdivision or tract will also
be benefited by the improvement, the Planning Board shall
forthwith forward to the municipal governing body a list and
description of all such improvements together with its request that
the governing body determine and advise the Board of the
procedure to be followed in the construction or installation thereof.
The Planning Board shall defer final action upon the subdivision or
site plan until receipt of the governing body's determination or
until the expiration of 90 days after the forwarding of such list and
description to the governing body without such determination
having been made, whichever occurs sooner.
(2) The governing body, within 90 days after receipt of said list and
description, shall determine and advise the Planning Board
whether:
(a) The improvement or improvements are to be constructed or
installed by the municipality.
[1] As a general improvement, the cost of which is to be borne
at general expense (except as hereinafter otherwise
provided as to a contribution thereto by the subdivider or
developer)
§ 165-167 GARAGE SALES § 165-168
154:507
[2] As a local improvement, all or part of the cost of which is to
be specially assessed against properties benefited thereby
in proportion to benefits conferred by the improvements in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:56-1 et seq. (except as
hereinafter otherwise provided as to a contribution thereto
by the subdivider or developer).
(b) The improvement or improvements are to be constructed or
installed by the subdivider or developer under a formula for
partial reimbursement as hereinafter set forth.
(3) If the governing body shall determine that the improvement or
improvements shall be constructed or installed under Subsection
B(2)(a)[1] above, the Planning Board shall estimate with the aid of
the Borough Engineer or such other persons as have pertinent
information or expertise the amount, if any, by which the total cost
thereof will exceed the total amount by which all properties,
including the subdivision or tract, will be specially benefited
thereby, and the subdivider or developer shall be liable to the
municipality for such excess. Further, the governing body shall
adopt an ordinance authorizing and providing for the financing of
the improvement or improvements in a manner consistent with the
obligation of the subdivider or developer for any excess of total cost
over total benefits conferred, as set forth above.
(4) If the governing body shall determine that the improvement or
improvements shall be constructed or installed under Subsection
B(2)(a)[2] above, the Planning Board shall, as provided in
Subsection B(3) of this subsection, estimate the difference between
the total costs to be incurred and the total amount by which all
properties, including the subdivision property or tract, will be
specially benefited by the improvement, and the subdivider or
developer shall be liable to the municipality therefor, as well as for
the amount of any special assessments against the subdivision
property or tract for benefits conferred by the improvement or
improvements. Further, the governing body shall adopt an
ordinance authorizing and providing for the financing of the
improvement or improvements and the assessment of benefits
arising therefor in a manner consistent with the obligation of the
subdivider or developer with respect thereto and proceedings
under said ordinance shall be in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:56-1 et
seq., except to the extent modified by the obligation of the
subdivider or developer for any excess of total costs over total
benefits conferred, as set forth above.
(5) If the governing body shall determine that the improvement or
improvements are to be constructed or installed by the subdivider
or developer under Subsection B(2)(b) above, the Planning Board
shall in like manner estimate the amount of such excess, and the
subdivider or developer shall be liable to the municipality therefor
as well as for the amount of any special assessments against the
§ 165-168 CHATHAM CODE § 165-168
154:508
subdivision property or tract for benefits conferred by the
improvement or improvements. However, the subdivider or
developer shall be entitled to be reimbursed by the municipality
for the amount of any special assessments against property other
than the subdivision property or tract for benefits conferred by
the improvement or improvements, and proceedings under said
ordinance shall be in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:56-1 et seq.
However, any such assessment against the subdivision property or
tract shall be marked paid and satisfied in consideration of the
construction or installation of the improvement or improvements
by the subdivider or developer.
(6) If the governing body shall not adopt such an ordinance or
resolution within said time, the final subdivision layout or site plan
shall be designed accordingly, and the Planning Board shall
thereupon grant or deny final approval.
C. Performance guarantee. The subdivider or developer shall be required
to provide, as a condition for final approval of his subdivision or site
plan application, a performance guarantee running to the municipality
as follows:
(1) If the improvement is to be constructed by the subdivider or
developer under subsection A or under Subsection B(2)(b) of this
section, a performance bond with surety in an amount equal to the
estimated cost of the improvement, or as to any part of said
improvement that is to be acquired or installed by the municipality
under said Subsection A, a cash deposit equal to the estimated cost
of such acquisition or installation by the municipality;
(2) If the improvement is to be constructed by the municipality as a
general improvement under Subsection B(2)(a)[1] of this section, a
cash deposit equal to the amount of the excess of the estimated
cost of the improvement over the estimated total amount by which
all properties, including the subdivision property or tract, will be
specially benefited thereby; and
(3) If the improvement is to be constructed by the municipality as a
local improvement under Subsection B(2)(a)[2] of this section, a
cash deposit equal to the amount by which the subdivision property
or tract will be specially benefited by the improvement.
D. Refund of deposit where improvements are not authorized within five
years. In any case in which a subdivider or developer shall deposit
money with the municipality for the completion of an improvement that
is to be constructed pursuant to this chapter by the municipality, the
subdivider or developer shall be entitled to a full refund of such deposit
if the governing body of the municipality shall not have enacted an
ordinance authorizing the improvement within five years after the date
all other improvements are completed.
§ 165-168 GARAGE SALES § 165-168
154:509
E. Deposit of funds. All moneys paid by a subdivider or developer pursuant
to this Ordinance shall be deposited with the Borough of Chatham and a
suitable depository shall be established for said monies. Such funds
shall be used only for the improvements for which they are deposited or
improvements serving the same purpose.
F. Redetermination of assessment upon completion of improvement. Upon
completion of off-tract improvements required pursuant to this section,
the subdivider's or developer's liability hereunder shall be recalculated
in accordance with the actual, as compared with the estimated, cost of
the improvements. To the extent that it shall decrease the amount
thereof, the municipality shall forthwith refund the amount of such
decrease to the subdivider or developer. In cases where improvements
are specially assessed against all benefited properties, recalculations
shall be made by the municipal assessing authority in the course of the
special assessment proceedings. In other cases, it shall be made by the
Borough Engineer.
G. Governing body approval required. All estimates required to be made
by the Planning Board herein shall be reviewed and approved by the
governing body to final action thereon.
§ 165-168 CHATHAM CODE § 165-168
154:510
ARTICLE XXII
Administration, Enforcement, Violations and Penalties
§ 165-169. Administration.
These rules, regulations and standards shall be considered the minimum
requirements for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare
of the citizens of the Borough. Any action taken by the Borough under
the terms of this chapter shall give primary consideration to the above
mentioned matters and to the welfare of the entire community. Moreover, if
an applicant or his agent can clearly demonstrate that, because of peculiar
conditions pertaining to his land, the literal enforcement of one or more
of these regulations is impracticable or will exact undue hardship, the
appropriate municipal agency may permit such exceptions or exceptions as
may be reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of the rules,
regulations and standards established by this chapter.
§ 165-170. Appointment of Borough Zoning Official. [Added
4-25-2005 by Ord. No. 05-09; amended 3-11-2013 by Ord. No.
13-0483]
The office of the Borough Zoning Official of the Borough of Chatham is
hereby established. Appointments to the office of the Borough Zoning
Official shall be made by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Borough
Council of the Borough of Chatham. The term of office shall be one year. A
vacancy in the office shall be filled by the Mayor subject to confirmation by
the Borough Council for the unexpired term.
§ 165-171. Enforcement.
A. Construction Official and Borough Zoning Official. It shall be the duty of
the Construction Official and Borough Zoning Official of the Borough to
administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. No structure shall
be erected until a construction permit is obtained from the
Construction Official and no structure or lot shall be used in violation of
this chapter. It shall be the duty of the Construction Official to keep a
record of all applications and all construction permits which are either
issued or denied, with notations of any conditions involved, which data
shall form a part of the Borough public records. A monthly report of
construction permits issued shall be filed with the Borough Tax
Assessor. It shall be the duty of the Borough Zoning Official, either in
the course of the everyday exercise of his responsibilities or pursuant to
a direct request by the administrative officer, to inspect the structures
and land in the Borough and order the owner in writing to remedy any
83.Editor’s Note: This ordinance provided that all references to “Zoning Officer” in this
chapter be changed to “Borough Zoning Official” or designee and/or the Administrative
Secretary of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, and further provided that
any reference made in the ordinance to the Borough Zoning Official and/or his/her
designee shall also include and apply to the Administrative Secretary of the Planning
Board and the Administrative Secretary of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, as
appropriate.
§ 165-169 GARAGE SALES § 165-171
154:511
condition found to exist in violation of any provision(s) of this chapter.
The owner shall have 30 days within which time to respond in writing
to the purported violations and indicate the remedies to be taken. Such
response, or lack of a response, shall be immediately communicated
in writing by the Borough Zoning Official to the administrative officer.
[Amended 3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-04]
B. Construction permits. Every application for a construction permit shall
be accompanied by three sets of plans drawn in ink or a blueprint
showing the actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the
exact location, size and height of all existing and proposed structures
and substructures, all existing easements, the existing or intended use
of each structure, the number of dwelling units the structure is
designed to accommodate, the number and location of off-street
parking spaces and off-street loading areas and such other information
with regard to the lot and neighboring lots as may be necessary to
determine and provide for the enforcement of this chapter. A
construction permit shall be granted or denied within 10 days from the
date of a complete application unless additional time is agreed upon in
writing by the applicant. one copy of such plans shall be returned to the
owner when such plans shall have been approved or denied by the
Construction Official together with such permit as may be granted. All
dimensions shown on these plans relating to the location and size of the
lot to be built upon shall be based on an actual survey of the lot by a
licensed land surveyor in the State of New Jersey. The lot and the
location of the structure(s) thereon shall be staked out on the grounds
before construction is started. No construction permit shall be issued
for any structure until prior site plan, subdivision and variance
approvals, as may be necessary, have been granted by the appropriate
municipal agency in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
C. Certificate of occupancy.
(1) It shall be unlawful to use or permit the use of any structure or
part(s) thereof, either transferred to a new owner, or occupied by a
new use or new occupant or hereafter erected, altered, converted
or enlarged wholly or in part, until a certificate of occupancy shall
have been issued by the Construction Official. The owner of record
or his agent shall obtain the certificate of occupancy and it shall be
the duty of the Construction Official to issue a certificate of
occupancy only when he is satisfied that the structure or part(s)
thereof and the proposed use conform to this chapter and all other
applicable codes and ordinances of the Borough. [Amended
2-13-1979 by Ord. No. 2-79; 12-14-1987 by Ord. No. 16-87A]
(2) A certificate of occupancy shall be granted or denied in writing
within 10 days from the date that a written notification is filed with
the Construction Official that the erection of the structure is
completed, unless additional time is agreed upon by the applicant
in writing.
§ 165-171 CHATHAM CODE § 165-171
154:512
§ 165-172. Action to prevent violation; court review.
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, moved or converted, or any building, structure or land is used in
violation of, or contrary to, the provisions of this chapter, the Borough may
institute an action to enjoin or any other appropriate action or proceeding to
prevent such erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion
or use. However, nothing in this chapter shall be construed to restrict the
right of any party to obtain a review by any court of competent jurisdiction
according to law.
§ 165-173. Violations and penalties.
(3) A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for any
structure or use for which site plan approval has been granted
although not all conditions of said approval have been complied
with. Such temporary certificate of occupancy shall be issued only
in extenuating circumstances and only with the approval of the
Planning Board which may establish specific terms and conditions.
(4) Should the Construction Official decline to issue a certificate of
occupancy, his reasons for doing so shall be so stated on two copies
of the application and one copy shall be returned to the applicant.
(5) Upon notice being served of any condition found to exist in
violation of any provisions of this chapter with respect to any land
use, the certificate of occupancy for such use shall thereupon,
without further notice, be null and void and a new certificate of
occupancy shall be required for any further use of such structure or
land.
(6) A monthly report of the certificates of occupancy issued shall be
filed with the Borough Tax Assessor and administrative officer. A
record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept in the office of
the Construction Official and copies shall be furnished on request
to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the
structure or land affected. The charge for each copy shall be
established by resolution of the governing body except that there
shall be no charge to a municipal agency.
A. Fines.
(1) Any person, firm or corporation that shall violate any provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof by any court authorized
by law to hear and determine the matter, be subject to the penalties
provided in Chapter 1, § 1-14, as such court in its discretion may
impose. Each day that such violation exists shall constitute a
separate offense.
(2) The owner of any building or structure, lot or land, or part thereof,
and/or the tenant or the occupant of any building or structure, lot
§ 165-171 GARAGE SALES § 165-173
154:513
or land, or part thereof, where anything in violation of the chapter
shall be placed or shall exist or be suffered, allowed or permitted
to exist; and any architect, builder, developer, contractor, agent,
person or corporation engaged in connection therewith and who
assists in the commission of any such violation, shall each be guilty
of a separate violation, and upon conviction thereof shall each be
liable to the fine or imprisonment, or both, specified above.
B. Selling land before final subdivision approval.
(1) If, before final subdivision approval has been granted, any person,
as owner or agent, transfers or sells or agrees to transfer or sell
any land which forms a part of a subdivision for which municipal
approval is required in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, except pursuant to an agreement expressly conditioned on
final subdivision approval, such person shall be subject to a penalty
not to exceed $1,000 and each lot disposition so made that may be
deemed a separate violation.
(2) In addition to the foregoing, the Borough may institute and
maintain a civil action:
(a) For injunctive relief.
(b) To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to
such a contract or sale if a certificate of compliance has not
been issued in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-56.
(3) In any such action, the transferee, purchaser or grantee shall be
entitled to a lien upon the portion of the land from which the
subdivision was made that remains in the possession of the
subdivider or his assigns or successors, to secure the return of any
deposit made or purchase price paid, and also a reasonable search
fee, survey expense and title closing expense, if any. Any such
action must be brought within two years after the date of the
recording of the instrument of transfer, sale or conveyance of said
land, or within six years if unrecorded.
§ 165-173 CHATHAM CODE § 165-173
154:514
Chapter 169
LIBRARY PROPERTY AND BOOKS
§ 169-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BORROWED OR BORROWING FROM THE LIBRARY OF THE CHATHAMS
— Includes articles borrowed or borrowing from any library or other source
by means of or by charging the same to a Library of the Chathams library
card.[Added 11-9-1981 by Ord. No. 17-81]
LIBRARY OF THE CHATHAMS — The joint library established by the
Borough of Chatham and the Township of Chatham in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:54-29.3 et seq.
§ 169-2. Failure to return books or other property.
No person shall detain or fail to return any book, periodical, pamphlet,
artistic reproduction, phonograph recording, audio-visual material or any
other article borrowed from the Library of the Chathams after 30 days have
elapsed from the date of posting by certified mail, return receipt requested,
of a notice demanding return thereof, addressed to said person at the last
address furnished to the library.
§ 169-3. Damage to books and other property.
No person shall cut, tear, deface, disfigure, damage or destroy any book,
periodical, pamphlet, artistic reproduction, phonograph recording, audiovisual
material or other article, or any part thereof, which is borrowed from,
owned by or is in the custody of the Library of the Chathams.
§ 169-4. Library cards.
No person shall register or furnish a false name or address or use without
the owner's permission any card other than the one issued to said person
for the purpose of borrowing any book, periodical, pamphlet, phonograph
recording, audio-visual material or other article from the Library of the
Chathams.
§ 169-5. Borrowing procedures.
A. The Board of Trustees of the Library of the Chathams shall adopt and
post in a conspicuous place in the library reasonable rules, regulations
and procedures governing the borrowing of books, periodicals,
pamphlets or any other item or article which may be available to the
public for such borrowing.
B. No person shall remove any book, periodical, pamphlet, artistic
reproduction, phonograph recording, audio-visual material or any other
§ 165-173 LIBRARY PROPERTY AND BOOKS § 169-5
169:515
§ 169-6. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Director of the
Library of the Chathams or such other person as may, from time to time, be
designated by the Board of Trustees of the Library of the Chathams.
§ 169-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, § 1-14, for each offense or,
in the case of a violation of § 169-2 or 169-3 of this chapter, for each article
detained or damaged. Continued failure to return any such article detained
or to pay the Library of the Chathams the replacement cost thereof or of
any article damaged, for a period of 30 days after conviction of a violation
of § 169-2 or 169-3 of this chapter, shall constitute a separate offense under
this chapter.
Chapter 173
LITTERING AND HANDBILLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 204. Public health nuisances — See Ch. 208.
item or article from the Library of the Chathams unless such person
shall first have complied with said rules, regulations and procedures.
§ 169-5 CHATHAM CODE § 169-7
173:516
ARTICLE I
Handbills
[Adopted 7-5-1938 (Ch. 86 of the 1975 Code); amended in its
entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I)]
§ 173-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, any sample
or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other
printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of
literature which:
NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, any
sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine,
paper booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or
copies of any matter of literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of
a commercial handbill or newspaper.
A. Advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing;
Directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment or other activity for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales;
B.
Directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance,
exhibition or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is charged
for the purpose of private gain or profit; but the terms of this definition
shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is
taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such
meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, when
either of the same is held, given or takes place in connection with the
dissemination of information which is not restricted under the ordinary
rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety and good order,
provided that nothing contained in this definition shall be deemed to
authorize the holding, giving or taking place of any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind, without a license, where
such license is or may be required by any law of this state or under any
ordinance of this Borough; or
C.
While containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is
predominantly and essentially an advertisement and is distributed or
circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit and gain
of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
D.
§ 173-1 LITTERING AND HANDBILLS § 173-2
173:517
§ 173-2. License required to distribute to private premises;
exceptions; hours.
No person shall distribute or cause to be distributed to the occupants of
any private house or premises, or cause to be placed in any vestibule
or areaway or in front of or along the side of any such house or upon
the doorstep thereof, any newspaper, paper, periodical, book, magazine,
handbill, circular, card or pamphlet without first obtaining a license to
do so from the Borough Clerk; provided, however, that such license shall
not be required when the person or persons in actual occupation of the
house or premises to which any of the aforementioned printed matter shall
be distributed or placed has previously ordered the same, and provided
further that no license shall be required for the distribution of religious or
political literature or notices. No distribution herein provided for shall be
made between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., nor shall any such
distribution be made on Sunday.
§ 173-3. Issuance of license; fees.
Such license shall be issued by the Borough Clerk upon presentation of a
written application and upon the payment of a fee of $5 for each day or $25
for a year. A yearly fee shall cover the period from January 1 to December
31 of the year in which it is paid. The Borough Clerk shall endorse on each
license the amount of the fee.
§ 173-4. Carrying and display of license.
The holder of every such license aforementioned shall carry the same on
his or her person and shall exhibit the same to any police officer when
requested so to do.
§ 173-5. Throwing or distributing handbills in public places.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the
Borough, nor shall any person without a license hand out or distribute or
sell any commercial handbill in any public place; provided, however, that it
shall not be unlawful on any sidewalk, street or other public place within
the Borough for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to
the receiver thereof, any noncommercial handbill to any person willing to
accept it.
§ 173-6. Placing handbills on vehicles.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any vehicle; provided, however, that it shall not be
unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or distribute, without
charge to the receiver thereof, a noncommercial handbill to any occupant of
a vehicle who is willing to accept it.
§ 173-2 CHATHAM CODE § 173-7
173:518
§ 173-7. Depositing handbills on uninhabited or vacant premises.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or
continuously uninhabited or vacant.
§ 173-8. Enforcement officer and complaints. [Amended 6-13-2005
by Ord. No. 05-09]
The Chief of Police or his designee of the Borough of Chatham shall be
responsible for the enforcement of this article. Any complaint regarding the
violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be cognizable before
the Municipal Court of the Borough of Chatham.
§ 173-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of
this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, § 1-14. The continuation of such violation for each successive day
shall constitute a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or
permitting the continuation of the violation may be punished as provided
above for each separate offense.
§ 173-7 LITTERING AND HANDBILLS § 173-9
173:519

ARTICLE II
Litter
[Adopted 5-13-1968 by Ord. No. 4-4 (Ch. 96 of the 1975 Code);
amended in its entirety 4-25-2005 by Ord. No. 05-09]
§ 173-10. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.[Added
6-13-2005 by Ord. No. 05-21]
LITTER — Any used or unconsumed substance or waste material which has
been discarded whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber, paper, or
other natural or synthetic material, or any combination thereof, including
but not limited to any bottle, jar, or can, or any top, cap, or detachable tab of
any bottle, jar, or can; any unlighted cigarette, cigar, match or any flaming
or glowing material; or any garbage, trash, refuse, debris, rubbish, grass
clippings or other lawn or garden waste; newspapers; magazines; glass,
metal, plastic, or paper containers or other packaging; or construction
material or unused machinery, machine, appliance, equipment or parts
thereof.
LITTER RECEPTACLE — A container suitable for the depositing of litter
which is so designed to contain litter in the receptacle from the effects of
the weather and which is of sufficient size to contain all litter deposited
therein between normal periodic servicing.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.[Added 6-13-2005 by Ord. No. 05-21]
PUBLIC BUILDING, PUBLIC PLACE or PUBLIC PROPERTY — Every public
place or building within the Borough, which is within the jurisdiction and
control of the Borough and is or may be in general use by all citizens, and
in which all have an equal right of passage at will, including but not limited
to all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys, beaches or other public ways,
and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings.[Amended
6-13-2005 by Ord. No. 05-21]
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste (except body
waste), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial waste.[Added
6-13-2005 by Ord. No. 05-21]
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes,
cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery
and similar materials.[Added 6-13-2005 by Ord. No. 05-21]
§ 173-10 LITTERING AND HANDBILLS § 173-10
173:521
STREET — Includes highways, roads, avenues, boulevards, courts, public
lanes, alleys, sidewalks, footpaths and all other public highways for
vehicular or pedestrian travel.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used
exclusively on stationary rails or tracks.[Added 6-13-2005 by Ord. No.
05-21]
§ 173-11. Littering prohibited.
§ 173-12. Adequate containerization in public places and at special
events required.
Litter receptacles and their servicing are required at the following public
places which exist in the Borough of Chatham, including sidewalks used
by pedestrians in active retail commercially zoned areas, such that at a
minimum there shall be no single linear quarter mile without a receptacle;
buildings held out for use by the public, including schools, governmental
buildings, and railroad and bus stations; parks, drive-in restaurants; all
street vendor locations; self-service refreshment areas; construction sites;
gasoline service stations islands; shopping centers; parking lots; and public
recreational bathing facilities and at special events to which the public is
invited, including sporting events, carnivals, and festivals. The proprietors
of these places or the sponsors of these events shall be responsible for
providing and serving the receptacles such that adequate containerization
is available.
A. No person shall throw, drop, discard, or otherwise put or place, or
cause to be thrown, put or placed, into, upon or within any street, public
place, parking lot or public building, litter of any nature or any
substance, matter or thing whatsoever whereby the safe, free or
unobstructed use of the same by the public may be in any way impeded
or interfered with, or whereby the same may be detrimental to the
health, safety or welfare of the public. Nothing in this section shall
prohibit the deposit of any such material in any public or private
receptacles approved by the Borough for such purpose. Nothing
contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit construction,
repair or maintenance equipment, materials or machinery from being
utilized on such street, public place, parking lot or public building.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, discard or otherwise
place any litter of any nature upon public or private property other than
in a litter receptacle, or having done so, to allow such litter to remain.
[Added 6-13-2005 by Ord. No. 05-21]
C. Whenever any litter is thrown or discarded or allowed to fall from a
vehicle in violation of this article, the person who is the operator or
owner, or both, of the motor vehicle shall also be deemed to have
violated this article. [Added 6-13-2005 by Ord. No. 05-21]
§ 173-10 CHATHAM CODE § 173-13
173:522
§ 173-13. Illegal dumping.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discard or dump along any street or
road, on or off any right-of-way, any household or commercial solid waste,
rubbish, refuse, junk vehicle or parts thereof, rubber tires, appliances,
furniture, or private property, except by written consent of the owner of said
property, in any place not specifically designated for the purpose of solid
waste storage or disposal.
§ 173-14. Storage of household solid waste.
It shall be unlawful for any residential property owner to store or permit
storage of any household waste, including household appliances, furniture,
and mattresses, in areas zoned residential, except; in a fully enclosed
structure, during days designated for the collection of bulky items, or away
from public view such that the storage of such items is in such a manner so
as not to constitute a threat to the public health, safety and welfare.
§ 173-15. Storage of tires.
It shall be unlawful for any residential property owner to open store or
permit the open storage of tires in areas zoned residential, unless such tire
or tires are stored in such a manner that there does not exist the potential
for the breeding of mosquitoes.
§ 173-16. Uncovered vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be driven, moved stopped or parked
within the Borough on any highway, street, alley or other public place,
unless such vehicle is constructed or loaded to prevent any of its contents
from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom. Any person
operating a vehicle from which any glass or objects have fallen or escaped
which could cause an obstruction, damage a vehicle, or otherwise endanger
travelers or public property, shall immediately cause the public property to
be cleaned of all glass or objects and shall pay the costs thereof.
§ 173-17. Construction sites.
It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent, or contractor in charge of a
construction or demolition site to permit the accumulation of litter before,
during, or after completion of any construction or demolition project. It
shall be the duty of the owner, agent, or contractor in charge of a
construction site to furnish containers adequate to accommodate flyable or
nonflyable debris or trash at areas convenient to construction areas, and
to maintain and empty the receptacles in such a manner and with such a
frequency as to prevent spillage of refuse.
§ 173-13 LITTERING AND HANDBILLS § 173-18
173:523
§ 173-18. Open or overflowing waste disposal bins.
It shall be unlawful for any residential or commercial property owner to
permit or maintain open or overflowing solid waste containers on his or her
property.
§ 173-19. Duty to maintain certain property litter-free; sweeping
litter onto sidewalks.
It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or person in
charge of any structure to keep and cause to be kept sidewalks, alleyways,
backyards, courts and alleys free from litter and other offensive material.
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, catch basin
or other public place any accumulation of litter from any public or private
sidewalk or driveway. All sweepings shall be collected and properly
containerized for disposal.
§ 173-20. Inoperable, abandoned or unlicensed vehicles.
§ 173-21. Interference with public official.
No person shall prevent or interfere with any employee of the Department
of Public Works or any municipally authorized person in the sweeping or
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or permit the keeping on
streets, vacant lots, residential lawns or on any premises located within
the Borough except within a fully enclosed structure, any motor vehicle,
trailer or semitrailer which is:
(1) Wholly unfit without rebuilding or reconditioning for use for
highway transportation; or
(2) Which has been discarded for use as a motor vehicle, trailer or
semitrailer; or
(3) Which does not display a current valid state license; or
(4) Which is wrecked, disassembled or partially disassembled.
B. This section shall not apply if it is proven by the owner that the vehicle
in question is being actively reconditioned, provided that:
(1) Only one vehicle may be reconditioned outside of an enclosed
structure at any given time on property; and
(2) Vehicle body parts and equipment necessary for the reconditioning
of said vehicle are stored in an enclosed structure; and
(3) The reconditioning is performed in such a manner so as not to
create an eyesore or public nuisance; and
(4) The vehicle is covered at all times when it is not being
reconditioned.
§ 173-18 CHATHAM CODE § 173-21
173:524
cleaning of any street or in the removal or sweeping of ashes, garbage,
rubbish, snow, ice or other refuse material.
§ 173-22. Unsolicited materials.
§ 173-23. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-12-1975 by Ord. No.
5-75; 5-9-1988 by Ord. No. 13-88]
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of
this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, § 1-14. The continuation of such violation for each successive day
shall constitute a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or
permitting the continuation of the violation may be punished as provided
above for each separate offense.
§ 173-23.1. Enforcement officer. [Added 6-13-2005 by Ord. No.
05-21]
The Chief of Police or his designee of the Borough of Chatham shall be
responsible for the enforcement of this article.
A. It shall be unlawful for any firm or corporation to cause the delivery or
deposit of any unsolicited newspapers, shoppers, circulars, leaflets,
flyers and other like printed matter including any personal property to
or upon private premises within the Borough of Chatham except in
accordance with the terms hereof. For the purposes of this section,
"unsolicited" shall mean the printed matter or other personal property
referred to that has not been ordered, subscribed to or requested by the
recipient.
B. The delivery of any personal property, other than pursuant to the
regulations set forth for printed material, on private property is
prohibited.
C. There shall be no intentional delivery whatsoever of any such
unsolicited printed matter to premises after the owner or tenant of said
premises has notified the publisher or the delivery person, by certified
mail, return receipt requested, at the address so indicated, that such
delivery shall cease or be suspended for a stated period of time.
D. No person shall post or affix any notice, poster or other paper or device,
calculated to attract the attention of the public, to any lamppost, public
utility pole or shade tree or upon any public structure or building,
except as may be authorized or required by law.
§ 173-21 LITTERING AND HANDBILLS § 173-23.1
173:525

ARTICLE III
Abandoned Vehicles and Machinery
[Adopted 4-12-1965 by Ord. No. 3-8; amended in its entirety
4-25-2005 by Ord. No 05-09]
§ 173-24. Legislative finding.
It is hereby determined and declared that the placing, parking,
abandonment, leaving, keeping or storage out of doors on public or private
property of any motor vehicle not currently in use for transportation or
not licensed for the current license year with a currently dated inspection
sticker, or any unused machinery, machine, appliance, equipment or parts
thereof, is contrary and inimical to the public welfare in that such articles
so placed, parked, stored or abandoned attract or may attract persons of
tender years, who, being so attracted, may play in or about such articles
and be injured in so doing, and in that such articles so placed, abandoned
or left out of doors, exposed to the elements, deteriorate and in themselves
are unsightly and are detrimental to and depreciate the value of properties
in the neighborhood where they are located.
§ 173-25. Definitions.
The following terms, phrases and words used in and for the purpose of this
article shall be deemed to have the following meanings:
ABANDONED — Any motor vehicle, omnibus, road tractor, trailer, truck,
truck-trailer, other vehicle, unused machinery, machine, appliance,
equipment or parts thereof as contained and defined in N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et
seq. which:
IMPOUNDMENT — The sequestration of a motor vehicle, junk automobile
or junk automobile body at a place of storage.
JUNK AUTOMOBILE or JUNK AUTOMOBILE BODY — Any automobile
which is no longer in actual use as a motor vehicle or which is wholly unfit,
without rebuilding or reconditioning, for use in highway transportation,
or which has been discarded for use as a motor vehicle or otherwise
abandoned.
Is parked without the current year's registration or identification
markers as required by law;
A.
Has been continuously parked in any public street or on any public land
for a period of 30 days;
B.
Is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic, and the driver or
person owning or in charge thereof neglects or refuses to move same
to a place where it shall not obstruct traffic;
C.
Is found to be mechanically inoperative and is allowed to remain
inoperative for a period of seven days; or
D.
E. Is found without one or more tires.
§ 173-24 LITTERING AND HANDBILLS § 173-25
173:527
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle, omnibus, road tractor, trailer,
truck, truck-trailer or other vehicle, as defined in N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et seq.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership or corporation being the owner
of or having any legal right in or to a motor vehicle or other vehicle as
defined herein.
PRIVATE PROPERTY — Any property which is privately owned and which is
not public property as defined herein.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Any street or highway which shall include the entire
width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained for the
purposes of vehicular traffic, and any other publicly owned property and
facility.
§ 173-26. Abandonment; obstruction of traffic; storage restrictions.
§ 173-27. Enforcement procedures.
A. Abandonment prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon
or suffer or permit the abandoning of any motor vehicle, junk
automobile, junk automobile body or any unused machinery, machine,
appliance, equipment or parts thereof out of doors upon any public or
private lands in the Borough of Chatham or on any public street or
between the right-of-way lines of any public right-of-way therein.
B. Storage prohibition. No person shall place, keep or store any junk
automobile, junk automobile body, unused machinery, machine,
appliance, equipment or parts thereof on any public or private property
within the Borough of Chatham.
C. Presumption. If any article as described in § 173-25 shall be abandoned
on private lands for seven days or more, it shall be presumed that the
owner or tenant in possession of said land has abandoned it there or
permitted or suffered it to be abandoned there.
D. Exclusion. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prohibit the
placing, keeping or storage of any article described in § 173-25 in a
totally enclosed garage or other building.
E. Traffic obstruction. The parking or placing of any motor vehicle on any
street or public way of the Borough of Chatham in such manner as to
constitute an obstruction to traffic, whether such vehicle is disabled or
not and whether such vehicle is attended or unattended, is hereby
prohibited.
A. Impounding vehicles. Whenever any member of the Police Department
of the Borough of Chatham finds a motor vehicle, junk automobile, junk
automobile body, unused machinery, machine, appliance, equipment or
parts thereof as more fully describe in § 173-25 of this article which has
been abandoned, kept or stored contrary to the provisions of this
article, such officer shall remove, secure the removal of and/or impound
said article in accordance with the procedures hereinafter set forth:
§ 173-25 CHATHAM CODE § 173-27
173:528
(1) Abandonment on public property. Whenever any motor vehicle,
junk automobile, junk automobile body or any other article as more
fully described in § 173-25 of this article is found on any public
street, highway or public property, an emergency condition is
herewith declared to exist, and the Police Department of the
Borough of Chatham is hereby authorized to immediately remove,
secure the removal of and/or impound the motor vehicle, junk
automobile or junk automobile body without the necessity of notice
prior of said impoundment. After impoundment, the Borough Police
Department shall use diligent efforts to identify and locate the
owner of the impounded motor vehicle, junk automobile or junk
automobile body and shall notify the owner in accordance with the
provisions of this article hereinafter set forth.
(2) Abandonment on private land.
(a) Whenever any motor vehicle, junk automobile, junk automobile
body or any other article as more fully described in § 173-25 of
this article is found on any private land in violation of the
provisions of this article, the Police Department of the Borough
of Chatham shall cause the owner of the abandoned vehicle or
equipment, if he can be found, or the owner or tenant of the
private lands upon which the violation is occurring, to be given
30 days' notice, either personally or by certified mail to the last
known address of the owner and/or tenant of the property that
said violation exists. In the event that at the expiration of 30
days the violation of the provisions of this article still exists, the
Police Department of the Borough of Chatham is authorized to
proceed in accordance with law to impound the motor vehicle,
junk automobile or junk automobile body and to remove said
motor vehicle to a place of storage. Notice of said
impoundment shall be given to the owner of the abandoned
vehicle or equipment or to the tenant or owner of the private
land on which the violation is occurring, in the manner
hereinafter established.
(b) Exclusion. One motor vehicle, in the definition set forth above,
which does not possess the current year's registration and
whose owner is in the military service stationed outside the
State of New Jersey, may be maintained on a single parcel of
land having on it a single-family residential dwelling, as long as
the motor vehicle is in complete and operable condition.
(3) Notice of impoundment.
(a) Notice of the impoundment of any motor vehicle, junk
automobile or junk automobile body shall be given to the
owner of said vehicle or to the owner or tenant of lands upon
which the violation is occurring, either personally, or in writing
by certified mail, at the last known address of the party to be
served and shall contain the following information:
§ 173-27 LITTERING AND HANDBILLS § 173-27
173:529
§ 173-28. Redemption of impounded property.
At any time prior to the sale, the owner or other person entitled thereto
may reclaim possession of the impounded article upon payment of the
reasonable costs of removal and storage of same and any fine or penalty and
court costs assessed against him for violation which gave rise to the seizure
or taking possession of such article.
§ 173-29. Claims of interest.
Upon the sale of any article more fully defined in § 173-25, all claims of
interest therein shall be forever barred and the proceeds realized therefrom
after payment of the expenses of possession and sale shall be remitted to
the Borough Clerk of the Borough of Chatham as its sole property.
[1] The time and place of impoundment.
[2] The location of the motor vehicle, junk automobile or junk
automobile body.
[3] The reason for impoundment.
[4] The amount and nature of penalties and costs that may be
entered against him.
[5] A statement that a sale of the motor vehicle, junk
automobile or junk automobile body will occur after 30
days if the motor vehicle, junk automobile or junk
automobile body is not reclaimed.
[6] A statement of the time and place of sale.
[7] The notice required hereby shall be mailed within 48 hours
of any such impoundment.
(b) The address of the owner as shown on the records of the State
Division of Motor Vehicles shall be deemed sufficient for the
purpose of this article.
B. Sale of impounded vehicles. Whenever any motor vehicle, junk
automobile, junk automobile body, unused machinery, machine,
appliance equipment or parts thereof impounded by the Police
Department of the Borough of Chatham shall remain unclaimed by the
owner or other person having a legal right thereto for a period of 30
days, the same may be sold at auction in a public place. The owner
thereof or other person having a legal right thereto shall be given
notice of such sale, by certified mail, to the owner, if his name and
address are known and to the holder of any security interest filed with
the Director of the Division of Motor Vehicles, and by publication in a
form to be prescribed by the Director of Motor Vehicles by one
insertion, at least five days before the date of the sale, in one or more
newspapers circulated in the Borough of Chatham.
§ 173-27 CHATHAM CODE § 173-30
173:530
§ 173-30. Enforcement.
The Chief of Police or his designee of the Borough of Chatham shall be
responsible for the enforcement of this article.
§ 173-31. Investigation of complaints.
Upon complaint of any resident or property owner of the Borough of
Chatham or any employee of said Borough, or upon his own motion, the
Chief of Police or his designated agent shall make an investigation of the
condition complained of and report thereon to the Borough Clerk.
§ 173-32. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of
this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, § 1-14.
B. The imposition of a penalty or penalties for any violation of this article
shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and all such
persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations within a
reasonable time. If said violations are not corrected or remedied within
a reasonable time, then each 10 days thereafter that the prohibited
conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense
hereunder. Such reasonable time shall be determined by the Municipal
Judge.
§ 173-30 LITTERING AND HANDBILLS § 173-32
173:531
Chapter 180
NEWSPAPER VENDING MACHINES
§ 180-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
DISPLAY WINDOW — A window used for the display of merchandise.
MAINTAIN — To place, install, maintain or operate a newspaper vending
machine.
NEWSPAPER VENDING MACHINE — Any self-service or coin-operated box,
stand, rack, container, storage unit or other dispenser which is installed,
used or maintained for the purpose of offering for sale, vending, distributing
or giving away any publication.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association or
entity.
PUBLICATION — Any newspaper, magazine, periodical or similar printed
matter.
ROADWAY — The portion of a street which is improved, designed or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel.
SIDEWALK — Any surface provided for the exclusive use of pedestrians,
including the area between the sidewalk and the curb of any street or, if
there is no sidewalk, the area between the edge of the roadway and the
property line adjacent thereto.
STREET — All the area dedicated to public use for public street purposes,
including but not limited to roadways, parkways, alleys and sidewalks.
UNPROTECTED LANDSCAPED AREA — An area improved with flowers or
shrubs that is not protected by either a man-made barrier, such as a fence,
or a natural barrier, such as a hedge.
§ 180-2. Permit required. [Amended 8-26-1985 by Ord. No. 17-85]
No person shall maintain a newspaper vending machine in or on any public
property or outside at any place which is open to the public in the Borough
of Chatham in violation of the provisions of this chapter. Prior to or
simultaneously with locating a newspaper vending machine, the owner
of said machine shall apply for a newspaper vending machine permit for
the machine. One permit shall be required for each newspaper vending
machine.
§ 180-3. Application for permit.
An application for a newspaper vending machine permit or for change of
location of an existing newspaper vending machine shall be filed in writing
§ 173-32 CHATHAM CODE § 180-3
180:532
in the office of the Borough Clerk on forms provided by that office for that
purpose. The application shall state:
§ 180-4. Insurance required; notice.
§ 180-5. Indemnification agreement required.
No newspaper vending machine permit shall be issued unless the machine
owner shall have executed and filed with the Borough Clerk an
indemnification agreement pursuant to which the owner agrees to forever
defend, protect, indemnify and save harmless the Borough of Chatham,
its officers, agents and employees from and against any and all causes of
action, injuries, losses, damages, expenses, fees and costs arising out of or
to arise out of the owner's maintenance of a machine or machines in the
Borough of Chatham.
§ 180-6. Fees.
A. The name and address of the applicant or owner.
B. The proposed specific location of the newspaper vending machine.
C. An accurate description of the newspaper vending machine, including
its dimensions and unique identifying marks, such as its serial number.
D. The name, address and telephone number of an individual responsible
for repair and maintenance of the machine and to be notified for any
reason or problem whatsoever.
A. Type and amount. No newspaper vending machine permit shall be
issued unless the machine owner shall have filed with the Borough
Clerk a copy of an insurance policy, issued by a company duly licensed
to transact business under the insurance laws of this state, providing
for the payment of not less than $1,000,000 to satisfy all claims for
damage by reason of bodily injuries to or the death of any person due to
the maintenance of such machine and further providing for the
payment of not less than $25,000 to satisfy all claims for property
damage due to the maintenance of such machine.
B. Notice. The insurance policy shall provide that the insurance company
shall notify the Borough of Chatham 10 days prior to cancellation or
substantial change in coverage.
A. The annual fee for a newspaper vending machine permit shall be $25.
B. The fee for relocation of a newspaper vending machine, which is not a
renewal, movement of a machine within the same tax lot as the lot lines
are projected to the curbline or movement of the machine for purposes
of complying with this chapter or any amendment thereto, shall be $25.
[Amended 8-26-1985 by Ord. No. 17-85]
§ 180-3 NEWSPAPER VENDING MACHINES § 180-7
180:533
§ 180-7. Expiration of permit; renewal.
All newspaper vending machine permits shall expire annually on June 30 at
12:00 midnight. Permits may be renewed annually by filing an application
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. All permits issued during
the year shall expire on the annual date set forth above, and there shall be
no reduction in permit fees.
§ 180-8. Issuance of permit.
Newspaper vending machine permits shall be issued within 10 business
days after the filing of an application therefor, provided that the applicant
has complied with all the requirements of this chapter.
§ 180-9. Newspaper vending machines prohibited on roadways.
No person shall maintain a newspaper vending machine on any portion of
a roadway, nor shall any person permit a newspaper vending machine to
project onto, into or over any portion of a roadway.
§ 180-10. Newspaper vending machines on sidewalks; prohibited
locations.
A. Subject to the provisions hereinafter set forth, newspaper vending
machines maintained on a sidewalk shall be either:
(1) Parallel to the curb, with the outer edge not less than 12 inches nor
more than 18 inches from the edge of such curb; or
(2) Parallel to the wall of a building, with the inside edge not more than
six inches from such wall, but not less than three feet from an
entrance or exit of a building.
B. No person shall place, install, maintain or operate a newspaper vending
machine at any of the following locations: [Amended 8-26-1986 by
Ord. No. 17-85]
(1) Within six feet of any marked crosswalk as measured along the
curbline.
(2) Within 15 feet of a curb return of any unmarked crosswalk as
measured along the curbline.
(3) Within 15 feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box or
other emergency facility.
(4) Within six feet of any driveway which provides access to a street.
(5) At any bus stop within the area designated for such stop as
measured along the curbline.
(6) Within six feet of any publicly owned, unprotected landscaped area.
§ 180-7 CHATHAM CODE § 180-10
180:534
§ 180-11. Standards for maintenance and installation of newspaper
vending machines.
Every newspaper vending machine which is maintained in whole or in part
upon or projecting over any portion of a public sidewalk or publicly owned
property of any kind shall comply with the following standards:
(7) Except with the owner's written permission, within six feet, as
measured along the building line, of any display window of any
building abutting the sidewalk or in such location as to impede or
interfere with the reasonable use of such window for display
purposes and, as to all other nondisplay windows, not in front of
such window if it will block in any way the view into or out of such
window.
(8) At any location where installation of the machine would reduce the
clear space for the passage of pedestrians on a sidewalk to less
than four feet.
(9) At any location where the machine would unreasonably interfere
with or obstruct the flow of pedestrian or vehicle traffic; the ingress
into or egress from any residence, place of business or any legally
parked or stopped vehicle; or at any location where the machine
would endanger the safety of persons or property.
(10) At any location where the machine would reasonably interfere with
the use of poles, posts, traffic signs, traffic signals, hydrants,
mailboxes or other objects permitted at or near such location.
(11) At any location where the machine would interfere with the
cleaning of any sidewalk by the use of mechanical sidewalk
cleaning machinery.
(12)Within 200 feet of any other machine on the same side of the street
containing the same issue or edition of the same publication or at
any location directly opposite any other machine.
A. No machine shall be larger than five feet in height, 30 inches in width
and two feet in depth.
B. No machine shall be chained, bolted or otherwise attached to any
property not owned by the owner of such machine.
C. Machines may be chained or otherwise attached to one another;
however, no more than three machines may be joined together in this
manner, and a space of not less than 18 inches shall separate each
group of three machines so attached.
D. No machine or group of attached machines shall weigh, in the
aggregate, in excess of 125 pounds when empty.
§ 180-10 NEWSPAPER VENDING MACHINES § 180-11
180:535
§ 180-12. Impoundment of dangerous newspaper vending
machines.
§ 180-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, § 1-14. Each violation of a
section or subsection of this chapter and each day that a violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 184
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Howling or barking dogs — See Ch. 79,
§ 79-13.
§ 184-1. Declaration of findings and policy.
E. No machine shall be used for advertising, signs or publicity purposes,
other than that dealing with the display, sale or purchase of the
publication sold therein.
F. Each machine shall be maintained in a clean, neat condition and in good
repair at all times.
G. The owner of each machine shall permanently affix thereto his name,
address and telephone number in a place where such information may
be easily seen.
A. The police of the Borough of Chatham may impound any newspaper
vending machine that creates a danger to pedestrians or vehicles.
B. Written notice of the impoundment must be sent to the owner of the
impounded machine within two business days. The owner shall be
entitled to obtain the return of the impounded machine from the police
upon request during normal business hours, provided that the machine
is not being held as evidence in any criminal proceeding.
A. Excessive sound is a serious hazard to the public health, welfare, safety,
and the quality of life. A substantial body of science and technology
exists by which excessive sound may be substantially abated. The
people have a right to, and should be ensured of, an environment free
from excessive sound.
B. It is the policy of the Borough of Chatham to prevent excessive sound
that may jeopardize the health, welfare, or safety of the citizens or
degrade the quality of life.
§ 180-11 CHATHAM CODE § 184-1
184:536
§ 184-2. Applicability.
§ 184-3. Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. Terms
not defined in this chapter have the same meaning as those defined in
N.J.A.C. 7:29.
CONSTRUCTION — Any site preparation, assembly, erection, repair,
alteration or similar action, including demolition of buildings or structures.
C. This chapter shall apply to the control of sound originating from
sources within the Borough of Chatham.
A. This chapter applies to sound from the following property categories:
(1) Industrial facilities;
(2) Commercial facilities;
(3) Public service facilities;
(4) Community service facilities;
(5) Residential properties;
(6) Multi-use properties;
(7) Public and private rights-of-way;
(8) Public spaces; and
(9) Multi-dwelling-unit buildings.
B. This chapter applies to sound received at the following property
categories:
(1) Commercial facilities;
(2) Public service facilities;
(3) Community service facilities;
(4) Residential properties;
(5) Multi-use properties; and
(6) Multi-dwelling-unit buildings.
C. Sound from stationary emergency signaling devices shall be regulated
in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.3, except that the testing of the
electromechanical functioning of a stationary emergency signaling
device shall not meet or exceed 10 seconds.
§ 184-1 NOISE § 184-3
184:537
DEMOLITION — Any dismantling, destruction or removal of buildings,
structures, or roadways.
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
EMERGENCY WORK — Any work or action necessary to deliver essential
public services including, but not limited to, repairing water, gas, electricity,
telephone, sewer facilities, or public transportation facilities; removing
fallen trees on public rights-of-way; dredging navigational waterways; or
abating life-threatening conditions.
IMPULSIVE SOUND — Either a single pressure peak or a single burst
(multiple pressure peaks) that has a duration of less than one second.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle that is propelled other than by human or
animal power on land.
MUFFLER — A properly functioning sound-dissipative device or system for
abating the sound of escaping gasses on equipment where such a device is
part of the normal configuration of the equipment.
MULTI-DWELLING-UNIT BUILDING — Any building comprising two or
more dwelling units, including, but not limited to, apartments,
condominiums, co-ops, multiple-family houses, townhouses, and attached
residences.
MULTI-USE PROPERTY — Any distinct parcel of land that is used for more
than one category of activity. Examples include, but are not limited to:
NOISE CONTROL OFFICER — An employee of (1) a local, county or
regional health agency which is certified pursuant to the County
Environmental Health Act (N.J.S.A. 26:3A2-21 et. seq.) to perform noise
enforcement activities; or (2) a municipality with a Department-approved
Noise Control Ordinance and the employee has received noise enforcement
training and is currently certified in noise enforcement. The employee must
be acting within his or her designated jurisdiction and must be authorized
to issue a summons in order to be considered a Noise Control Officer.
PLAINLY AUDIBLE — Any sound that can be detected by a person using
his or her unaided hearing faculties. As an example, if the sound source
under investigation is a portable or personal vehicular sound amplification
or reproduction device, the detection of the rhythmic bass component of the
music is sufficient to verify plainly audible sound. The Noise Control Officer
A commercial, residential, industrial or public service property having
boilers, incinerators, elevators, automatic garage doors, air
conditioners, laundry rooms, utility provisions, or health and
recreational facilities, or other similar devices or areas, either in the
interior or on the exterior of the building, which may be a source of
elevated sound levels at another category on the same distinct parcel
of land; or
A.
A building which is both commercial (usually on the ground floor) and
residential property located above, behind, below or adjacent.
B.
§ 184-3 CHATHAM CODE § 184-3
184:538
need not determine the title, specific words, or the artist performing the
song.
PRIVATE RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
sidewalk, alley or easement that is owned, leased, or controlled by a
nongovernmental entity.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
sidewalk, alley or easement that is owned, leased, or controlled by a
governmental entity.
PUBLIC SPACE — Any real property or structures thereon that are owned,
leased, or controlled by a governmental entity.
REAL PROPERTY LINE — Either (1) the imaginary line including its vertical
extension that separates one parcel of real property from another; (2) the
vertical and horizontal boundaries of a dwelling unit that is part of a multidwelling-
unit building; or (3) on a multi-use property, the interface between
the two portions of the property on which different categories of activity
are being performed (e.g., if the multi-use property is a building which is
residential upstairs and commercial downstairs, then the real property line
would be the interface between the residential area and the commercial
area).
WEEKDAY — Any day that is not a federal holiday, and beginning on Monday
at 7:00 a.m. and ending the following Friday at 6:00 p.m.
WEEKENDS — Beginning on Friday at 6:00 p.m. and ending on the
following Monday at 7:00 a.m.
§ 184-4. Noise Control Officers.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by Noise Control
Officers. A person shall be qualified to be a Noise Control Officer if the
person meets the criteria set forth in the definition above and
completes, at a frequency specified by the Department in N.J.A.C.
7:29-2.11, a noise certification and recertification course which is
offered by the Department of Environmental Sciences of Cook College,
Rutgers, the State University of New Jersey and any other noise
certification or recertification course which is offered by an accredited
university and approved by the Department.
B. Sound measurements made by a Noise Control Officer shall conform to
the procedures set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:29-2, except that interior sound
level measurements shall also conform with the procedures set forth in
§ 184-5B and C of this chapter and with the definition of "real property
line" as contained herein.
C. Noise Control Officers shall have the power to:
(1) Coordinate the noise control activities of all departments in the
Borough of Chatham and cooperate with all other public bodies and
agencies to the extent practicable;
§ 184-3 NOISE § 184-4
184:539
§ 184-5. Maximum permissible sound levels.
(2) Review the actions of the Borough of Chatham and advise of the
effect, if any, of such actions on noise control;
(3) Review public and private projects, subject to mandatory review or
approval by other departments or boards, for compliance with this
chapter;
(4) Investigate and pursue possible violations of this chapter for sound
levels which equal or exceed the sound levels set forth in Tables I
and II, when measured at a receiving property located within the
designated jurisdiction of the Noise Control Officer, in accordance
with § 184-9 below; and
(5) Cooperate with Noise Control Officers of adjacent municipalities in
enforcing one another's municipal noise ordinances.
A. No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the operation of any
source of sound on an source property listed in § 184-2A above in such a
manner as to create a sound level that equals or exceeds the sound level
limits set forth in Tables I and II when measured at or within the real
property line of any of the receiving properties listed in Tables I and II,
except as specified in Subsection B below.84
B. When measuring total sound or residual sound within a multi-use
property, or within a residential unit when the property line between it
and the source property is a common wall, all exterior doors and
windows shall be closed and the measurements shall be taken in the
center of the room most affected by the noise. Residual sound shall be
measured in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:29-2.9(b)2. When measuring
total sound or residual sound, all sound sources within the dwelling unit
must be shut off (e.g., television, stereo). Measurements shall not be
taken in areas which receive only casual use such as hallways, closets
and bathrooms.
C. Indoor measurements shall only be taken if the sound source is on or
within the same property as the receiving property, as in the case of a
multi-use property (e.g., sound generated within a commercial unit of a
multi-use property building and received within a residential unit of the
same building) or multi-dwelling-unit building. In addition, indoor
measurements shall be taken if the property line between the receiving
property and the source property is a common wall, such as in a multidwelling-
unit building. The allowable sound level standards for indoors
are as shown in Tables I and II.
D. Impulsive sound. Impulsive sound shall not equal or exceed 80 decibels
at all times.
84.Editor's Note: Tables I and II are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 184-4 CHATHAM CODE § 184-6
184:540
§ 184-6. Table I: Maximum Permissible A-Weighted Sound Levels.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the operation of any source
of sound on any source property listed in § 184-2A above in such a manner
as to create a sound level that equals or exceeds the sound levels listed in
Table I.85
§ 184-7. Table II: Maximum Permissible Octave Band Sound
Pressure Levels in Decibels.
§ 184-8. Exemptions. [Amended 5-8-2006 by Ord. No. 06-12]
§ 184-9. Enforcement. [Amended 5-8-2006 by Ord. No. 06-1287]
Chapter 188
A. No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the operation of any
source of sound on any source property listed in § 184-2A above in such
a manner as to create a sound pressure level that equals or exceeds the
sound levels listed in Table II in one or more octave bands.86
B. When octave measurements are made, the sound from the source must
be constant in level and character. If octave band sound pressure level
variations exceed plus or minus two decibels in the bands containing
the principal source frequencies, discontinue the measurement.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the exceptions listed at
N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.4.
B. Construction and demolition activities are exempt from the sound level
limits set forth in Tables I and II.
A. Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be cause for an
enforcement document to be issued to the violator by the Noise Control
Officer according to procedures set forth at N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.6. The
recipient of an enforcement document shall be entitled to a hearing in
municipal court having jurisdiction to contest such action.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
a civil penalty for each offense of not more than $3,000. If the violation
is of a continuing nature, each day during which it occurs shall
constitute an additional, separate, and distinct offense.
C. No provision of this chapter shall be construed to impair any common
law or statutory cause of action, or legal remedy therefrom, of any
person for injury or damage arising from any violation of this chapter or
from other law.
85.Editor's Note: Table I is included at the end of this chapter.
86.Editor's Note: Table II is included at the end of this chapter.
87.Editor's Note: This ordinance combined former §§ 184-9, Enforcement document; 184-10,
Construal of provisions; and 184-11, Violations and penalties, into this one section.
§ 184-6 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 184-9
188:541
NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS
§ 188-1. Numbering required; size of figures.
The owner or owners, occupant or occupants of each and every dwelling
house, store or other building which now fronts or may hereafter front
upon any of the streets or public places within the Borough shall cause
the same to be properly numbered in accordance with the directions and
requirements of this chapter, the numbers to be in figures of at least three
inches in height, placed respectively on the front of each dwelling house,
store or other building.
§ 188-2. Reference to tax maps required.
For the proper numbering of the said dwelling houses, stores and other
buildings, reference shall be made to the tax maps of the Borough now on
file in the office of the Clerk of the Borough.
§ 188-3. Resolution of difficulties in interpreting maps.
In case of doubt or of difficulty in applying the plan as indicated on the
said maps to the numbering of any dwelling house, store or other building,
application shall be made to the Mayor and Street Committee of the
Council, a majority of whom are hereby given full power and authority
to settle and adjust the same, their said determination to be final, to be
reduced to writing and filed, with the Borough Clerk.
§ 188-4. Numbering of buildings not on map.
The numbering of the dwelling houses, stores and other buildings now
fronting or which may hereafter be built and front on any street at present
existing and not provided for on said maps, or that may front on any street
hereafter to exist within the Borough, shall be done in such manner as the
Mayor and Street Committee of this Council, or a majority thereof, shall
in writing order and direct, which written order, signed by the officials
consenting thereto, and any sketches in connection therewith, shall be filed
in the office of the Borough.
§ 188-5. Time limit for numbering.
All dwelling houses, stores and other buildings within the Borough located
on streets plotted on the said map shall be numbered pursuant hereto
within three months from the final passage of this chapter. All such dwelling
houses, stores and other buildings hereafter to be built and erected,
fronting on said streets, shall be so numbered within a like period after
becoming fit for occupancy, and all such buildings located or to be located
on streets not now or at the time of their completion plotted on said map
shall be numbered within a like period after the filing of the written order
provided for in § 188-4 hereof.
§ 184-9 CHATHAM CODE § 188-6
188:542
§ 188-6. Construal of provisions.
This chapter shall not be deemed or construed in any way to be an
acceptance by the said Borough as a public street of any road, street or
highway denoted on the tax maps which has not heretofore been recognized
and acknowledged by its authorities so to be.
§ 188-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, § 1-14. The continuation of such violation for each successive day
shall constitute a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or
permitting the continuation of the violation may be punished as provided
above for each separate offense.
Chapter 189
OIL AND HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE PIPELINES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land development regulations — See Ch. 165.
§ 189-1. Applicability.
The provisions in this chapter apply to all oil and hazardous substance
pipelines proposed for siting and construction within the Borough. To the
extent any regulations within this chapter conflict with state or federal
regulations or laws regulating oil and hazardous substance pipelines, those
state or federal regulations and laws shall take precedence over this
chapter.
§ 189-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CRITICAL LAND USE — A land use that, if located in the vicinity of an oil
and hazardous substance pipeline, represents an unusually high risk to life
in the event of a pipeline failure due to the characteristics of the inhabitants
or functions of the use. Critical land uses include without limitation:
A. Child care;
B. Houses of worship and other religious institutions;
C. Hospitals;
Lodgings, including hotels, dormitories, and apartment complexes, and
office buildings, which may not lend themselves to a timely evacuation;
D.
§ 188-6 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 189-2
188:543
ESSENTIAL PUBLIC FACILITIES — Those public facilities that provide
basic health and safety services to residents of and visitors to the Borough,
including, without limitation, potable water wells, water sanitation plants,
water treatment plants, sewage treatment plants, water storage facilities,
municipal telecommunication towers, police stations, fire and emergency
medical service stations, jails, courthouses, public health facilities, and
emergency operations centers.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE — Any substance designated under 40 CFR
116 pursuant to Section 311 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendments of 1972 (Clean Water Act, Public Law 92-500; 33 U.S.C. § 1251
et seq.), the New Jersey Spill Compensation and Control Act, N.J.S.A.
58:10-23.11 et seq., or Section 4 of the New Jersey Water Pollution Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10A-4 et seq., including without limitation petroleum,
petroleum products, pesticides, solvents and other substances.
OIL AND HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE PIPELINE — A pipeline, whether
above or below ground, that transports or is designed to transport oil or
other hazardous substance. As used herein, a pipeline includes all parts
of those physical facilities through which oil or a hazardous substance
moves or is meant to move in transportation, including pipes, valves, and
other appurtenances attached to pipes, compressor units, pumping stations,
metering stations, regulator stations, delivery stations, emergency response
terminals, holders, breakout tanks, fabricated assemblies, and other surface
pipeline appurtenances.
PIPELINE OPERATOR — The company, entity, or person(s) responsible
for the operation, maintenance and management of an oil and hazardous
substance pipeline.
PIPELINE OWNER — The company, entity, or person(s) that owns an oil and
hazardous substance pipeline.
Open space uses, including Green Acres and Borough-owned lands
designated as open space preservation areas, historic preservation
areas, Blue Acres preservation areas, active recreation areas, and
passive recreation areas;
E.
F. National Park Service designated national natural landmarks;
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection ("NJDEP")
designated New Jersey Natural Areas and Natural Heritage Priority
Sites;
G.
H. Senior and residential care facilities;
Institutional uses, including public and private schools, day-care
facilities, public buildings;
I.
J. Improved or unimproved lands containing sole source aquifers; and
Improved or unimproved land used for state highway and railroad
rights-of-way.
K.
§ 189-2 CHATHAM CODE § 189-3
188:544
§ 189-3. Use regulation.
Oil and hazardous substance pipelines shall comply with the applicable
zoning regulations set forth in Chapter 165.88
§ 189-4. Submittal of pipeline construction information.
The Borough Engineer may request preliminary as-built information,
including, without limitation, as-built drawings, a copy of GIS shapefiles of
the pipeline and its related appurtenances and facilities within the Borough,
and any additional requested information about the oil and hazardous
substance pipeline 90 days prior to the date the pipeline is proposed to
become operational within the Borough. Updated as-built information,
including, without limitation, as-built drawings, a copy of GIS shapefiles of
the oil and hazardous substance pipeline and its related appurtenances and
facilities within the Borough, and any additional information requested by
the Borough Engineer about the pipeline shall be filed within 60 days after
the oil and hazardous substance pipeline has become operational with the
Borough Engineer.
§ 189-5. Construction and access to property by owners.
The pipeline owner and pipeline operator shall give public notice 48 hours
prior to the proposed start date of construction of the oil and hazardous
substance pipeline to the Chief of Police, Fire Chief, Borough Engineer and
the Emergency Management Coordinator, or their respective designees,
and all property owners within 1,000 feet, as shown on the current tax
duplicate, of the pipeline alignment. All property owners shall have access
to their properties at all times during pipeline construction.
§ 189-6. Emergency preparedness plan.
Sixty days prior to the first date of operation of the oil and hazardous
substance pipeline, the pipeline owner and pipeline operator shall meet
with the Police Department, Fire Department, Borough Engineer, and
Emergency Management Coordinator, or their respective designees, and
submit to them an emergency preparedness plan ("EMP") for any and
all emergencies that may result in an accidental leak or failure incident
regarding the pipeline and its related appurtenances and facilities. The
EMP shall cover the requirements stated in 49 CFR 195.402 and 195.403
and shall identify a responsible local emergency response official and a
direct twenty-four-hour emergency phone number. No oil and hazardous
substance pipeline shall become operational, nor shall any oil or hazardous
substance be introduced into the oil and hazardous substance pipeline prior
to the pipeline owner and pipeline operator receiving the prior written
approval of the EMP by the Chief of Police, Fire Chief, Borough Engineer
and Emergency Management Coordinator, or their respective designees.
88.Editor's Note: See § 165-148.3.
§ 189-3 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 189-7
188:545
§ 189-7. Insurance.
§ 189-8. Indemnification and hold harmless.
Prior to the first operation of the oil and hazardous substance pipeline,
the pipeline owner and pipeline operator shall both agree in writing to
indemnify and hold harmless Chatham Borough, as well as its officers,
officials, supervisors, employees, agents, contractors, and assigns, from any
and all liability relating to or arising from the oil and hazardous substance
pipeline, including, but not limited to, any failure, leak, spill, contamination,
cleanup, remediation, property damage, and personal injury from and
related to such pipeline. The indemnification and hold harmless agreement
shall include a provision for the payment of Chatham Borough's reasonable
attorneys' fees and litigation costs.
§ 189-9. Easements.
Any easements or rights-of-way obtained by the pipeline owner or pipeline
operator for the oil and hazardous substance pipeline shall be recorded by
the pipeline owner or pipeline operator in the office of the County Clerk.
§ 189-10. Marking.
The pipeline owner or pipeline operator shall install and maintain markers
to identify the location of the oil and hazardous substance pipeline in
accordance with all applicable federal and state requirements.
A. No pipeline owner or pipeline operator shall operate any oil and
hazardous substance pipeline or introduce any oil or hazardous
substance into an oil and hazardous substance pipeline without first
obtaining insurance policies covering general liability, environmental
incidents and contamination, and property damage in an aggregate
amount to be determined by the Borough Engineer based upon
reasonable estimates of potential liability and property damage that
would result from a leak, spill or other failure of the oil and hazardous
substance pipeline.
B. Prior to the first operation of the oil and hazardous substance pipeline
and every year in which the oil and hazardous substance pipeline is in
operation thereafter, the pipeline owner or pipeline operator shall
submit insurance coverage certificates and endorsements to the
Borough Engineer adding the Borough as an additional named insured
on the insurance policies, demonstrating that the required policies and
levels of insurance have been obtained.
C. The Borough of Chatham shall be provided with 10 days' written notice
of cancellation, material change or nonrenewal of insurance policies
and the pipeline owner or pipeline operator must cease operations until
insurance coverage, acceptable to the Borough of Chatham, is in place.
§ 189-7 CHATHAM CODE § 189-11
188:546
§ 189-11. Pipeline failure and remediation.
In the event that a leak, spill, or failure has occurred with the oil and
hazardous substance pipeline, the pipeline owner and pipeline operator
shall notify the Chief of Police, Fire Chief, Borough Engineer and the
Emergency Management Coordinator, or their respective designees, and all
property owners within 1,000 feet of the affected pipeline area, as shown
on the current tax duplicate, within one hour of discovery of the leak, spill
or failure. The pipeline owner and pipeline operator shall cooperate with
Borough officials and make every effort to respond as soon as possible to
protect the public's health, safety, and welfare. All leak or spill remediation
plans shall be made in consultation with the Borough, and no remediation
may be deemed complete without final approval thereof by the Borough
Engineer and Emergency Management Coordinator, or their respective
designees. In the event that the oil and hazardous substance pipeline is
shut down due to a leak, spill, or failure, the pipeline owner and pipeline
operator shall not restart the pipeline without the written approval of the
Borough Engineer.
§ 189-12. Repair.
Following any repair(s) of an oil and hazardous substance pipeline, any
areas disturbed by such repair(s) shall be revegetated and restored in
accordance with the applicable provisions of the code at the pipeline
owner's and pipeline operator's sole cost and expense.
Chapter 195
PARKS, PLAYGROUNDS AND RECREATION AREAS
§ 189-11 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 189-12
188:547

ARTICLE I
Joint Recreation Advisory Committee
[Adopted 9-26-2005 by Ord. No. 05-2789]
§ 195-1. Establishment and composition.
There is hereby established in and for the Borough of Chatham and in and
for the Township of Chatham a joint Recreation Advisory Committee to be
known as the "Joint Recreation Advisory Committee of the Chathams." The
Joint Recreation Advisory Committee of the Chathams shall be composed of
nine members and two alternates.
§ 195-2. Appointment of members; terms of office; vacancies.
A. Chatham Borough members.
(1) Three members of the Joint Recreation Advisory Committee who
are residents of Chatham Borough shall be appointed for a term of
three years by the Mayor of the Borough of Chatham upon the
advice and consent of the Borough Council. The terms of office of
the first three appointed members shall expire December 31, 2006,
December 31, 2007, and December 31, 2008, respectively. In the
event of a vacancy, the Mayor shall appoint a replacement upon the
advice and consent of the Borough Council, and the term of
appointment shall be only for the unexpired term.
(2) One member who is a resident of Chatham Borough shall be
appointed for a term of one year as an alternate member by the
Mayor of the Borough of Chatham upon the advice and consent of
the Borough Council. In the event of a vacancy, the Mayor shall
appoint a replacement upon the advice and consent of the Borough
Council, and the term of appointment shall be only for the
unexpired term.
(3) In the event that the Mayor fails to make a nomination at least 15
days prior to the date of the second regular public meeting of the
Council after a position becomes vacant or the Borough Council
fails to confirm a nomination, then the appointment shall be made
by the Borough Council by a vote of a majority of the members
present at the meeting, provided that at least three affirmative
votes shall be required, with the Mayor to have no vote thereon
except in case of a tie.
B. Chatham Township members.
(1) Three members of the Joint Recreation Advisory Committee who
are residents of Chatham Township shall be appointed for a term of
three years by the Mayor of the Township of Chatham upon the
89.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that the former provisions of this chapter,
§§ 195-1 through 195-21, now be designated as Art. II, General Provisions, §§ 195-5
through 195-25.
§ 195-1 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 195-2
188:549
§ 195-3. Meetings; quorum; record of proceedings; annual report.
The Joint Recreation Advisory Committee of the Chathams shall meet at
such times and places as it shall deem expedient, but at least quarter
annually. A majority of the appointed membership of the Joint Recreation
advice and consent of the Township Committee. The terms of office
of the first three appointed members shall expire December 31,
2006, December 31, 2007, and December 31, 2008, respectively. In
the event of a vacancy, the Mayor shall appoint a replacement upon
the advice and consent of the Township Committee, and the term
of appointment shall be only for the unexpired term.
(2) One member who is a resident of Chatham Township shall be
appointed for a term of one year as an alternate member by the
Mayor of the Township of Chatham upon the advice and consent of
the Township Committee. In the event of a vacancy, the Mayor shall
appoint a replacement upon the advice and consent of the
Township Committee, and the term of appointment shall be only for
the unexpired term.
(3) In the event that the Mayor fails to make a nomination at least 15
days prior to the date of the second regular public meeting of the
Township Committee after a position becomes vacant or the
Township Committee fails to confirm a nomination, then the
appointment shall be made by the Township Committee by a vote of
a majority of the members present at the meeting, provided that at
least three affirmative votes shall be required.
C. One member of the Joint Recreation Advisory Committee shall be a
Council member, appointed by the Borough Council, and the term of the
appointment of such member shall be one year. In the event of a
vacancy by a Council member, the Mayor shall appoint a replacement
upon the advice and consent of the Borough Council, and the term of
appointment shall be only for the unexpired term.
D. One member of the Joint Recreation Advisory Committee shall be a
Township Committee member, appointed by the Township Committee,
and the term of the appointment of such member shall be one year. In
the event of a vacancy by a Township member, the Mayor shall appoint
a replacement upon the advice and consent of the Township Committee,
and the term of appointment shall be only for the unexpired term.
E. One member of the Joint Recreation Advisory Committee shall be
appointed by the School District of the Chathams (hereinafter called the
"School District"), and shall be an elected representative thereof. The
term of the appointment of such member shall be one year. In the event
of a vacancy by this member of the School District, the President of the
School District shall appoint a replacement upon the advice and
consent of the elected School District Board, and the term of
appointment shall be only for the unexpired term.
§ 195-2 CHATHAM CODE § 195-3
188:550
Advisory Committee of the Chathams shall constitute a quorum thereof.
The Committee shall keep a record of its proceedings, which shall be the
joint property of the governing body of the Borough of Chatham and the
governing body of the Township of Chatham. The Joint Recreation Advisory
Committee of the Chathams shall take minutes of all proceedings and
make an annual written report addressed to the governing body of each
municipality.
§ 195-4. Powers and duties.
A. The Joint Recreation Advisory Committee of the Chathams shall
perform such duties and have such powers as are delegated to it by this
article or by interlocal agreement or by companion resolutions adopted
by the governing body of the Borough of Chatham, the governing body
of the Township of Chathamand the School District.
B. The Joint Recreation Advisory Committee of the Chathams shall have
the power to develop policy manuals for recreation which shall then be
submitted to the governing body of the Borough of Chatham and to the
governing body of the Township of Chatham for approval.
§ 195-3 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 195-4
188:551

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
[Adopted 7-8-1974 by Ord. No. 10-17 (Ch. 106 of the 1975 Code)]
§ 195-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible
material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feedings does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or
game.[Added 6-13-2005 by Ord. No. 05-22]
PARK — Any park, lawn, playground, playing field or vacant land within the
limits of the Borough of Chatham which is open to the public, irrespective
of whether or not the same shall be owned by the Borough, including the
paths, roadways, sidewalks, streets and parking areas therein and adjacent
thereto.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.[Added 6-13-2005 by Ord. No. 05-22]
WILDLIFE — All animals that are neither human nor domesticated.[Added
6-13-2005 by Ord. No. 05-22]
§ 195-6. Purpose. [Added 9-13-1976 by Ord. No. 13-76]
This article is enacted to establish rules and regulations for the protection,
care and control of the public land, parks and playgrounds in the Borough
and to regulate the conduct of persons on or within such public land, parks
and playgrounds or using the facilities thereof.
§ 195-7. Misuse and other acts forbidden. [Added 9-13-1976 by Ord.
No. 13-76]
A. No person shall injure, deface, displace, remove, alter, disturb, tamper
with, damage or destroy any trees, shrubs, soil, grass or plantlife or any
structure, building, post, playground equipment, walkway, telephone or
electric pole, wires, pipes or appurtenances or any other park or
recreational equipment or facility or any hydrant, water, storm or sewer
drain, pipe, main, basin covering, manhole or any appendage or
appurtenance thereof, or any sign, inscription, post or monument
erected or marked for any lawful purpose; or injure or in any way
interfere with the operation of any machinery or equipment used under
the direction of the Borough or any of its departments, agencies or
officials; or deface, destroy, alter, damage or tamper with any drive,
path, walk, bridge, parking area or shelter; or take up, remove or carry
away any asphalt, concrete, stone, rock, wood, gravel, clay or earth; or
make any excavation of any kind.
§ 195-5 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 195-7
188:553
§ 195-8. Fires. [Added 9-13-1976 by Ord. No. 13-76]
No person shall kindle, build or maintain a fire within any park except in
such areas as may be designated for that purpose and then only charcoal or
self-contained camping stoves may be used. No fire shall be left unattended
and any fire shall be put out immediately after use.90
§ 195-9. Archery and golf. [Added 9-13-1976 by Ord. No. 13-76]
No person shall take part in or abet the playing of archery or golf except in
such areas as may be designated for either purpose within any park.
§ 195-10. Rough games. [Added 9-13-1976 by Ord. No. 13-76;
amended 4-25-2005 by Ord. No. 05-09]
The playing of rough games is restricted to specific locations, as determined
by the Director of Recreation for the Borough of Chatham.
§ 195-11. Pollution of water or waterways. [Added 9-13-1976 by
Ord. No. 13-1976]
No person shall cast, lay, drop or discharge into or leave in the water or
waterways of any park any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid.
§ 195-12. Motor vehicles. [Added 9-13-1976 by Ord. No. 13-1976;
amended 8-10-1981 by Ord. No. 12-81]
B. No person shall hunt, molest, kill, frighten, trap, chase, tease, shoot or
throw missiles at any animal, reptile or bird; nor shall he remove or
molest the eggs or young of any animal, reptile or bird.
A. No person shall drive, operate, use or bring into any park any
motorbike, minibike, motorcycle, snowmobile or any other motor
vehicle, except for vehicles duly licensed or otherwise authorized and
then only in areas designated for the parking or operating of such
vehicles.
B. No person shall drive a vehicle in any park carelessly or without due
caution and circumspection in a manner so as to endanger or be likely
to endanger a person or property.
C. This section shall apply to all parks as defined in this article and include
specifically all Borough and school parking lots and driveways, but is
not intended to, nor shall it apply to, any highway as that term is used in
Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey.
90.Editor's Note: Original § 106-5, Firearms and weapons, added 9-13-1976 by Ord. No.
13-76, which immediately followed this section, was deleted 4-25-2005 by Ord. No. 05-09.
§ 195-7 CHATHAM CODE § 195-12.1
188:554
§ 195-12.1. Feeding of wildlife prohibited. [Added 6-13-2005 by Ord.
No. 05-22]
No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned by
the Borough of Chatham, any wildlife.
§ 195-13. Advertising. [Added 9-13-1976 by Ord. No. 13-1976]
No person shall post, exhibit or otherwise display any signs, posters or other
advertising material in any park, except where authorized in connection
with the issuance of a permit for a special event under § 195-21. This section
shall not apply to bulletin boards, posters or programs erected, maintained
or sponsored by the Borough or any of its departments or agencies.
§ 195-14. Lighted matches; flammable material. [Added 9-13-1976
by Ord. No. 13-1976]
No person shall drop, throw or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning
cigarettes or cigars, tobacco paper or other flammable material within any
park, or on any highway, road or street abutting or contiguous thereto.
§ 195-15. Parking. [Added 9-13-1976 by Ord. No. 13-1976]
No person shall leave a vehicle unattended or parked in any park except
during park hours, but this provision is not intended to apply to adjacent
public streets. No person shall park a vehicle in other than an established
designated area within any park, and such use shall be in accordance
with any posted directions and the directions of any attendant who may
be present. Overnight parking is prohibited except where specifically
authorized in connection with a special event approved pursuant to
§ 195-21.
§ 195-16. Limitation of park hours and activities. [Added 9-13-1976
by Ord. No. 13-1976; amended 3-22-2004 by Ord. No. 04-07]
§ 195-17. Exceptions. [Added 9-13-1976 by Ord. No. 13-1976]
Nothing contained in any of the foregoing restrictions, §§ 195-7 to 195-17
of this article, shall be understood or construed to apply to municipal
officers or employees of the Borough acting within the scope of their duties
A. Opening and closing hours for Borough parks may be determined on an
individual or area basis, from time to time, by the Enforcement Officer.
Such determination may exclude certain activities or all activity or
close any park to the public at any time and for any interval of time.
B. Any person having knowledge of a determination made pursuant to this
section or who, upon being advised thereof, fails to abide thereby or
violates the same shall be guilty of a violation of this article. Where
notice of the determination is posted in the park area, knowledge
thereof shall be presumed.
§ 195-12.1 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 195-17
188:555
or any person or person acting under specific directions or with specific
permission of the Borough Council, the Board of Recreation or the owner of
the land involved, e.g., the Board of Education. Nothing in this exception,
however, shall be construed to authorize any act which is prohibited by
other applicable ordinance or is otherwise unlawful.
§ 195-18. Leaf composting. [Added 6-27-1988 by Ord. No. 17-88;
amended 12-10-2012 by Ord. No. 12-18]
The Borough of Chatham, as part of its authority to administer, maintain,
operate and protect lands for public park, recreation and conservation
purposes, shall include the composting of leaves as a permitted use for
Block 34, Lot 1, subject to the following conditions:
§ 195-19. Consumption of alcoholic beverages restricted. [Amended
10-12-2010 by Ord. No. 10-29]
A. The operation of a leaf compost facility shall be in accordance with
applicable state, county or local permits, conditions and land use
regulations affecting park, recreation and conservation areas.
B. Lands which are regulated in whole or in part by the New Jersey Green
Acres Statutes and rules and regulations promulgated thereunder shall
fall under such statutes, rules and regulations which must be enforced
by the municipality.
C. The operation and maintenance of a leaf compost facility shall neither
permanently nor completely alter or divert from a use other than public
recreation or conservation lands dedicated, owned or operated by the
Borough of Chatham.
D. The humus produced from a leaf compost facility shall be made
available to the general public at designated times and places as may be
prescribed and used by the municipality for natural resource purposes.
E. Any sales proceeds derived from Subsection E above shall be dedicated
in a special account for park, recreation and conservation purposes in
the municipality.
F. No person shall dump or cause to be dumped any leaves or other
material at the compost facility or in any part of any park, recreation or
conservation area except as may be prescribed by the Borough of
Chatham and with the approval of the New Jersey Green Acres
Program.
A. No alcoholic beverage shall be sold within any park or brought to the
same for consumption or free distribution therein, and the possession of
any alcoholic beverage therein otherwise than in its original sealed
container is prohibited, unless a permit therefor shall have been issued
by the Mayor and Council. Said permit shall be subject to such rules as
the Mayor and Council deem necessary to preserve and protect the
public welfare.
§ 195-17 CHATHAM CODE § 195-19
188:556
§ 195-20. Permit required for special events. [Added 9-13-1976 by
Ord. No. 13-1976]
§ 195-21. Liability of permittee. [Added 9-13-1976 by Ord. No.
13-1976]
The person or persons to whom a permit is issued under this article shall
be liable for any loss, damage or injury sustained by any person whatever
by reason of the negligence of the person or persons to whom such permit
shall have been issued.
§ 195-22. Disorderly conduct. [Added 9-13-1976 by Ord. No.
13-1976]
No person shall conduct himself in a disorderly or indecent manner or
commit any indecent act or use profane, indecent or obscene language in
any public park. No person shall unreasonably interfere with or disturb any
other person in the use of any park.
§ 195-23. Interference with officials. [Added 9-13-1976 by Ord. No.
13-1976]
No person shall interfere with or fail to obey any police officer or parks and
playground personnel in the proper performance of their duties in any park.
§ 195-24. Enforcement Officer. [Added 3-22-2004 by Ord. No. 04-07]
The Recreation Director of the Borough of Chatham is hereby designated as
the Enforcement Officer for the purposes of enforcement of the provisions
of this article. All members of the Chatham Borough Police Department are
hereby designated as Assistant Enforcement Officers for the purposes of the
enforcement of this article.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Borough Administrator may grant
or issue a permit for the free distribution of alcoholic beverages in any
public park by or for the Chatham Borough Police Department, the
Chatham Borough Fire Department and the Chatham Borough
Emergency Squad at any events held for their members.
A. A special event is any event which is conducted, sponsored or permitted
by an organized group of persons and which involves any advance
publicity or advertising by or within said group, except activities
scheduled by the Board of Recreation.
B. No special event shall be held or permitted in any park owned by the
Borough unless a permit therefor shall have been issued by the Mayor
and Council. Said permit shall be subject to such rules as the Mayor and
Council deem necessary to preserve and protect the public welfare.
§ 195-19 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 195-25
188:557
§ 195-25. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, § 1-14.
§ 195-25 CHATHAM CODE § 195-25
188:558
ARTICLE III
Criminal Background Checks for Volunteers and Employees in Joint
Recreation Programs
[Adopted 12-10-2007 by Ord. No. 07-31]
§ 195-26. Intent.
The Township of Chatham (hereinafter "Township") and the Borough of
Chatham (hereinafter "Borough") have established a joint recreation
program. The Township and the Borough have determined that it is in
the best interest of the residents of the Township and the Borough and
the participants in the joint recreation program that all volunteers and
employees who wish to participate in the program undergo criminal
background checks prior to said participation. It is the intention of the
Township and the Borough to adopt similar ordinances to accomplish this
goal.
§ 195-27. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHATHAM REVIEW COMMITTEE — A four-member committee consisting
of the Township Administrator or designee, the Borough Administrator
or designee, and Chiefs of Police or designees of the Township and the
Borough, respectively. The Committee shall be charged with the review
of all appeals of any Township or Borough employee or volunteer whose
criminal history background check reveals a disqualifying criminal
conviction.
COACH — Any person, whether paid or volunteer, involved with coaching or
supervising participants in a nonprofit youth-serving organization, whether
the title is coach, manager or another title consistent with these terms.
COSPONSORED PROGRAM — Any program, including but not limited to
nonprofit youth-serving organizations as defined below, which receives
benefits, either directly or indirectly, including but not limited to the
provision of funding and/or the provision of fields, facilities and/or
equipment (and including the maintenance of same), from the Township
and/or the Borough.
CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD BACKGROUND CHECK — A determination
of whether a person has a criminal record by cross-referencing that
person's name and fingerprints with those on file with the Federal Bureau of
Investigation Identification Division and the State Bureau of Identification
in the Division of State Police.
EMPLOYEES — All full-time, part-time and seasonal employees of the
Chatham Township Recreation Department or the Borough of Chatham
Recreation Department.
NONPROFIT YOUTH-SERVING ORGANIZATIONS — A corporation,
association or other organization established pursuant to Title 15 of the
§ 195-26 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 195-27
188:559
Revised Statutes, Title 15A of the New Jersey Statutes or other law of
the state, but excluding public and nonpublic schools, and which provides
recreational, cultural, charitable, social or other activities or services for
persons younger than 18 years of age, and is exempt from federal income
taxes.
SPONSORED PROGRAM — Recreation programs run directly and jointly
by the Township and the Borough, including oversight, control and/or fiscal
contribution.
STATE BUREAU OF IDENTIFICATION — The entity located within the
New Jersey State Police responsible for retrieving criminal background
information on individuals as requested by state, local or private entities.
VOLUNTEER REVIEW OPERATION ("VRO") — The unit located within the
State Bureau of Identification that is responsible for administering criminal
background checks for volunteer coaches as specified in this article.
§ 195-28. Requests for criminal background checks; costs.
A. The Township and the Borough require that all coaches of nonprofit
youth-serving organizations involved in sponsored or cosponsored
programs request through the Township Recreation Department or the
Borough Recreation Department, as determined by the municipality of
residence, that the State Bureau of Identification and the Federal
Bureau of Investigation ("FBI") conduct a criminal history record
background check on each prospective and current coach of nonprofit
youth-serving organizations in accordance with N.J.A.C. 13:59-1.1 et
seq. and with the procedures and guidelines adopted by the VRO. No
person will be permitted to act as a coach until the results of the
background checks have been received and reviewed by the
Administrator of the Township or the Administrator of the Borough,
respectively.
B. The Township and the Borough shall conduct a criminal history record
background check only upon receipt of the written consent for a check
from the prospective or current coach.
C. Any prospective or current coach of a nonprofit youth-serving
organization who refuses to consent to this procedure shall not be
permitted to participate in any sponsored or cosponsored programs
involving nonprofit youth-serving organizations.
D. The Township and the Borough Recreation program participant fees
shall bear the costs associated with conducting criminal history record
background checks for prospective or current coaches for sponsored
programs, and all other nonprofit youth-serving organizations shall
bear the costs for conducting such checks for prospective or current
coaches participating in cosponsored programs in accordance with the
regulations established by the VRO.
§ 195-27 CHATHAM CODE § 195-28
188:560
§ 195-29. Conditions under which a person is disqualified from
service.
§ 195-30. Submission and exchange of background information
pertaining to coaches.
§ 195-31. Limitations on access and use of criminal history record
information.
E. The Administrator for the Township and the Administrator for the
Borough may set forth policies and procedures which shall not be
inconsistent with this article.
F. The VRO shall advise both respective Administrators of the eligibility of
the prospective or current coach. Any information received by the
Administrators shall be confidential.
G. Criminal history background checks will be performed for individuals
under the age of 18 in accordance with N.J.A.C. 13:59-1.1 et seq. and
with the procedures and guidelines adopted by the VRO.
A. A person may be disqualified from serving as a coach of a nonprofit
youth-serving organization if that person's criminal history record
background check reveals a disqualifying record in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 15A:3A-1 et seq.
B. In any other state or jurisdiction, conduct which, if committed in New
Jersey, would constitute a disqualifying record in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 15A:3A-1 et seq. may also constitute grounds for
disqualification.
A. Prospective or current coaches of nonprofit youth-serving organizations
for cosponsored programs shall submit their names, addresses,
fingerprints, written consent, and any other necessary information to
the organization for the criminal history record background check to be
performed. The organization shall submit this documentation to the
Administrators, who shall coordinate the background check and refer
the information to the State Bureau of Investigation for the background
check. The Administrators or their designees shall be responsible for
obtaining the above information for all prospective and current
coaches, for all nonprofit youth-serving organizations, both sponsored
and cosponsored programs. Thereafter, the Township and the Borough
shall conduct periodic background checks after the date of the initial
background check, but not less frequently than every 60 months.
[Amended 4-11-2011 by Ord. No. 11-05]
B. The Administrator for the Township and the Administrator for the
Borough shall be responsible for the maintenance of all records
generated as a result of conducting criminal history record background
checks pursuant to this article.
§ 195-28 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 195-31
188:561
§ 195-32. Determination by Chatham Review Committee concerning
coaches; appeal process.
A. Access to criminal history record information for noncriminal justice
purposes, including licensing and employment, is restricted to the
members of the Chatham Review Committee, as authorized by federal
or state statute, rule or regulations, executive order, administrative
code, local ordinance or resolution regarding obtaining and
disseminating of criminal history record information obtained under
this article.
B. The Chatham Review Committee shall limit its use of criminal history
record information solely to the authorized person for which it was
obtained, and criminal history record information furnished shall not be
disseminated to persons or organizations not authorized to receive the
records for authorized purposes. Use of this record shall be limited
solely to the authorized purpose for which it was given, and it shall not
be disseminated to any unauthorized persons. Any person violating
federal or state regulations governing access to criminal history record
information may be subject to criminal and/or civil penalties.
A. The VRO shall make a recommendation based on the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 15A:3A-1 et seq. as to whether the prospective or current
volunteer coach is being recommended. The VRO will provide the
Administrator of the respective municipality with a letter of
recommendation or nonrecommendation for each individual for whom
the VRO completed a background check.
B. The Administrator shall promptly notify a prospective or current coach
who receives a letter of nonrecommendation from the VRO. Individuals
who receive a letter of nonrecommendation from the VRO will not be
permitted to participate as a coach. Such individuals may obtain a copy
of their criminal history record by contacting the VRO in writing. The
individuals shall then have 30 days from the receipt of notification from
the Administrator to petition the Chatham Review Committee for a
review and to cite reasons substantiating the review.
C. Individuals who receive a letter of nonrecommendation from the VRO
may be permitted to serve as a coach if they affirmatively demonstrate
rehabilitation to the Chatham Review Committee. In determining
whether a person has affirmatively demonstrated clear and convincing
evidence of rehabilitation, the Chatham Review Committee may
consider the following factors in conjunction with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 15A:3A-1 et seq.:
(1) The nature and responsibility of the position which the convicted
person would hold or has held, as the case may be;
(2) The nature and seriousness of the offense;
(3) The circumstance under which the offense occurred;
§ 195-31 CHATHAM CODE § 195-32
188:562
(4) The date of the offense;
(5) The age of the person when the offense was committed;
(6) Whether the offense was an isolated or repeated incident;
(7) Any social conditions which may have contributed to the offense;
and
(8) Any evidence of rehabilitation, including good conduct in prison or
the community, counseling or psychiatric treatment received,
acquisition of additional academic or vocational schooling,
successful participation in correctional work release programs or
the recommendation of those who have had the person under their
supervision.
D. In all instances, the final determination of whether an individual will be
permitted to serve as a coach will lie in the sole discretion of the
Chatham Review Committee, whose vote must be unanimous.
E. The Chatham Review Committee shall promptly advise the prospective
or current coach whether he or she is qualified to serve as a coach.
F. When the Administrators receive a letter of nonrecommendation from
the VRO, the Administrators shall file that letter with the Police
Departments of Chatham Township and Chatham Borough.
G. The Police Departments shall keep the written notification on file for
three years from the date it was issued.
H. The Administrators may request the applicable Police Department to
review its files to determine if there is written notification on file stating
whether a criminal history record background check of a current or
prospective coach reveals a disqualifying offense or stating that the
person has affirmatively demonstrated rehabilitation under this act.
§ 195-32 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 195-32
188:563

ARTICLE IV
Smoking
[Adopted 11-8-2010 by Ord. No. BOH 10-01]
§ 195-33. Smoking prohibited.
Smoke or the use of tobacco-related products, and/or discarding of those
products, in an area designated as "tobacco free" and/or beyond any point
which is otherwise marked as “no smoking beyond this point” or similar
language, or within 50 feet of any park, playground, and/or recreation area,
Borough Hall and Library, owned, leased or utilized by the Borough of
Chatham and/or the youth sports organizations of the Borough of Chatham,
is prohibited.
§ 195-34. Violations and penalties.
Pursuant to § 195-25 of the Code of the Borough of Chatham, any person
who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof,
be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, § 1-14, as follows: Unless another
penalty is provided or if no other penalty for the violation of any provision
of the Code of the Borough of Chatham, the violator shall, upon conviction,
be punishable by one or more of the following: a fine of not more than $100,
and/or a period of community service.
§ 195-33 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 195-34
188:565
Chapter 199
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS
§ 199-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to balance the First Amendment free speech
protections afforded to door-to-door peddling, solicitation and canvassing
with the Borough's public safety concerns and the privacy interests of
Borough residents.
§ 199-2. Definitions.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Chatham.
PEDDLER — Any person who goes from place to place by traveling on
the streets and roads or from house to house carrying, conveying or
transporting goods, wares, merchandise or personal property of any nature
whatsoever for the purpose of selling them to customers. The word
"peddler" shall include the words "hawker," "huckster" and "vendor."
PERSON — An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, voluntary
association, incorporated association and principal or agent thereof.
SOLICITOR or CANVASSER —
VEHICLE — Includes wagons, carts, trailers, motor trucks, motor vehicles,
service dispensers or other type of conveyance.
Any person who goes from place to place by traveling on the streets and
roads or from house to house taking or attempting to take orders for
the sale of goods, wares and merchandise or personal property of any
nature whatsoever for future delivery or for services to be furnished
or performed in the future, including orders for improvements to real
property, whether or not such person has, carries or exposes for sale
a sample of the object to be sold and whether or not he is collecting
advance payments on such sales.
A.
B. The word "solicitor" shall include the word "canvasser."
A solicitor or canvasser also is deemed to be one who is not in the
business of selling goods, but one who makes surveys for research
purposes, analysis, opinion polls, rating data and any such similar work,
which, by nature, involves a door-to-door or place-to-place activity, and
shall include persons going from door to door or place to place or
being in or on any public or quasipublic areas of the Borough for the
purpose of seeking contributions, donations or alms for any person or
organization.
C.
§ 195-34 CHATHAM CODE § 199-3
188:566
§ 199-3. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any peddler, solicitor or canvasser, as defined in this
chapter, to engage in such activity within the Borough of Chatham without
first obtaining a license as provided herein.
§ 199-4. Exceptions.
§ 199-5. Application.
All applicants shall pay the license fee required by § 199-6, if applicable, and
file with the Police Department a sworn written application, in duplicate,
on forms to be furnished by the Police Department which shall give the
following information:
A. Any individual or group advocating or soliciting on behalf of a
charitable or not-for-profit organization, including such activities as
religious proselytizing, political speech or the distribution of political or
religious handbills or circulars, shall be exempt from the requirements
of this chapter except for the time limitations set forth in § 199-8.
B. Any veteran or exempt firefighter of a volunteer fire department
holding a special license issued pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 and
45:24-10 shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter except
for the time limitations set forth in § 199-8.
C. The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to the following:
(1) Any public utility or its employees, where said public utility is
subject to regulation by the State Board of Public Utilities;
provided, however, that such employees shall display the
identification badge or card issued by their employer.
(2) Any person engaged in the delivery of merchandise or other
articles or things in the regular course of business to the premises
of persons who had previously ordered the same or were entitled to
receive the same by reason of a prior agreement.
A. Name and address of the applicant. If applicant is an individual
employed by another, the name, address and phone number of
applicant's employer; if applicant's employer is a corporation, the name
and address of its registered agent shall also be provided. The
application shall be accompanied by a letter or other written statement
from the individual, firm or corporation employing the applicant
certifying that the applicant is authorized to act as a representative of
the individual, firm, or corporation.
B. Name and description of each proposed peddler, solicitor, or canvasser,
including date of birth, sex, and physical description, including height,
weight, hair color and eye color.
§ 199-3 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 199-5
188:567
§ 199-6. Fees.
An applicant shall pay the nonrefundable application fee in an amount to be
established by duly adopted resolution of the Borough Council.
§ 199-7. Investigation; criminal background check.
C. A brief statement of the nature of the business and a description of the
merchandise or service to be sold or distributed, if applicable.
D. If the licensed activity is to be carried on at a fixed location, the address
and description of the premises.
E. The length of time for which the license is required, not to exceed 120
days.
F. If a vehicle is to be used, a description of such vehicle, including the
make, model, year and license plate number and a photocopy of a valid
registration for each such vehicle. Also provide a photocopy of a valid
driver's license for each proposed driver.
G. The days of the week and the hours of the day during which the licensed
activity will be conducted.
H. Two recent color passport-quality photographs of each proposed mobile
vendor or solicitor, each photograph to be two inches by two inches in
size.
I. Each applicant shall agree to be fingerprinted for the purpose of
verifying that he/she has no criminal record. The fingerprint
impressions will be taken by an approved fingerprint vendor.
A. Each application shall be referred to the Chief of Police, or his/her
designee, who shall cause an investigation to be made of the applicant's
character, business responsibility and ability to properly conduct the
licensed activity as deemed necessary by the Police Department for the
protection of the public. The Chief of Police, or his/her designee, shall
conduct a criminal history background check through an approved
fingerprint vendor for each applicant prior to issuance of license. All
fees required by the fingerprint vendor will be paid by the applicant.
B. The criminal background check will be valid for 120 days. The Chief of
Police, or his/her designee, may accept a criminal history background
check conducted in connection with a permit application made to
another municipality in the State of New Jersey within the last 120
days.
C. An applicant shall be denied a license if the criminal history check
reveals that he/she has been convicted of any crime in the State of New
Jersey or convicted in any state, territory, commonwealth or other
jurisdiction of what would constitute a crime under the laws of the State
of New Jersey.
§ 199-5 CHATHAM CODE § 199-7
188:568
D. An applicant may be denied a license if the criminal history check
reveals that the applicant's character or business responsibility is
unsatisfactory or if he/she has been convicted of any disorderly persons
or petty disorderly persons offenses. Any such determination by the
Chief of Police, or his/her designee, that an application is unsatisfactory
shall be based upon one or more of the following findings with respect
to the applicant:
(1) Conviction of an offense relating adversely to the occupation of
peddling, solicitation or canvassing, which shall be determined in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2A:168A-2 and set forth
in a written explanation provided to the applicant based upon
consideration of the following factors or any other factors:
(a) The nature and duties of the business for which a license is
sought;
(b) The nature and seriousness of the offense;
(c) Circumstances under which the offense occurred;
(d) The date of the offense;
(e) The age of the person when the offense was committed;
(f) Whether the offense was an isolated or repeated incident;
(g) Social conditions which may have contributed to the offense;
and
(h) Any evidence of rehabilitation, including good conduct in
prison or in the community, counseling or psychiatric
treatment received, acquisition of additional academic or
vocational schooling, successful participation in correctional
work-release programs, or the recommendation of persons
who have or have had the applicant under their supervision.
(2) Prior violation of a peddling or soliciting ordinance.
(3) Previous fraudulent acts or conduct.
(4) Record of breaches of soliciting contracts.
(5) Complaints made to the New Jersey Division of Consumer Affairs.
(6) Misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application
for the license.
E. If an applicant is denied a license in accordance with Subsection C or D
herein, the Chief of Police, or his/her designee, shall deny the
application and notify the applicant that his/her application is
disapproved.
§ 199-7 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 199-7
188:569
§ 199-8. Hours.
All activities regulated by this chapter shall be permitted except between
the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
§ 199-9. Area of solicitation.
The licensee shall notify the Police Department prior to commencing any
peddling, solicitation or canvassing. Such notification shall include a
statement of the general area of the Borough in which the licensee intends
to conduct said activity and a schedule of dates and times when said activity
shall be conducted. The licensee shall notify the Police Department of any
change in the area or time of peddling, solicitation or canvassing activity.
§ 199-10. Permit not transferable.
No license shall be transferable. In the case of a firm or corporation, each
person representing such firm or corporation shall be issued a separate
license.
F. If, as a result of such investigation, the character and business
responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the Chief of
Police, or his/her designee, shall endorse his/her approval on the
application and issue a license to the applicant. The Chief of Police, or
his/her designee, shall keep a record of all licenses issued and all
complaints received, if any, concerning each license.
G. Any license issued pursuant to this chapter shall contain the signature
of the issuing officer and shall show:
(1) The name, address and passport-quality color photo of the licensee.
(2) The kind of merchandise or services to be sold or distributed
thereunder, if applicable.
(3) The date of issue.
(4) The length of time the license shall be operative, not to exceed 120
days.
(5) The license number and other identifying description of any vehicle
used in the peddling or soliciting activity licensed.
H. A license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be carried by the
licensee at all times while engaged in the activity for which the license
was issued and shall be displayed at all times when engaged in the
activities herein.
I. The Chief of Police, or his/her designee, shall ordinarily act on all
applications within 48 hours after submission of a complete application.
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays shall be excluded from such
computation.
§ 199-7 CHATHAM CODE § 199-11
188:570
§ 199-11. Revocation of licenses.
§ 199-12. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Chief of Police, or his/her
designee, in the denial of an application for license in accordance with this
chapter, or in the decision with reference to the revocation of a license
as provided in § 199-11 of this chapter, shall have the right of appeal to
the Borough Administrator or his/her designee. Such appeal shall be taken
by filing with the Borough Clerk, within 10 days of the action complained
of, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The
Borough Administrator, or his/her designee, may decide the matter on
the papers or schedule a time and place for a hearing on such appeal.
Notice of any such hearing shall be served upon the licensee or mailed,
postage prepaid, to the licensee at the address given by the licensee in
making application for license in accordance with this chapter, at least five
days prior to the date set for said hearing. The decision and order of the
Borough Administrator, or his/her designee, on such appeal shall be final
and conclusive.
§ 199-13. Do-Not-Knock Registry.
A. Licenses issued under this chapter may be revoked by the Chief of
Police, or his/her designee, upon written notice to the licensee for any
of the following causes:
(1) Fraud or misrepresentation in any application for a license.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or other dishonesty in the conduct of the
licensed activity.
(3) Violation of any of the provisions contained in this chapter.
(4) Conviction of any crime or offense relating adversely to the activity
of peddling, soliciting or canvassing as determined according to the
procedure and based upon the considerations set forth in § 199-7 of
this chapter.
(5) Conducting the business of licensed activity, whether by licensee
himself or his agents or employees, in any unlawful manner or in
any manner that constitutes a breach of the peace or a menace to
the public health, safety or general welfare.
A. The Borough Clerk shall prepare a list of addresses of those premises
where the owner and/or occupant has notified the Clerk that peddlers,
solicitors and canvassers are not permitted on the premises
(hereinafter referred to as the "Do-Not-Knock Registry"). Notification
shall be by completion of a form available on the Borough website or at
the Borough Clerk's office during normal business hours. The list shall
be updated by the Borough Clerk annually.
§ 199-11 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 199-13
188:571
§ 199-14. Violations and penalties.
Except as otherwise provided herein, any falsification of information
contained in the application or any failure to comply with any provisions
of this chapter shall, upon conviction be punishable as provided in Chapter
1, § 1-14. The continuation of such violation for each successive day shall
constitute a separate offense and the person or persons allowing or
permitting the continuation of the violation may be punished as provided
above for each separate offense.
§ 199-15. Charitable clothing bins.
B. Any owner and/or occupant who has requested enlistment on the Do-
Not-Knock Registry, pursuant to Subsection A above, shall be able to
purchase from the Clerk's office, for a nominal fee, a sticker for display
at his/her or its premises indicating enlistment on the Do-Not-Knock
Registry.
C. The Borough Clerk shall submit the Do-Not-Knock Registry to the Chief
of Police annually to be distributed to applicants for a license pursuant
to this Chapter.
D. The licensee shall not peddle, canvass, or solicit at any premises
identified on the then current Do-Not-Knock Registry.
E. Any person who violates the provisions of this § 199-13 shall:
(1) Be subject to the fines as provided in this chapter.
(2) Be subject to a revocation of any license issued pursuant to this
chapter; and/or
(3) Be ineligible to receive a new license pursuant to this chapter for a
one-year period.
A. No person shall place, use or employ a donation clothing bin for
solicitation purposes within the Borough of Chatham unless all of the
following requirements are met:
(1) The person shall apply for and obtain a permit from the
Construction Code Official. The application for the permit shall
include, along with the required fee set forth in this section:
(a) The location where the bin would be situated, as precisely as
possible;
(b) The manner in which the person, entity, or organization
anticipates any clothing or other donations collected via the
bin would be used, sold, or dispersed and the method by which
the proceeds collected would be allocated or spent;
§ 199-13 CHATHAM CODE § 199-15
188:572
(c) The name and telephone number of the bona fide office of any
entity which may share or profit from any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin; and
(d) Written consent of the property owner to place the bin on his
property.
(2) The owner/applicant shall be recognized as a charitable nonprofit
501(c)(3) corporation, organization, or an officer of such
corporation or organization on whose behalf the application is
being made. Such applicant shall submit the required sufficient
documentation demonstrating the formal creation and recognition
by the Internal Revenue Service of the establishment and present
status of the charitable corporation or organization.
(3) All persons who have obtained a permit pursuant to Subsection
A(1) above and wish to renew said permit shall submit, along with
the required fee set forth in this ordinance, an application for
renewal prior to the expiration of the permit, which such renewal
application shall include the following information:
(a) The location where the bin is currently situated, as precisely as
possible, and, if the person intends to move it, the new location
where the bin would be situated and a written consent of the
property owner to place the bin on his property;
(b) The manner in which the person has used, sold, or dispersed
any clothing or other donations collected via the bin, the
method by which the proceeds of collected donations have
been allocated or spent, and any changes the person
anticipates it may make in these processes during the period
covered by the renewal; and
(c) The name and telephone number of the bona fide office of any
entity which shared or profited from any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin, and of any entities which may
do so during the period covered by the renewal.
B. Safety and maintenance requirements.
(1) Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A above, no donation
clothing bin shall be placed, used or employed in a location that is
considered by the Construction Code Official to cause a safety
hazard. Placement that will be considered to pose a safety hazard
includes, but is not limited to, placement within 100 yards of any
place which stores large amounts of, or sells, fuel or other
flammable liquids or gases. Placement of a donation clothing bin
shall also be undertaken in a manner so as to reasonably consider
and account for the personal safety of the persons using the
clothing bins for the placement of clothing and/or unloading of
donation clothing bins.
§ 199-15 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 199-15
188:573
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A above, no donation
clothing bin shall be placed, used or employed pursuant to this
chapter unless such donation clothing bin is free of rust, peeling, or
other deleterious effects and subject to the Borough Property
Maintenance Code and its violation provisions.
(3) Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A above, no donation
clothing bin shall be placed, used or employed pursuant to this
chapter unless appropriate maintenance obligations are met, which
include, but are not limited to, keeping the donation clothing bin
and surrounding placement area free of debris and other materials,
and the required emptying of donation clothing bins of donations
and contents on a periodic regular basis.
C. Permit fee and duration.
(1) The application fee, which must be submitted with the application
under Subsection A(1) above, shall be $25.
(2) The fee for a renewal of the permit, which must be submitted with
the application under Subsection A(2) above, shall be $25.
(3) All permits and renewals obtained shall be in effect for one year
and shall expire on December 31 of the year of the permit and
renewals.
D. The person, and any other entity which may share or profit from any
clothing or other donations collected via the bin, must maintain a bona
fide office where a representative of the person or other entity,
respectively, can be reached at a telephone information line during
normal business hours for the purpose of offering information
concerning the person or other entity. For the purposes of this
ordinance, an answering machine or service unrelated to the person
does not constitute a bona fide office.
E. Notices required. The following information shall be clearly and
conspicuously displayed on the exterior of the donation clothing bin:
(1) The permit number and the date of expiration of that permit;
(2) The name and address of the registered person who owns the bin,
and any other entity which may share or profit from any clothing or
donations collected from the bin;
(3) The telephone number of the person's bona fide office and the
telephone number of the bona fide office of any entity which may
share or profit from any clothing or donations collected via the bin;
(4) In cases where an entity other than the person who owns the bin
may share or profit from any clothing or other donations collected
via the bin, the notice shall also state that clothing or other
donations collected via the bin, their proceeds, or both, may be
§ 199-15 CHATHAM CODE § 199-15
188:574
shared, or given directly to, an entity other than the person who
owns the bin, which such entity shall be identified; and
(5) A statement indicating the manner in which the person, entity, or
organization anticipates any clothing or other donations collected
via the bin would be used, sold, or dispersed, and the method by
which the proceeds of collected donations would be allocated or
spent.
F. Complaints and investigation.
(1) The Construction Code Official, upon receipt of any complaint
concerning a donation clothing bin, shall request that the Police
Department perform an investigation within 30 days of the receipt
of the complaint.
(2) Any person who places a clothing bin in violation of this ordinance
or N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.61 shall be given a warning stating that if the
violation is not rectified or a hearing with the Construction Code
Official is not requested within 45 days, then the bin will be seized
and removed at the expense of the person who placed the bin, and
any clothing or other donations collected via the bin shall be sold at
public auction or otherwise disposed of. This notice shall be placed
on the donation clothing bin and forwarded to the last known
address of the person who placed the bin at the location according
to the Borough's records.
(3) If the person who placed the bin does not rectify the violation or
request a hearing within 45 days of the posting of the warning, then
the Borough shall remove the bin or have it removed at the expense
of the person who placed the bin and sell at public auction or
otherwise dispose of the clothing or donations. All proceeds from
the sale of the donations collected via the bin shall be paid to the
Chief Financial Officer of the Borough.
G. Additional fines and penalties. In addition to the remedies set forth in
Subsection E above, any person who violates this ordinance or N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.60 et seq. and as amended and/or supplemented, which results
in the seizure of the donation clothing bin, shall be subject to the
following:
(1) A penalty up to $20,000 for each violation. The Borough shall bring
this action in Municipal Court or Superior Court in a summary
proceeding under the Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999, P.L. 1999,
c. 274 (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et seq.). Penalty monies collected shall be
paid to the Chief Financial Officer of the Borough.
(2) Deemed ineligible to place, use or employ a donation clothing bin
for solicitation purposes. A person who is deemed ineligible may
apply to the Construction Code Official to have that person's
eligibility restored. The Construction Code Official may restore the
eligibility of a person who:
§ 199-15 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 199-15
188:575
Chapter 204
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fertilizer — See Ch. 130.
Litter — See Ch. 173, Art. II.
Snow and ice removal — See Ch. 228.
Solid waste — See Ch. 233.
Street and sidewalk encumbrances — See Ch.
240.
§ 204-1. General provisions.
(a) Acted within the public interest; and
(b) Demonstrated that he has made a good faith effort to comply
with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60 et seq. and this
ordinance and had no fraudulent intentions.
A. Title. This chapter shall be known as the "Property Maintenance Code
of the Borough of Chatham."
B. Legislative findings. It is hereby found and declared that there exist in
the Borough of Chatham structures used for residential, nonresidential
or mixed-use occupancy which are, or may become in the future,
substandard with respect to structure, equipment or maintenance or,
further, that such conditions, including but not limited to structural
deterioration, lack of maintenance and appearance of exterior of
premises, infestation, lack of essential heating, plumbing, storage or
refrigeration equipment, lack of maintenance or upkeep of essential
utilities and facilities, existence of fire hazards, inadequate provisions
for light and air or unsanitary conditions and overcrowding constitute a
menace to the health, safety, welfare and reasonable comfort of the
citizens and inhabitants of the Borough of Chatham. It is further found
and declared that by reason of lack of maintenance and progressive
deterioration, certain properties have the further effect of creating
blighting conditions, and that if the same are not curtailed and
removed, the aforesaid conditions will grow and spread and will
necessitate, in time, the expenditure of large amounts of public funds to
correct and eliminate the same, and that by reason of timely regulations
and restrictions as herein contained, blight may be prevented and the
neighborhood and property values in the Borough thereby maintained,
the desirability and amenities of residential and nonresidential uses and
neighborhoods enhanced and the public health, safety and welfare
protected and fostered.
C. Purposes. The purposes of this code are to protect the public health,
safety and welfare by establishing minimum standards governing the
maintenance, appearance, condition and occupancy of residential,
§ 199-15 CHATHAM CODE § 204-1
188:576
nonresidential premises and mixed-occupancy buildings, to establish
minimum standards governing utilities, facilities and other physical
components and conditions essential to make the aforesaid facilities fit
for human habitation, occupancy and use, to fix certain responsibilities
and duties upon owners, occupants and operators, to authorize and
establish procedures for the inspection of residential, nonresidential
and mixed-occupancy structures or premises, to establish procedures
for implementing the requirements of this code, to fix penalties for
the violations of this code and to provide for the repair or vacation of
premises found to be in violation of this code.
D. Applicability. Every residential, nonresidential or mixed-use occupancy
building and the premises on which it is situated, used or intended to be
used for dwelling, commercial, business or industrial occupancy shall
comply with the provisions of this code, whether or not such structure
shall have been constructed, altered or repaired before or after the
enactment of this code and irrespective of any permits or licenses
which shall have been issued for the use or occupancy of the building or
premises, for the construction or repair of the building or for the
installation or repair of equipment or facilities prior to the effective
date of this code.
E. Conflict with other provisions. In any case where the provisions of this
code impose a higher standard than set forth in any other chapter, other
local ordinance or under the laws of the State of New Jersey, then the
standards as set forth herein shall prevail, but if the provisions of this
code impose a lower standard than any other chapter, other local
ordinance or of the laws of the State of New Jersey, then the higher
standard contained in any such other chapter, ordinance or law shall
prevail. In addition, nothing contained herein shall in any way abrogate
the authority of the Health Officer and/or Board of Health to enforce the
provisions of the Board of Health Code.
F. Responsibilities. Unless expressly provided to the contrary in this code,
the respective obligations and responsibilities of the property owner,
operator and occupant shall not be altered or affected by any
agreement or contract by and between any of the aforesaid or between
them and other parties. The primary responsibility for compliance with
the provisions of this code shall be that of the property owner.
G. Effect on other provisions. No license or permit or other certification of
compliance with this code shall constitute a defense against any
violation of any other local ordinance applicable to any structure or
premises or use of such structure or premises, nor shall any provision
herein relieve any owner, operator, or occupant from complying with
any such other provision or any official of the Borough from enforcing
any such other provision.
H. All rights reserved. This code contains substantial copyrighted material
from Chapter 3 of the 2012 International Property Maintenance Code,
which is a copyrighted work owned by the International Code Council,
§ 204-1 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 204-1
188:577
§ 204-2. Definitions.
Inc. The copyrighted material is identified by the (IPMC) designation
following the text. Without advance written permission from the
copyright owner, no part of this book may be reproduced, distributed or
transmitted in any form or by any means, including, without limitation,
electronic, optical or mechanical means (by way of example and not
limitation, photocopying or recording by or in an information storage
retrieval system). For information on permission to copy material
exceeding fair use, please contact: Publications, 4051 West Flossmoor
Road, Country Club Hills, IL 60478. Phone 1-888-ICC-SAFE (422-7233).
NOTE: Trademarks: "International Code Council," the "International
Code Council" logo and the "International Property Maintenance
Code" are trademarks of the International Code Council, Inc.
A. Whenever, in describing or referring to any person, party, matter or
thing, any word importing the singular number or masculine gender is
used, the same shall be understood to include and to apply to several
persons or parties as well as to one person and to females as well as
males and to bodies corporate as well as individuals and to several
matters and things as well as one matter or thing.
B. The following terms, wherever used herein or referred to in this code,
shall have the respective meanings assigned to them, unless the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
C. Words not defined herein shall be given their common and ordinary
meaning.
BATHROOM — Any enclosed space which contains one or more of
the following, i.e., bathtub, shower, water closet, lavatory, water closet
compartment, washbowl sink or fixtures serving similar purposes.
BUILDING — Any building or structure, or part thereof, used for human
habitation, use or occupancy and includes any accessory buildings and
appurtenance belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms or any part thereof
located within a building and forming a single habitable unit for one
or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping,
cooking, eating and bathrooms.
EXTERIOR PROPERTY — The open area of a premises.
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable and other organic waste
resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of
food.
INFESTATION — The presence within or contiguous to a structure or
building of insects, rodents or other pests.
§ 204-1 CHATHAM CODE § 204-2
188:578
LODGING UNIT — A rented room or group of rooms containing no
cooking facilities, used for living purposes by a separate family or group
of persons living together or by a person living alone, within a building.
MIXED OCCUPANCY — Any building containing one or more dwelling
units or lodging units and also having a portion thereof devoted to
nonresidential uses.
NUISANCE —
OCCUPANT — Any person or persons living or sleeping in a building
or any part thereof, or having possession of a space within a building,
including the owner.
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care or control of a
premises, or part thereof, whether with or without the knowledge and
consent of the owner.
OWNER — Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a
legal or equitable interest in a property.
PERSON — The same meaning as defined in N.J.S.A. 1:1-2.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land structure and any buildings
or structures located thereon.
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE OFFICER — The Borough official who is
charged with administration and enforcement of this code, or any duly
authorized representative.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except
body wastes), including but not limited to garbage, rubbish, ashes,
street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and industrial
wastes. (See also the definitions of "garbage" and "rubbish.")
RUBBISH — Combustible and noncombustible waste material, except
garbage.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation whether installed on, above, or below
the surface of a parcel of land.
WINDOW — An opening in the wall or roof of a building for the
admission of light, which opening may be closed to the elements by
casements or sashes containing glass or other transparent or
translucent material.
WINDOW DISPLAY AREA — That area of a building in proximity to the
inner surface of a window which is designed or used for the viewing
Any public nuisance known in law or equity jurisprudence or as
provided by the statutes of the State of New Jersey or the
ordinances of the Borough of Chatham.
(1)
Physical conditions dangerous to human life or detrimental to
health of persons on or near the premises where the conditions
exist.
(2)
§ 204-2 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 204-2
188:579
§ 204-3. Enforcement.
of the interior and the display of items representative of any goods or
services pertaining to the business therein.
A. Property Maintenance Officer. The provisions of this code shall be
enforced by the Zoning Officer or his/her designated representative,
who shall be referred to herein as the "Property Maintenance Officer."
B. Enforcement procedure.
(1) Where a violation of this code is found to exist, a written notice
from the Property Maintenance Officer shall be served upon the
owner, operator or occupant who shall be responsible for
correcting such condition. The notice shall contain the following:
(a) An identification of the conditions constituting the violation(s)
and why the notice is being issued;
(b) The necessary corrective actions;
(c) A reasonable time period, not to exceed 60 days, to correct or
abate the violation;
(d) The right of the person in violation to request a hearing;
(e) A statement that the notice shall become a final order of the
Property Maintenance Officer in 10 days after service, unless a
hearing is requested, in writing, within that time period; and
(f) A statement that, if the owner, operator or occupant fails to
comply with the notice, the Property Maintenance Officer may
cause the removal and/or abatement of such violation(s) and
assess the cost of said removal or abatement against the
premises.
(2) The notice shall be served personally or by certified mail at the last
known address of the owner, operator or occupant alleged to be in
violation. Where it is ascertained that the owner, operator, or
occupant does not reside on the premises and the last known
address cannot be ascertained, the notice may be posted in a
conspicuous place on the outside front entrance of the affected
structure.
(3) Service upon any owner, operator, or occupant may also be
achieved by service of any notice upon a member of the family of
the owner, operator, or occupant of the age of 14 years or over then
residing at the residence of such owner, operator or occupant.
(4) After 10 days from the date of service of the notice, the notice shall
constitute a final order, unless any owner, operator, or occupant
alleged to be in violation request a hearing thereon before the
Borough Administrator or his/her designated representative by
§ 204-2 CHATHAM CODE § 204-3
188:580
serving a written request, in person or by certified mail, upon
the Property Maintenance Officer for such hearing. The request
for hearing shall state briefly the ground or reasons on which the
request for hearing is based and the factual matters contained in
the notice of violation that are disputed by the person alleged to
be in violation. Appeals will be granted strictly on factual matters.
Upon receipt of the request for hearing, the matter shall be set for
hearing within 30 days therefrom and with five days' notice to the
party alleged to be in violation.
(5) At the hearing provided for herein, the Borough Administrator or
his/her designated representative shall act as Hearing Officer and
consider the matter presented by the owner, operator, or occupant
alleged to be in violation, together with all other relevant evidence.
Within 10 days from the date of the hearing, the Borough
Administrator or his/her designated representative shall affirm,
modify or vacate the prior notice issued by the Property
Maintenance Officer in any manner deemed appropriate by him or
her and consistent with the provisions and enforcement of this
code.
(6) The Property Maintenance Officer may extend the time for
correction and abatement of any violation of this code for an
additional period of time not to exceed 30 days, except where major
capital improvement or renovations are involved, in which case the
time for completion may be extended for such a period of time as
the Property Maintenance Officer may deem reasonable and
adequate.
C. Inspections; violations and penalties.
(1) When the Property Maintenance Officer believes or has reason to
believe that violations of the provisions of this code exist, he shall
make or cause to be made inspections to determine the condition of
such structures and premises in order to safeguard the safety and
welfare of persons and property and fulfill the provisions of this
code.
(2) The Property Maintenance Officer is authorized to enter occupied
structures or premises at reasonable times with reasonable prior
notice to inspect subject to permission by the owner, operator or
occupant in control of the premises and constitutional restrictions
on unreasonable searches and seizures. If the Property
Maintenance Officer is denied entry to any structure or premises
after a request is made, the Property Maintenance Officer may
obtain an administrative search warrant or other authorization
from a court of competent jurisdiction to enter the structure or
premises and conduct the necessary and authorized search. Such
search warrant shall be requested from a court of competent
jurisdiction upon the submission of any photographs obtained from
public property or neighboring property and an affidavit stating the
§ 204-3 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 204-3
188:581
reasons a violation exists of this code along with any other
supporting evidence justifying the issuance of the search warrant.
(3) Abandoned structures and premises shall be subject to
unrestricted, complete and thorough Code inspections, including
legal right of entry into those structures found unsecured. All
abandoned structures and premises shall be subject to vigorous
Code enforcement and it shall be the duty of the Property
Maintenance Officer to give abandoned structures and lots priority
enforcement to ensure public safety and welfare.
(4) An owner, operator, or occupant who violates this code by failure to
comply with an order entered by the Property Maintenance Officer
shall appear before the Municipal Judge for a hearing and/or
imposition of fines, sanctions, sentence, or any combination
thereof. In addition, the Property Maintenance Officer may cause
the removal and/or abatement of the violation(s), and the cost of
said removal or abatement shall be assessed against the property
as provided herein.
(5) Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Property Maintenance Officer
may also maintain an action or proceeding in a court of competent
jurisdiction to recover the costs of the removal and/or abatement
and/or compel compliance with or restrain by injunction the
violation of the Code.
(6) Each violation of a different section of this code shall constitute a
separate and distinct violation independent of any other section.
Each day's failure to comply with any provision of this code shall
constitute a separate violation.
D. Withholding of strict enforcement. The Property Maintenance Officer
shall have the power to withhold strict enforcement of this code upon
written application therefor by an owner, operator, or occupant after
making a determination that:
(1) Any variation or modification of a structure or use approved by the
Property Maintenance Officer is consistent with the intent and
purpose of this code and will not detrimentally affect the health or
safety of the owners, operators or occupants of the premises or the
health, safety or welfare of same or the owners, operators or
occupants of adjacent premises or of the Borough;
(2) Strict enforcement would constitute an undue and unnecessary
hardship on the owner, operator or occupant because it would
compel expenditures for the premises which would be substantially
disproportionate to any benefit to the health, safety or welfare that
might be derived therefrom; and
(3) The owner, operator or occupant is without any practical or feasible
means to comply with the strict provisions of this code.
§ 204-3 CHATHAM CODE § 204-4
188:582
§ 204-4. Exterior maintenance.
A. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner, operator or
occupant of all residential, nonresidential or mixed-use occupancy
premises to maintain the exterior of such premises in accordance with
the provisions hereinafter set forth.
B. The exterior of the premises and all structures thereon shall be
maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition and shall be kept free
of all nuisances and any hazards to the safety of occupants, pedestrians
and other persons utilizing the premises. It shall be the duty of the
owner, operator or occupant to keep the premises free from nuisances,
unsanitary conditions and hazards, which include but are not limited to
the following:
(1) Rubbish: brush, weeds, broken glass, stumps, roots, obnoxious
growths, filth, garbage, trash, refuse and debris;
(2) Natural growth: dead and dying trees or other natural growth that,
by reason of rotting or deteriorating condition or storm damage
within 50 feet of a structure on an adjacent property or public
right-of-way, constitutes a hazard to persons or structures in the
vicinity thereof;
(3) Ground surface hazards and unsanitary conditions: holes,
excavations (except in areas of active construction), breaks,
projections, obstructions, icy conditions, and uncleared snow which
are accessible to and are used by the general public;
(4) Dead and dying trees and limbs or other natural growth that, by
reason of rotting or deteriorating conditions or storm damage,
constitute a hazard and/or a potential hazard to persons in the
vicinity thereof. Trees shall be kept pruned and trimmed to prevent
such conditions;
(5) Loose and overhanging objects and accumulations of ice and snow
that, by reason of location above ground level, constitute a danger
of falling on persons in the vicinity thereof;
(6) Ground surface hazards or unsanitary conditions, holes,
excavations, breaks, projections, obstructions, icy conditions,
uncleared snow, excretions of pets and other animals on paths,
walks, driveways, parking lots and parking areas and other parts of
the premises which are accessible to and used by persons on the
premises. All such holes and excavations shall be filled and
repaired, walks and steps replaced and other conditions removed
where necessary to eliminate hazards or unsanitary conditions with
reasonable dispatch upon their discovery; and
(7) Sources of rodent harborage and infestation.
§ 204-4 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 204-4
188:583
C. The exterior of every structure or accessory structure, including fences,
roofs and gutters, shall be structurally sound and maintained in good
repair, and all surfaces thereof shall be kept painted, when necessary,
for the purpose of preservation and appearance. The same shall be
maintained free of broken glass, loose shingles, crumbling stone or
brick, excessive peeling paint or other conditions reflective of
deterioration or inadequate maintenance, to the end that the property
itself may be preserved, safety and fire hazards eliminated and the
adjoining properties and the neighborhood protected from blighting
influences.
D. Where exposed to public view, the landscaping of premises shall be
maintained in an orderly state with lawns and bushes trimmed and free
from becoming overgrown, littered and unsightly where such would
constitute a blighting effect, depreciating adjoining and nearby
property. Open areas shall be graded evenly to eliminate holes,
depressions, gullies, mounds, accumulations of debris, excavated
material or other unsightly or unsafe conditions.
E. All permanent signs exposed to public view shall be maintained in good
repair. Any sign that has weathered excessively or faded or the paint on
which has excessively peeled or cracked shall, with the supporting
members, be removed forthwith or put into a state of good repair. All
nonoperative or broken electrical signs shall be repaired or shall, with
their supporting members, be removed forthwith.
F. All windows exposed to public view shall be kept clean and free of
marks and foreign substances. Except when necessary in the course of
changing displays, no storage of materials, stock or inventory shall be
permitted in window display areas ordinarily exposed to public view
unless such areas are first screened by drapes, venetian blinds or other
means of making the windows nontransparent. All screening of
interiors shall be maintained in a clean and attractive manner and in
good state of repair.
G. Any awning or canopy and its accompanying structural members that
extend over any street, sidewalk or other portion of the premises shall
be maintained in good repair and shall be so maintained as to not
constitute a nuisance or a safety hazard. In the event that any such
awning or canopy is not properly maintained in accordance with the
foregoing, it shall, together with its supporting members, be removed
forthwith. In the event that any such awning or canopy is made of cloth,
plastic or of similar materials, said materials, where exposed to public
view, shall be maintained in good condition and shall not show evidence
of excessive weathering, discoloration, ripping, tearing or other
deterioration. Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize any
encroachment of an awning or canopy or its accompanying structural
members on streets, sidewalks or other parts of the public domain,
except as otherwise provided by the Borough Code.
§ 204-4 CHATHAM CODE § 204-4
188:584
§ 204-5. Maintenance of structural soundness.
H. No temporary painting scaffold or other temporary equipment used for
construction, repair or maintenance shall be permitted to remain in
place beyond a period of 10 days after erection or placement thereof
without permission of the Property Maintenance Officer.
I. Compost pile(s) must comply with the following standards:
(1) There shall be a limit of one compost pile on a premises. Any
additional compost piles must be approved by the Property
Maintenance Officer.
(2) Compost piles shall be located only in rear yards.
(3) Compost piles shall have no obnoxious odors.
(4) All compost piles shall be properly screened or fenced.
(5) All compost piles shall be maintained in such a manner as not to
create a nuisance or serve as harborage for insects and rodents as
defined in Section II, Subsection 2.1 of the Public Health Nuisance
Code of New Jersey (1953) as adopted by the Borough Code.
(6) Only vegetative yard waste (e.g., leaves, grass clippings, vegetative
garden debris) and vegetative kitchen waste (e.g., fruit and
vegetable scraps) shall be composted.
A. Every structure and accessory structure and every part thereof shall be
kept structurally sound and in a state of good repair to avoid safety,
health or fire hazards, including but not limited to the following:
(1) All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks, loose or rotting
materials; and maintained weatherproof and properly surface
coated where required to prevent deterioration. (IPMC).
(2) Every building shall be so maintained as to be weathertight and
watertight. All exposed surfaces thereof subject to deterioration
shall be protected against weathering by a protective coating
appropriate for the particular material involved, as needed.
(3) Basements, cellar and crawl spaces shall be free of moisture
resulting from seepage, and cross ventilation shall be required
where necessary to prevent accumulation of moisture and
dampness and shall be maintained at all times in a condition so as
to be smooth, clean, free from cracks, breaks and/or other hazards.
(4) All foundation walls shall be maintained plumb and free from open
cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as to
prevent the entry of rodents and other pests. (IPMC). Foundation
walls shall also be kept structurally safe and sound, free from
defects and damage and shall be capable of bearing imposed loads
safely.
§ 204-4 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 204-5
188:585
(5) All chimneys and flue and vent attachments thereto shall be
maintained structurally sound, free from defects and so maintained
as to perform capably at all times the functions for which they were
designed. Chimneys, flues, gas vents or other draft-producing
equipment shall provide sufficient draft to develop the rated
output, and the connected equipment shall be structurally safe,
durable, smoketight and capable of withstanding the action of flue
gases.
(6) Every exterior stairway, deck, porch and balcony and all
appurtenances attached thereto shall be maintained structurally
sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage and capable of
supporting the imposed loads. (IPMC).
(7) All exterior surfaces, including, but not limited to, doors, door and
window frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies, decks and
fences, shall be maintained in good condition. Exterior wood
surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from
the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or
treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated
and surfaces repainted. All siding and masonry joints as well as
those between the building envelope and the perimeter of windows,
doors, and skylights shall be maintained weather-resistant and
watertight. All metal surfaces subject to rust or corrosion shall be
coated to inhibit such rust and corrosion, and all surfaces with rust
or corrosion shall be stabilized and coated to inhibit future rust and
corrosion. Oxidation stains shall be removed from exterior
surfaces. Surfaces designed for stabilization by oxidation are
exempt from this requirement. (IPMC).
(8) All structural members shall be maintained free from deterioration,
and shall be capable of safely supporting the imposed dead and live
loads. (IPMC).
(9) The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and not have defects that
admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent dampness
or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the structure.
Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in good
repair and free from obstructions. Roof water shall not be
discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance. (IPMC).
(10) All cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings and
similar decorative features shall be maintained in good repair with
proper anchorage and in a safe condition. (IPMC).
(11) All overhang extensions, including, but not limited to, canopies,
marquees, signs, metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes and
exhaust ducts shall be maintained in good repair and be properly
anchored so as to be kept in a sound condition. When required, all
exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the
elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of
§ 204-5 CHATHAM CODE § 204-5
188:586
§ 204-6. Interior maintenance.
weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface
treatment. (IPMC).
(12) Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of
supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good
condition. (IPMC).
(13) Every window, skylight, door and frame shall be kept in sound
condition, good repair and weathertight.
(a) Glazing. All glazing materials shall be maintained free from
cracks and holes.
(b) Openable windows. Every window, other than a fixed window,
shall be easily openable and capable of being held in position
by window hardware. (IPMC).
(14) All exterior doors, door assemblies and hardware shall be
maintained in good condition. Locks at all entrances to dwelling
units, rooming units and guest rooms shall tightly secure the door.
(IPMC).
(15) Every basement window that is openable shall be supplied with
rodent shields, storm windows or other approved protection
against the entry of rodents. (IPMC).
(16) Doors, windows or hatchways for dwelling units, room units or
housekeeping units shall be provided with devices designed to
provide security for the occupants and property within. (IPMC).
A. The interior of a structure and equipment therein shall be maintained in
good repair, structurally sound and in a clean and sanitary condition.
B. All structural members shall be maintained structurally sound, free
from deterioration and capable of safely bearing imposed loads.
C. All interior surfaces, including windows and doors, shall be maintained
in good, clean and sanitary condition. Peeling, chipping, flaking or
abraded paint shall be repaired, removed or covered. Cracked or loose
plaster, decayed wood and other defective surface conditions shall be
corrected. (IPMC).
D. Every stair, ramp, landing, balcony, porch, deck or other walking
surface shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair. (IPMC).
E. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of
supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good
condition. (IPMC).
F. The floors, interior walls and ceilings of every structure shall be
structurally sound and maintained in good repair and in a clean and
§ 204-5 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 204-6
188:587
§ 204-7. Residential dwelling units.
With respect to residential structures and premises, the New Jersey State
Housing Code, N.J.A.C. 5:28 et seq., as amended from time to time and
as approved by the Department of Community Affairs and filed in the
Secretary of State's office, is hereby accepted, adopted and established
as a standard to be used in determining whether residential structures,
premises or dwellings in this municipality are safe, sanitary and fit for
human habitation. A copy of the New Jersey State Housing Code is annexed
to this code and copies of the same have been placed on file in the office
of the Borough Clerk and are available to all persons desiring to use and
examine the same.
§ 204-8. Weeds and brush.
sanitary condition. Floors shall be considered to be structurally sound
when capable of safely bearing normal imposed loads. Walls and
ceilings shall be considered to be in good repair when they are
reasonably free from cracks, breaks, loose or defective plaster,
sheetrock, wallboard or particleboard, excessive blistering paint and
similar conditions.
G. Bathrooms shall be kept in a dry, clean and sanitary condition at all
times.
H. Garbage and rubbish shall be disposed of in the following manner:
(1) Garbage and rubbish must be disposed of in a clean and sanitary
manner.
(2) Garbage and rubbish must be stored in watertight nonleaking
receptacles, or such other material approved by the sanitarian, and
covered with tight-fitting lids until removed from the premises for
disposal.
(3) Receptacles must be kept in areas of smooth, easily cleanable
construction.
(4) Receptacles for garbage and rubbish located outside of a structure
or building shall be maintained free of litter. Any structure or fence
which screens said receptacles must be maintained in good repair
and in a safe sanitary condition.
(5) Garbage and rubbish must be disposed of using Borough-approved
garbage bags.
A. The presence upon lands lying within the corporate limits of the
Borough of brush, weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps, roots,
obnoxious growth, filth, garbage, trash and debris is decreed to be
detrimental to public health, safety and the general welfare and likely
to present a fire hazard.
§ 204-6 CHATHAM CODE § 204-8
188:588
§ 204-9. Abatement of nuisances; correction of defects.
This section is enacted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12f which authorizes
the Borough to, by resolution of the Borough Council, abate a nuisance,
correct a defect, or put the premises in proper condition so as to comply
with the requirements of the Borough Code or state law applicable thereto,
at the cost of the owner, operator or occupant, and expend municipal funds
for such purpose and charge the same against the premises. The amount
thereof as determined by the Borough Council to be reasonable and just
shall be a lien against the premises and shall be added to and become and
form part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon the premises, the
same to bear interest at the same rate as taxes, and shall be collected and
enforced by the same officers and in the same manner as taxes.
§ 204-10. Unfit for habitation or use.
B. The owner, operator or occupant of property lying within the corporate
limits of the Borough is required to remove or cause to be removed from
such lands any brush, weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps, roots,
obnoxious growth, filth, garbage, trash and debris within 10 days after
receipt by such owner, operator or occupant of written notice from the
Property Maintenance Officer.
C. Notice to the owner, operator or occupant to cause the removal of any
brush, weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growth,
filth, garbage, trash and debris shall be given by the Property
Maintenance Officer and may be served upon any such owner, operator
or occupant either personally or by certified mail. The notice shall, in
addition to requiring the removal aforesaid, advise the owner, operator
or occupant of the lands to which such notice refers that failure to
accomplish such removal within the time stated therein will result in
removal by or under the direction of the Property Maintenance Officer
and the cost of such removal shall become a lien upon the lands and be
collected as provided by N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.14 and herein.
D. Whenever the owner, operator or occupant of such lands within the
Borough fails to remove any brush, weeds, dead and dying trees,
stumps, roots, obnoxious growth, filth, garbage, trash and debris from
such lands within the time prescribed by the notice required pursuant
to this code, such removal shall be accomplished by or under the
direction of the Property Maintenance Officer. An accurate record of
the cost of such removal shall be determined by the Property
Maintenance Officer, who shall certify the cost thereof to the Borough
Council. The amount so charged shall forthwith become a lien upon
such lands and shall be added to and become and form part of the taxes
next to be assessed and levied upon such lands, the same to bear
interest at the same rate as taxes, and shall be collected and enforced
by the same officers and in the same manner as taxes.
§ 204-8 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 204-10
188:589
A. The Borough Administrator, or his/her designee, is hereby designated
and appointed as the Public Officer of the Borough of Chatham for
purposes of this section. The Public Officer shall exercise the powers
and duties prescribed by this chapter pursuant to the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3 et seq.
B. It is hereby found and declared that the existence or occupation of any
building(s), or parts thereof, lying within the corporate limits of the
Borough, which are so old, dilapidated, or have become so out of repair
as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use are inimical to the welfare and
dangerous and injurious to the health and safety of the people of this
Borough, and a public necessity exists for the repair, closing or
demolition of such building(s), or parts thereof.
C. Whenever a petition is filed with the Public Officer by a public authority
or by at least five residents of the municipality, charging that any
building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use, or whenever
it appears to the Public Officer that any building is unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use, the Public Officer shall, if his
preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and
cause to be served upon the owner and any parties in interest in such
building a complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing
a notice that a hearing will be held before the Public Officer or his
designated agent, at a place therein fixed, not less than seven days nor
more than 30 days after the service of said complaint; and that the
owner and parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to
the complaint and to appear in person or otherwise give testimony at
the place and time fixed in the complaint; and that the strict rules of
evidence prevailing in the courts of New Jersey shall not be controlling
at the hearing.
D. The Public Officer may determine that a building is unfit for human
habitation, occupancy or use if he finds that conditions exist in such
building which are dangerous or injurious to the health or safety of the
occupants of such building, the occupants of neighboring buildings or
other residents of the Borough of Chatham, including but not limited to
defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other
calamities, lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities,
dilapidation, disrepair, structural defects, uncleanliness and failure to
comply with the requirements of this code or the certificate of
occupancy.
E. If, after notice and hearing as set forth herein, the Public Officer
determines that the building under consideration is unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use, he/she shall state in writing his findings
of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be
served upon the owner thereof and parties in interest an order
requiring the repair, alteration or improvement of said building to be
made by the owner within a reasonable period of time as established by
the Public Officer, but not to exceed 30 days, or permitting the owner, at
§ 204-10 CHATHAM CODE § 204-10
188:590
his option, to vacate or have said building vacated and closed within the
time set forth in the order.
F. If, however, the building is in such a condition as to make it dangerous
to the health and safety of persons on or near the premises and the
owner fails to repair, alter or improve said building within the time
specified in the order, then the owner shall be required to remove or
demolish said building within a reasonable period of time as established
by the Public Officer, but not to exceed 30 days, as specified in the order
of removal.
G. If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve or,
at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the building, the Public
Officer may cause such building to be repaired, altered or improved or
to be vacated and closed.
H. If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the
building, the Public Officer may cause such building to be removed or
demolished or may contract for the removal or demolition thereof after
advertisement for and receipt of bids therefor.
I. The cost of the filing of legal papers, expert witnesses' fees, search fees
and advertising charges incurred in the course of any proceeding taken
under this act determined in favor of the municipality and such cost of
such repairs, alterations, improvements or the removal or demolition of
the building or any part(s) thereof, if any, or the amount of the balance
thereof remaining after deduction of the sum, if any, realized from the
sale of materials derived from such building or from any contract for
removal or demolition thereof shall be a municipal lien against the real
property upon which such cost was incurred. If the building is removed
or demolished by order of the Public Officer, he shall sell the materials
of such building. There shall be credited against the cost of the removal
or demolition thereof the proceeds of any sale of such materials or any
sum derived from any contract for the removal or demolition of the
building. If there are no such credits or if the sum total of such costs
exceeds the total of such credits, a detailed statement of the aforesaid
costs and the amount so due shall be filed with the Tax Assessor or
other custodian of the records of tax liens, and a copy thereof shall be
forthwith forwarded to the owner by registered mail. If the total of the
credits exceed such costs, the balance remaining shall be deposited in
the Superior Court by the Public Officer and shall be secured in such
manner as may be directed by such court and shall be disbursed
according to the order or judgment of the court to the persons found to
be entitled thereto by final order or judgment of such court.
J. Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way
the Borough's authority to define and declare nuisances and to cause
their removal or abatement, by summary proceedings or otherwise.
K. Any owner or party in interest may, within 60 days from the date of the
filing of the lien certificate set forth in Subsection A above, proceed in a
§ 204-10 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 204-10
188:591
§ 204-11. Maintenance and repair of residential properties under
foreclosure. [Added 4-11-2017 by Ord. No. 17-05]
summary manner in the Superior Court to contest the reasonableness
of the amount or the accuracy of the costs set forth in the municipal lien
certificate.
L. The Public Officer is further hereby authorized to exercise such powers
as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the
purposes and provisions of this chapter, including the following powers
in addition to others herein granted:
(1) To investigate the building conditions in the municipality in order
to determine which buildings therein are unfit for human habitation
or occupancy or use.
(2) To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence.
(3) To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations,
provided that such entry shall be made in such a manner as to
cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in
possession.
(4) To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees
as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
(5) To delegate any of his functions and powers under this chapter to
such officers and agents as he may designate.
A. A creditor filing a summons and complaint in a foreclosure action shall
be responsible for the care, maintenance, security, and upkeep of the
exterior of vacant and abandoned residential properties on which a
foreclosure action has been filed, and, if the creditor is located outside
the State of New Jersey, shall be responsible for appointing an in-state
representative or agent to act for the foreclosing creditor.
B. A creditor serving a summons and complaint in an action to foreclose on
a mortgage on residential property in the Borough of Chatham shall,
within 10 days of serving the summons and complaint, notify the
Borough Clerk that a summons and complaint in an action to foreclose
on a mortgage has been filed against the subject property. The notice
shall contain the name and contact information for the representative of
the creditor who is responsible for receiving complaints of property
maintenance and code violations. The notice may contain information
about more than one property. The notice may be provided by mail or
electronic communication, at the discretion of the Borough Clerk,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51 et seq.
C. In the event the creditor is located outside the State of New Jersey, the
notice shall designate an in-state representative or agent to act for the
creditor and shall provide the full name and contact information of the
§ 204-10 CHATHAM CODE § 204-11
188:592
in-state representative responsible for the care, maintenance, security
and upkeep of the exterior of the property. A creditor located outside
the State of New Jersey found by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be in violation of this requirement shall be subject to a fine of $2,500
for each day of the violation, commencing on the day after the ten-day
period for providing notice to the Borough Clerk that a summons and
complaint in a foreclosure action has been served.
D. The Property Maintenance Officer, or his/her designee, shall be
authorized to issue a notice to the creditor filing the summons and
complaint in a foreclosure action, or the representative or agent of any
creditor located outside the State of New Jersey, as applicable, if the
Property Maintenance Officer determines that the creditor has failed to
provide for the care, maintenance, security and upkeep of the exterior
of the property on which a foreclosure action has been filed. The notice
shall provide a period of 30 days from receipt of the notice to correct
the violation, or within 10 days of receipt of the notice if the violation
presents an imminent threat to public health and safety. The issuance of
this notice shall constitute proof that a property is "vacant and
abandoned" for purposes of N.J.S.A. 2A:50-73. A creditor found by any
court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the requirement to
provide for the care, maintenance, security, and upkeep of the exterior
of vacant and abandoned residential properties on which a foreclosure
action has been filed pursuant to this section shall be subject to a fine of
$1,500 for each day of the violation, commencing 31 days following
receipt of the notice, except a violation that presents an imminent risk
to public health and safety, in which cases any fines shall commence 11
days following receipt of the notice.
E. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51 et seq., if the owner of a
residential property vacates or abandons any property on which a
foreclosure proceeding has been initiated, or if a residential property
becomes vacant at any point subsequent to the creditor's filing of the
summons and complaint in an action to foreclose on a mortgage against
the subject property, but prior to vesting of title in the creditor or any
other third party, and the exterior of the property is found to be a
nuisance or in violation of any applicable state law or Borough
ordinance, the Property Maintenance Officer, or his/her designee, shall
notify the creditor or the representative or agent of any creditor located
outside the State of New Jersey, as applicable, which shall have the
responsibility to abate or correct the violation in the same manner and
to the same extent as the title owner of the property, to the standard
and specification required by state law or Borough ordinance. The
notice shall include a description of the condition which gave rise to the
violation with the notice of violation, and shall provide a period of 30
days of the creditor's receipt of the notice for the creditor to remedy the
violation. If the creditor fails to remedy the violation within that time
period, the Borough may impose penalties allowed for the violation of
its ordinances pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.
§ 204-11 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 204-11
188:593
Chapter 208
PUBLIC NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering and handbills — See Ch. 173.
Noise — See Ch. 184.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 204.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 291.
F. If the Borough expends public funds in order to abate a nuisance or
correct a violation on a residential property in situations in which the
creditor was given notice pursuant to the § 204-11D, but failed to abate
the nuisance or correct the violation as directed, the Borough shall have
the same recourse against the creditor as it would have against the title
owner of the property, including, but not limited to, the recourse
provided under § 42 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-100).
§ 204-11 CHATHAM CODE § 204-11
188:594
ARTICLE I
(Reserved)91
§ 208-1. through § 208-3. (Reserved)
91.Editor’s Note: Former Art. I, Public Health Nuisance Code, adopted 4-25-2005 by Ord. No.
05-14, was repealed 3-14-2013 by Ord. No. BOH 13-02 and 3-25-2013 by Ord. No. 13-06.
See now Ch. 291, Nuisances, Public Health.
§ 208-1 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 208-1
188:595

ARTICLE II
Nuisance Prohibited — Noise
[Adopted 2-13-2006 by Ord. No. 06-02]
§ 208-4. Noise prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for a person to make, continue or cause to be made or
continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which does
or is likely to annoy, disturb, injure or endanger the comfort, repose, health,
peace or safety of others.
§ 208-5. Definition of noise.
Without intending to limit the generality of § 208-4, the following acts are
hereby directed to be examples of loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise
in violation of this section:
A. Radios; televisions; phonographs. The playing, use or operation of any
radio receiving set, television, musical instrument, phonograph or other
machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such
manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of neighboring
inhabitants or with louder volume than is necessary for convenient
hearing for persons who are in the room, vehicle or chamber in which
the machine or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners. The
operation of such a set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device so
that it is clearly audible at a distance of 100 feet from the building,
structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence
of a violation of this subsection.
B. Yelling; shouting. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the
public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m., or at any time or place, which annoys or disturbs the quiet,
comfort or repose of persons in any office, dwelling, hotel, motel or
other type of residence or of any persons in the vicinity. Yelling,
shouting, hooting, whistling or singing that is clearly audible at a
distance of 100 feet from the person making the noise shall be prima
facie evidence of a violation of this subsection.
C. Animals; birds. The keeping of animals or birds which, by causing
frequent or long-continued noise, disturbs the comfort or repose of any
person in the vicinity. Noise from an animal or bird that is clearly
audible at a distance of 100 feet from the animal or bird making the
noise shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this subsection.
Nothing herein contained is intended to apply to a dog pound or kennel
licensed in accordance with Chapter 79, Animal Control.
D. Horns. The sounding of a horn or warning device on an automobile,
motorcycle, bus or other vehicle except when required by law, or when
necessary to give timely warning of the approach of the vehicle, or as a
warning of impending danger to persons driving other vehicles or to
persons on the street. No person shall sound a horn or warning device
§ 208-4 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 208-5
188:597
§ 208-6. Enforcement.
The Construction Code Official or his authorized representative and the
Chatham Borough Police Department are hereby authorized to enforce the
provisions of this Article II.
§ 208-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person failing to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, § 1-14.
The continuation of such violation for each successive day shall constitute
a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or permitting the
continuation of the violation may be punished as provided above for each
separate offense.
§ 208-8. Severability.
If any section, sentence or provision of this article is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or
invalidate the remainder of this Article II.
on an automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle which emits an
unreasonably loud or harsh sound or for an unnecessary or
unreasonable amount of time.
§ 208-5 CHATHAM CODE § 208-8
188:598
ARTICLE III
Hours of Construction, Power Equipment Use
[Adopted 2-13-2006 by Ord. No. 06-02]
§ 208-9. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate the hours of construction and the
use of power equipment out of doors in order to protect and promote the
health, safety and welfare of the public in the Borough of Chatham.
§ 208-10. Activities restricted.
§ 208-11. Hours restricted activities permitted.
The activities restricted by this chapter shall be permitted only during the
following hours:
§ 208-12. Exceptions.
The restrictions of this chapter shall not apply to the following:
A. The construction, maintenance, repair, alteration or demolition of any
building or structure, or the laying of any pavement, and including but
not limited to the making of an excavation, movement of earth, clearing
of land and loading or unloading of construction material, equipment or
supplies, shall be unlawful except as specified in this article.
B. Operating any power equipment, including but not limited to a power
saw, hammer, sander, drill, grinder, lawn mower, leaf blower, thatcher,
generator, air compressor or like power equipment shall be unlawful
except as specified in this chapter.
A. Weekdays: 8:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
B. Saturdays: 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
C. Sundays or federal holidays: 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. by occupants of the
premises only.
A. Activities confined within a wholly enclosed building or structure.
B. Activities conducted pursuant to and within the terms of a permit
issued by the Borough Administrator where he finds the public welfare
will be enhanced by the work or will be harmed by the failure to
perform the work at the times indicated therein.
C. Activities necessary to prevent injury to persons or property, including
snow removal.
D. Activities conducted by or for any government unit or agency.
§ 208-9 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 208-13
188:599
§ 208-13. Enforcement.
The Construction Code Official or his authorized representative and the
Chatham Borough Police Department are hereby authorized to enforce the
provisions of this Article III.
§ 208-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person failing to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, § 1-14.
The continuation of such violation for each successive day shall constitute
a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or permitting the
continuation of the violation may be punished as provided above for each
separate offense.
§ 208-15. Severability.
If any section, sentence or provision of this article is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or
invalidate the remainder of this Article III.
§ 208-13 CHATHAM CODE § 208-15
188:600
Chapter 217
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 111.
Sewers and septic systems — See Ch. 165,
§ 165-86.
Storm sewer system — See Ch. 237.
Water — See Ch. 267.
§ 208-15 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 208-15
188:601

ARTICLE I
Sewer Systems
[Adopted 6-19-1911 and 6-27-1988 (Ch. 118, Arts. I and II, of the
1975 Code); amended in their entirety 4-25-2005 by Ord. No. 05-09]
§ 217-1. Title.
This article may be cited as the "Sewer System Ordinance of the Borough of
Chatham."
§ 217-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of oxygen,
expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l), utilized in the biochemical
oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure for five
days at 20° C. The standard laboratory procedure shall be that found
in the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water
and Wastewater"; ASTM Standards, Part 23, Water; Atmospheric Analysis
(1972); EPA Methods for Chemical Analysis of Water and Wastes
(1971).[Amended 11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 09-21]
BRANCH SEWER — See "sewers, type of."[Added 11-23-2009 by Ord.
No. 09-21]
CATEGORICAL STANDARD — Any limitation upon the discharge of
pollutants adopted by the United States Environmental Protection Agency
pursuant to Section 307(b) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as
amended by the Clean Water Act of 1977.[Added 11-23-2009 by Ord. No.
09-21]
CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD) — A measure of the oxygen required
to oxidize all compounds in water, both organic and inorganic (in milligrams
per liter, mg/l) in a waste sample under specific conditions of an oxidizing
agent, temperature, and time as determined by analytical procedures set
forth in the "Chemical Analysis of Water and Wastes" (USEPA, Office of
Technology Transfer, Washington, D.C., March 1983.[Added 11-23-2009
by Ord. No. 09-21]
COMPOSITE SAMPLE — See "samples, types of."[Added 11-23-2009 by
Ord. No. 09-21]
DISCHARGE — The action of pumping, leaching, releasing, spilling, leaking,
pouring, emitting, emptying, or dumping, and also means the causing of
permitting of any of the aforesaid.[Added 11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 09-21]
DISPOSAL — The storage, treatment, utilization, or processing and final
disposition of septage.[Added 11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 09-21]
ENGINEER — The Borough Engineer, or his authorized deputy, inspector,
agent or representative.
§ 217-1 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 217-2
188:603
FLOOD AREA — All land along the Passaic River, or any tributaries thereof,
which are subject to surface flooding.
FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS — Those establishments primarily engaged in
activities of preparing, serving, or otherwise making available for
consumption by the public, such as a restaurant, commercial kitchen,
caterer, hotel, school, hospital, prison, correctional facility, and care
institution. These establishments use one or more of the following food
preparation activities: cooking by frying (all methods), baking (all methods),
grilling, sauteing, rotisserie cooking, broiling (all methods), boiling,
blanching, roasting, toasting, or poaching. Also included are infrared
heating, searing, barbecuing, and any other food preparation activity that
produces a hot, nondrinkable food product in or on a receptacle that
requires washing.[Added 11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 09-21]
GARBAGE — Includes, severally and collectively, garbage, offal and swill.
It includes, but not by way of limitation, solid waste resulting from the
preparation, cooking, dispensing or consumption of food or from the
handling, storage and sale of vegetables and other produce.
GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY — A federal, state, interstate agency, county or
municipal government or school district, whose jurisdiction is partially or
entirely within the state.[Added 11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 09-21]
GRAB SAMPLE — See "samples, types of."[Added 11-23-2009 by Ord.
No. 09-21]
HAZARDOUS POLLUTANT[Added 11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 09-21] —
HEALTH OFFICER — The Borough Health Officer, or his authorized deputy,
inspector, agent or representative.
HOUSE SERVICE CONNECTION — The piping of a drainage system which
receives the discharge from soil and waste pipes inside the walls of the
building and conveys it to the cleanout.
A. Any toxic pollutant; or
Any hazardous substance as defined by the New Jersey Spill
Compensation and Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.11 et seq.; or
B.
Any substance regulated as a pesticide under the Federal Insecticide,
Fungicide and Rodenticide Act, 7 U.S.C. § 136 et seq.; or
C.
Any substance the use or manufacture of which is prohibited under the
Federal Toxic Substances Control Act, 15 U.S.C. § 2601 et seq.; or
D.
Any substance identified as a known carcinogen by the International
Agency for Research on Cancer; or
E.
Any hazardous waste designated pursuant to the New Jersey Solid
Waste Management Act, N.J.S.A. 13:1E-1 et seq., or the Federal
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq.
F.
§ 217-2 CHATHAM CODE § 217-2
188:604
IMMEDIATE ACCESS — Access without delay but in no event beyond 10
minutes from the time the request for access is made by authorized Joint
Meeting personnel to any employee of the user.[Added 11-23-2009 by
Ord. No. 09-21]
INDIRECT DISCHARGE — Any discharge into Joint Meeting's domestic
treatment works.[Added 11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 09-21]
INDUSTRIAL USER — A source of discharge of industrial waste.[Added
11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 09-21]
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing
processes, as defined in the 1972 Edition of the "Standard Industrial
Classification Manual," as distinct from sanitary sewage. Industrial wastes
include the leachate from landfills or other contaminated areas.[Amended
11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 09-21]
INHIBITORY POLLUTANT — Any pollutant which, when entering a
domestic treatment works, in sufficient quantity will interfere with the
treatment works' physical, chemical, and/or biological processes.[Added
11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 09-21]
INTERFERENCE — A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, both inhibits or disrupts the
POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use
or disposal; and, therefore, is a cause of a violation of any requirement
of the POTW's NJPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or
duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal
in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or
permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations):
Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA)
[including Title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act (RCRA)], and including state regulations contained in
any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the
SWDA, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, and the Marine
Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act.[Added 11-23-2009 by Ord.
No. 09-21]
JOINT MEETING — The legal entity which owns and operates the Molitor
Water Pollution Control Facility, also known as the Madison-Chatham Joint
Meeting.[Added 11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 09-21]
LOCAL LIMITS — Any restriction on quantities, quality, or concentrations of
pollutants discharged into a local agency's treatment works, developed to
prevent upset, interference, or pass through of pollutants to the treatment
works, and to protect worker health and safety, and protect/improve the
quality of the sludge generated by the treatment works.[Added
11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 09-21]
MCJM — See Joint Meeting.[Added 11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 09-21]
MG/L — Abbreviation for milligrams per liter.[Added 11-23-2009 by Ord.
No. 09-21]
§ 217-2 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 217-2
188:605
NATIONAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD — "National pretreatment
standard," "pretreatment standard," or "standard" means any regulation
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the USEPA in
accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Clean Water Act, which
applies to industrial users. This term includes prohibitive discharge limits
established pursuant to 40 CFR § 403.5.[Added 11-23-2009 by Ord. No.
09-21]
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or
other body or surface or ground water.
NEW JERSEY POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM or
NJPDES — The New Jersey system for the issuance of permits pursuant to
the Water Pollution Control Act.[Added 11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 09-21]
NJDEP — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.[Added
11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 09-21]
NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperature
for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact
with any raw material, intermediate product (other than heat), or finished
product. Non-contact cooling water may, however, contain algaecides, or
biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat exchangers and/or
corrosion inhibitors.[Added 11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 09-21]
OIL AND GREASE — Includes the non-petroleum-based pollutants of animal
and vegetable origin, and petroleum-based pollutants, which are analyzed
by a USEPA and/or New Jersey State Certified Laboratory approved method
for oil and grease referenced in 40 CFR Part 136, as amended, including
subsequent amendments, and the petroleum-based pollutants analyzed by a
USEPA and/or New Jersey State Certified Laboratory approved method for
petroleum hydrocarbons cited in Methods for Chemical Analysis of Water
and Wastes, USEPA, as amended.[Added 11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 09-21]
OIL, GREASE, AND SAND INTERCEPTOR OR TRAPS — A device designed
and installed so as to separate and retain deleterious, hazardous, or
undesirable matter from sanitary waste while permitting sanitary sewerage
or liquid wastes to discharge into the drainage system by gravity.[Added
11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 09-21]
OUTFALL SEWER — See "sewers, types of."[Added 11-23-2009 by Ord.
No. 09-21]
PASS-THROUGH — A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the
United States or waters of the state in quantities or concentrations which,
alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources,
is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NJPDES permit
(including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation).[Added
11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 09-21]
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, partnership, corporation,
association, group, or society.[Added 11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 09-21]
PETROLEUM HYDROCARBONS or PETROLEUM-BASED OIL AND
GREASE — The petroleum-based pollutants analyzed by an EPA and/or
§ 217-2 CHATHAM CODE § 217-2
188:606
New Jersey State Certified Laboratory-approved method for petroleum
hydrocarbons cited in Methods for Chemical Analysis of Water and Wastes,
USEPA, as amended.[Added 11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 09-21]
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion concentration.
The concentration is the weight of the hydrogen-ions in grams, per liter of
solution.[Amended 11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 09-21]
POLLUTION — The condition of water resulting from the introduction
therein of substances of any kind and in quantities rendering it detrimental
or immediately or potentially dangerous to public health, or unfit for public
or commercial use.[Added 11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 09-21]
POTW or PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS — Any device or system
used in the storage and treatment (including recycling and reclamation) of
municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature which is owned by a
state, municipality, or political subdivision. This definition includes sewers,
pipes, or other conveyances if they convey wastewater to a POTW providing
treatment.[Added 11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 09-21]
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise
introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration may
be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes, process changes,
or by other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR § 403.6(d). Appropriate
pretreatment technology includes control equipment, such as equalization
tanks or facilities, for protection against surges or slug loadings that might
interfere with or otherwise be incompatible with the POTW. However, where
wastewater from a regulated process is mixed in an equalization facility
with unregulated wastewater or with wastewater from another regulated
process, the effluent from the equalization facility must meet an adjusted
pretreatment limit calculated in accordance with 40 CFR § 403.6(e).[Added
11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 09-21]
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment
standard, imposed on an industrial user.[Added 11-23-2009 by Ord. No.
09-21]
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS — All applicable federal rules implementing
Section 307 of the Clean Water Act, as well as any nonconflicting state or
local standards. In cases of conflicting standards or regulations, the more
stringent thereof shall apply.[Added 11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 09-21]
PRIVATE SEWER SYSTEM or PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM — A
sanitary sewer system owned or controlled by the Borough.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production
or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct,
or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is not limited
to, leachate and cooling water other than non-contact cooling water. This
definition includes the terms "commercial wastewater" and "industrial
§ 217-2 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 217-2
188:607
wastewater" as used in 40 CFR Part 503.[Added 11-23-2009 by Ord. No.
09-21]
PUBLIC SEWER — See "sewers, types of."[Added 11-23-2009 by Ord. No.
09-21]
RADIOACTIVE WASTE — Any waste which contains radioactive material
in concentrations which exceed those listed in 10 CFR, Part 20, Appendix
B, Table II, Column 2, or exceed the "Criteria for Identifying and Applying
Characteristics of Hazardous Waste and for Listing Hazardous Waste" in 40
CFR, Part 261, whichever is applicable.[Added 11-23-2009 by Ord. No.
09-21]
SAMPLES, TYPES OF[Added 11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 09-21] —
SANITARY SEWAGE — Means any liquid waste containing animal or
vegetable matter in suspension or solution, or the water-carried wastes
resulting from the discharge of water closets, laundry tubs, washing
machines, sinks, dishwashers, or any other source of water-carried waste
of human origin or containing putrescible material. The term specifically
excludes industrial, hazardous, or toxic wastes and materials.[Added
11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 09-21]
SANITARY SEWER — See "sewers, types of."[Amended 11-23-2009 by
Ord. No. 09-21]
SEPTAGE — The liquid and solid material pumped from a septic tank,
cesspool, or similar domestic sewage treatment system, or a holding tank
when the system is cleaned or maintained.[Added 11-23-2009 by Ord.
No. 09-21]
SEWAGE — Any wastes, including wastes from humans, households,
commercial establishments, and industries that are discharged to or
otherwise enter a sewage treatment works.[Added 11-23-2009 by Ord.
No. 09-21]
SEWAGE LATERAL — The extension of the house service connection from
the street curbline to the street sewer.
SEWAGE PIPE — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — Any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating sewage.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit that carries or is intended to carry wastewater
or drainage water.[Added 11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 09-21]
GRAB SAMPLE — An individual sample collected over a time period of
less than 15 minutes.
A.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE — A sample composed of several discrete
samples combined in a known proportion. For wastewater monitoring,
a composite sample is a sample composed of several discrete samples
collected at equal time intervals, or proportionally to the flow rate of
the discharge.
B.
§ 217-2 CHATHAM CODE § 217-2
188:608
SEWERAGE SYSTEM — Any facility or extension thereof designed to
provide for the collection, treatment, or discharge of sewage. Also, see
"sewers, types of."[Added 11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 09-21]
SEWERAGE TREATMENT PLANT — An arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating of sewage other than that used on and for
a property under one ownership as an individual sanitary disposal
system.[Added 11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 09-21]
SEWER DEPARTMENT — The division of the Chatham Borough Department
of Public Works responsible for construction, engineering and maintenance
of the Borough sewer utility.
SEWERS, TYPES OF — An underground pipe or drain used to carry off
water and waste matter as follows:[Added 11-23-2009 by Ord. No.
09-21]
SEWER SYSTEM — All trunks, sub-trunks, sewers, interceptors, laterals,
branches, and all other sewer appurtenances, whether privately owned
or owned by the Borough of Madison, Borough of Chatham, or the Joint
Meeting, the sewage from which is delivered to the sewage treatment
plant.[Amended 11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 09-21]
SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of goods that have been shredded to such degree that all
particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing
in street sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER or SIU — Any user including, but not
limited to, any "significant industrial user" as defined in 40 CFR 403.3(t)
where:[Added 11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 09-21]
BRANCH SEWER — A sewer which receives wastewater from a
relatively small area and discharges into a main sewer.
A.
OUTFALL SEWER — A sewer which receives wastewater from a
collecting system or treatment plant and carries it to a point of final
discharge.
B.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer owned or controlled by the Joint Meeting, a
public utility, or other governmental agency.
C.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer that carries water-carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions.
D.
The user is subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR
403.6 and 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N;
A.
The user's average volume of process wastewater exceeds 25,000
gallons per day;
B.
The amount of BOD, COD or suspended solids in the industrial process
wastewater discharge exceeds the mass equivalent of 25,000 gallons
per day of the domestic waste;
C.
§ 217-2 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 217-2
188:609
SIGNIFICANT NON-COMPLIER, SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE or SNC
— Any person who commits any of the violations described below, unless the
NJDEP uses, on a case-by-case basis, a more stringent frequency or factor
of exceedance to determine a significant non-complier and the NJDEP states
the specific reasons therefor, which may include the potential for harm to
human health or the environment.[Added 11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 09-21]
The volume of industrial process wastewater in the discharge exceeds
5% or more of the average daily dry weather flow of the Joint Meeting;
D.
The user's discharge of process wastewater contributes 5% or more of
the daily mass loading of any of the pollutants listed in N.J.A.C. 7:14A-4,
Appendix A, Tables II through V;
E.
The user is designated as a significant industrial user by NJDEP on the
basis that the user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting
the Joint Meeting's operation;
F.
The user is designated as a significant industrial user by the NJDEP on
the basis that the User has been in violation of any federal, state, or
local pretreatment standard or requirement, including, but not limited
to, significant noncompliance as defined in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(vii); or
G.
The NJDEP determines it would be consistent with the intent of federal
or state law or regulation to require a permit for the user.
H.
Violations which cause a person to become or remain an SNC (under
the State of New Jersey definition of "significant non-complier")
include:
A serious violation for the same pollutant, at the same discharge
point source, in any two months of any consecutive six-month
period;
(1)
Exceedance of an effluent limitation expressed as a monthly
average, for the same pollutant, at the same discharge point
source, by any amount in any four months of any consecutive sixmonth
period;
(2)
If there is not an effluent limitation for a particular pollutant
expressed as a monthly average, exceedance of the monthly
average of the daily maximums for the effluent limitation, for the
same pollutant, at the same discharge point source, by any amount
in any four months of any consecutive six-month period;
(3)
Any exceedance of an effluent limitation for pH by any amount,
excluding the excursions specifically excepted by a permit issued
by the NJDEP with continuous pH monitoring, at the same
discharge point source in any four months of any consecutive sixmonth
period; or
(4)
Failure to submit a completed discharge monitoring report in any
two months of any consecutive six-month period.
(5)
A.
§ 217-2 CHATHAM CODE § 217-2
188:610
SLUDGE — The solid residue and associated liquid resulting from the
physical, chemical, or biological treatment of domestic or industrial
wastewaters.[Added 11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 09-21]
SLUG DISCHARGE — Any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature,
including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch
discharge.[Added 11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 09-21]
STATE — State of New Jersey.[Added 11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 09-21]
Under the federal definition set forth at 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(vii), an
industrial user is in significant noncompliance if its violation meets one
or more of the following criteria:
Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which 66% or more of all of the measurements taken
during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily
maximum limit or the average limit for the same pollutant
parameter;
(1)
Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which 33% or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant
parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the
product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied
by the applicable TRC (TRC=1.4 for BOD, SS, fats, oil, and grease,
and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH).
(2)
Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum
or longer-term average) that the NJDEP determines has caused,
alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or
pass-through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel
or the general public);
(3)
Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to human health, welfare, or to the environment,
or has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority
under 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(B) to halt or prevent such a discharge;
(4)
Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control
mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction,
completing construction, or attaining final compliance;
(5)
Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required
reports such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance
reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on
compliance with compliance schedules;
(6)
(7) Failure to accurately report noncompliance;
Any other violation or group of violations which the NJDEP
determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of
the pretreatment program.
(8)
B.
§ 217-2 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 217-2
188:611
STORM DRAIN or STORM SEWER — A drain or sewer for conveying
water, groundwater, subsurface water, or unpolluted water from any
source.[Amended 11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 09-21]
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that:[Added 11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 09-21]
SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS) — Total suspended matter that either floats on
the surface of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids,
and that is removable by laboratory filtering and prescribed in "Standard
Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" and referred to as
"non-filterable residue."[Amended 11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 09-21]
SYSTEM — All trunks, interceptors, conduits, pipelines, mains, pumping
and ventilation stations, appurtenances, treatment or disposal systems,
plants and works, outfalls, and all other structures and conveyances and
real and tangible personal property acquired, constructed, or operated
by the Joint Meeting for the purposes of the Joint Meeting.[Added
11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 09-21]
TREATMENT WORKS — Any device or system, whether publicly or privately
owned or operated, used in the storage, treatment, recycling, or
reclamation of domestic or industrial waste of a liquid nature including
intercepting sewers, outfall sewers, sewage collection systems, cooling
towers, and ponds, pumping, power and other equipment and their
appurtenances; extensions, improvements, remodeling, additions, and
alterations thereof; and any other works including sites for the treatment
process or for ultimate disposal of residues resulting from such treatment.
Additionally, "treatment works" means any other method or system for
preventing, abating, reducing, storing, treating, separating, or disposing
of pollutants or industrial waste in the sanitary sewer systems.[Added
11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 09-21]
UNPOLLUTED WATER — Water of quality equal to or better than the
effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving
water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the
sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.[Added
11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 09-21]
USEPA or EPA — The abbreviation for the Environmental Protection Agency,
an agency of the United States Government.[Added 11-23-2009 by Ord.
No. 09-21]
USER — Any individual, firm, company, partnership, corporation,
association, group, or society, which discharges wastewater into a
treatment works.[Added 11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 09-21]
A. Runs off the land's surface;
B. Is transmitted to the subsurface; or
Is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage
facilities, or conveyed by snow-removal equipment.
C.
§ 217-2 CHATHAM CODE § 217-2
188:612
WASTEWATER — A combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes
from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and
institutions.[Added 11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 09-21]
WASTEWATER FACILITIES — The structures, equipment, and processes
required to collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes
and dispose of the effluent.[Added 11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 09-21]
WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS — An arrangement of devices and
structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes, and sludge.
Sometimes used as synonymous with "wastewater treatment plant" or
"waste treatment plant" or "water pollution control plant."[Added
11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 09-21]
WATERCOURSE — A channel in which a flow of water occurs, continuously
or intermittently.
§ 217-3. Deposit of objectionable waste prohibited. [Amended
6-13-2005 by Ord. No. 05-20]
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in an insanitary manner, upon public or private property within
the Borough, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other
objectionable waste. This section shall be read and enforced in conjunction
with and/or pursuant to Chapter 79.
§ 217-4. Discharge of material into natural outlet restricted.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet, within or under the
jurisdiction of the Borough, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes or other
polluted material, unless suitable treatment is provided in accordance with
the requirements of this article hereinafter set forth.
§ 217-5. Toilet facilities and sewer connection required.
The owner, tenant or any person occupying a house, building or property
used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes,
abutting on any street in which there is a public or private sanitary sewer
system, shall, at his own expense, install suitable toilet facilities therein. He
shall connect such facilities directly with the proper public or private sewer
system in accordance with the provisions of this article in the following
manner: The governing body shall accept or shall already have accepted
the sanitary sewer line, and the Borough Health Officer shall notify the
individual property owners of the formal acceptance by the governing body
of said sewer line, and the individual property owner shall connect with the
sewer facility within six months after being notified by the Borough Health
Officer of the acceptance of the facility by the governing body; provided,
however, that the public or private sewer is within 100 feet of the property
line measured from any corner of the individual property.
§ 217-2 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 217-6
188:613
§ 217-6. Permit required.
No person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use,
alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without a written
permit from the Borough Engineer.
§ 217-7. Classes of building sewer permits; fees.
§ 217-8. Application for service.
Application for public sewer service shall be made on a form prescribed by
the Borough Engineer and signed by the owner of the property or his agent.
Signing of the application shall signify assent to the rules, regulations and
schedule of public sewer fees, rentals and charges of the Borough.
§ 217-9. Fees and charges; responsibility for payment; rendering of
bills.
A. There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:
(1) A residential or commercial building sewer permit for residential
and commercial service.
(2) An industrial building sewer permit for service to establishments
producing industrial wastes.
B. Application; fees.
(1) The owner or his agent shall make application on a form furnished
by the Borough.
(2) The applications shall be supplemented by plans, specifications or
other information considered pertinent by the Health Officer and
the Borough Engineer.
(3) A permit and inspection fee of $25 for a residential or commercial
building sewer permit and $40 for an industrial building sewer
permit, plus the service connection charge, as hereinafter
provided, shall be paid at the time the application is filed.
A. The Borough shall fix all the public sewer fees, rentals and charges.
B. The owner of each building connected to the public sewer system shall
be responsible for the payment of bills for sewer service, as rendered by
the Borough of Chatham. All sewer rentals, fees and other charges
incurred in the installation and building of the sewer shall be a lien
against the property until paid.
C. Bills; termination of service upon nonpayment. [Amended 4-11-2011
by Ord. No. 11-04]
(1) Bills for sewer service shall be rendered quarterly. The amount
charged shall be due on the date of the rendered bill. If bills are not
§ 217-6 CHATHAM CODE § 217-9
188:614
§ 217-10. Sewer lateral installation.
The sewer lateral, including the making of the tap to the street and the
excavation, backfilling and resurfacing of the trench from the street to the
curbline, shall be done by the applicant, at his expense, by a contractor
acceptable to the Sewer Department. A street opening permit is required
from the appropriate jurisdiction (Borough, county, or state) for work
related to a sewer connection within the right-of-way of a public street.
§ 217-11. Separate laterals required.
(Reserved)
§ 217-12. Use of old laterals.
Old sewer laterals may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the Engineer, to meet all
requirements of this article.
§ 217-13. House service connections.
paid within 30 days from that date, interest and late charges shall
be added as established by resolution of the Borough Council.
Notice shall be served or mailed that unless the bill is paid within
seven days from the date of the notice the Borough may, within its
discretion, terminate service.
(2) Termination of sewer service shall be achieved by a turn off of
water service by the Borough Water Department. When sewer
service is terminated under such conditions, it shall remain
terminated until the total amount due, including interest, and turnoff
and turn-on charges, have been paid in full. A fee, as established
by resolution of the Borough Council, shall be charged to cover the
charge of turning off and turning on the water service.
A. The house service connection shall be installed at the expense of the
applicant. The house service connection shall be in conformance with
the requirements of the current Plumbing Code as evidenced by a
plumbing permit issued by the Construction Department.92
B. Whenever practical, the house service connection shall be brought to
the building at an elevation below the basement floor. The depth shall
be sufficient to afford protection from frost. The house service
connection shall be laid at uniform grade in straight alignment insofar
as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly
curved pipe and fittings, and cleanouts shall be constructed as directed
by the Plumbing Subcode Official at each bend.
92.Editor's Note: See Ch. 111, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 217-9 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 217-13
188:615
§ 217-14. Joints and connections.
All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight and are
subject to approval of the Plumbing Subcode official.
§ 217-15. Inspection and connection of house service.
The applicant for the sewer permit shall notify the Plumbing Subcode
Official when the house service connection is ready for inspection and
connection to the sewer lateral. The connection shall be made under the
supervision of the Plumbing Subcode Official.
§ 217-16. Maintenance of laterals and house service connections.
The sewer lateral shall be maintained by the home owner (all the way to the
sewer main connection). The house service connection shall be maintained
by the property owner.
§ 217-17. Installation of sewer system not to imply acceptance of
street.
The installation of a public sewer system in any street, by the Borough or by
others, shall not imply Borough ownership or acceptance of such streets.
§ 217-18. Public sewer system extension.
C. In all buildings in which any house service connection is too low to
permit gravity flow to the street sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such
connection shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged
to the sewer lateral. The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining
any applicable permits from the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
D. All excavations required for the installation of a house service
connection shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the
Plumbing Subcode Official. Pipe laying and backfilling shall be
performed in accordance with the requirements of the Plumbing
Subcode Official, and no backfill shall be placed until the work has been
inspected.
A. The entire cost of installing a public sewer system, including associated
facilities such as pumping stations, force mains, or any appurtenances
required by the Borough Engineer, shall be paid by the real estate
developers in the same manner as any other subdivision improvement.
Ownership thereof shall vest in the Borough when such installation
meets the approval of the Borough Engineer.
B. Each real estate developer shall enter into a contract covering the
foregoing and other related matters before any associated new
construction is made to the Borough sewer system.
§ 217-13 CHATHAM CODE § 217-18
188:616
§ 217-19. Construction standards for public sewer systems.
C. The Engineer shall review and, if found satisfactory, approve the type,
size and location of all public sewer pipes, pumps, force mains, etc., on
all new extensions. The entire system shall be subject to the Engineer's
inspection and approval and shall be tested under the Engineer's
supervision. The developer shall be responsible for obtaining all
applicable permits as required by N.J.A.C. 7:9 and N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
A. General. The standards outlined herein are applicable to developers,
builders, contractors and any other persons receiving approval to
expand, construct or relocate the Borough Sewer Department's sewer
collection facilities. Any work relating to the utility shall be under the
jurisdiction and supervision of the Borough Sewer Department.
B. Sewer pipe. Sewer pipe of a type, class and size shall be installed by
proper methods, with all necessary appurtenances, at the grades and
locations and of the types, classes and sized approved by the Engineer.
(1) Materials.
(a) Polyvinyl chloride pipe: Polyvinyl chloride pipe (PVC) and
fittings shall conform to the latest ASTM D-3034 and Unibell
specifications.
(b) The pipe shall be accurate and of uniform dimensions. All pipe
shall be straight and true to form without bulges, dents,
cracks, tears or other defects which will affect the strength.
The internal surfaces shall be smooth. Nominal laying lengths
shall be 10 to 20 feet.
(c) Joints shall be integral bell, bell and spigot joints meeting the
requirements of ASTM D-3212 and contain an elastometric
ring gasket conforming to ASTM F-477. Each joint shall be
furnished with one elastometric ring gasket. Joints shall be
lubricated with the instructions of the manufacturer and joints
at all manholes.
(d) The pipe shall be made of PVC plastic having a cell
classification of 12454-B as defined in ASTM D-1784, and the
fittings shall be made of PVC plastic having a cell classification
as defined in ASTM D-1784.
(e) Each length of pipe shall be marked to show the
manufacturer's name or trademark, nominal pipe size, PVC cell
classification, class of PVC (SDR) and the ASTM specification.
(f) The contractor shall procure from the pipe manufacturer and
deliver to the Engineer a certificate of tests for each different
class, size and batch of pipe. The tests conducted shall include,
but not be limited to the measurements conforming to the
latest ASTM D-122 Specifications, the impact-resistance test
§ 217-18 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 217-19
188:617
conforming to the latest ASTM D-2444 Specifications, the
extrusion quality test conforming to the latest ASTM-2152
Specifications, the pipe stiffness test conforming to the latest
ASTM-2412 Specifications, and the pipe-flattening test
conforming to the latest ASTM-3034 Specifications.
(g) The minimum impact strength, pipe stiffness and wall
thickness shall be as follows:
Minimum Impact Strength at 73° F.
Pipe Size
(inches)
Impact Strength
(ft/lb)
4 150
6 210
8 210
10 220
12 220
15 220
Minimum Pipe Stiffness
SDR Stiffness
35 46
Pipe Size
(inches)
Wall Thickness
(inches)
4 0.120
6 0.180
8 0.240
10 0.300
12 0.360
15 0.437
18 0.536
21 0.632
24 0.711
27 0.801
(h) Ductile iron pipe. Ductile iron pipe shall conform with ANSI
A21.51 for ductile iron pipe centrifugally cast in metal or sandlined
molds, for water and other liquids. The pipe shall be cast
utilizing iron conforming to Grade 60-42-10 as required in the
above noted ANSI specification. Pipe shall be furnished in
nominal sixteen-foot to twenty-foot laying lengths. The pipe
§ 217-19 CHATHAM CODE § 217-19
188:618
thickness shall conform to ANSI Specification A21.50, latest
revision.
(i) The lining of the pipe shall consist of cement mortar of full
thickness to the ends of the individual lengths of pipe and shall
be in accordance with ANSI A21.4. A bituminous interior seal
coat shall be applied to the cement mortar lining. The exterior
of the pipe shall receive standard coal tar or asphalt foundry
dip. The weight, class and pipe material shall be conspicuously
indicated by the manufacturer on the outside of the pipe.
(j) Joints for ductile iron pipe shall be mechanical joints or pushon
joints conforming to ANSI A21.11.
(k) Wye or tee fittings, as required for the ductile iron pipe, shall
be ductile or cast iron standard mechanical joint or push-on
joint fittings conforming to the requirements of ANSI A21.10
and with joints in accordance with ANSI A21.11. Standard
mechanical joint accessories shall be furnished for each bell
opening on fittings and shall consist of high-strength cast-iron
tee-head bolts, cast-iron glands and rubber gaskets. Assembly
shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's
recommendations, Fittings shall be cement-lined and
bituminous-coated inside and outside as specified hereinbefore
for ductile iron pipe. In all cases, the fittings and
appurtenances shall at least meet the strength and pressure
requirements shown or listed in ANSI A21.10.
(2) Laying.
(a) The pipe shall be installed in accordance with approved plans
and specify the manufacturer's recommendations. No pipe,
couplings, or rubber rings known to be defective or damaged
shall be installed, and pipe, couplings or rubber rings found
defective or damaged shall be removed and replaced. All joint
surfaces shall be in proper condition and protected from
damage. No pipe shall be installed on frozen soil. The
contractor shall be solely responsible for ensuring that each
pipe in constructed at the specified alignment and grade.
(b) The pipe shall be installed to provide maximum solid bearing
along its entire length.
(c) The trench shall be excavated to a minimum depth of six inches
below the grade (pipe invert) to provide for a pipe foundation
of crushed stone. The crushed stone shall be carefully placed
and thoroughly compacted. The same material which is used
for the pipe foundation shall be used for the pipe launching.
The launching shall be placed up to the pipe springline; that is,
up to the center line of the pipe.
§ 217-19 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 217-19
188:619
(d) The initial backfill shall be placed to a depth of 12 inches above
the top of the pipe. This backfill shall be tamped lightly so as
not to disturb the embedded pipe.
(e) The final position of the pipe shall be thoroughly secured and
amply supported to prevent settlement, disturbances or
flotation.
(f) The sewer lateral branch forty-five-degree wye joint fitting on
the sewer pipe shall be positioned so that the installation of the
sewer lateral will not be less than 1/4 inch per one foot slope
unless otherwise directed by the Engineer.
(g) The sewer lateral branch forty-five-degree wye joint shall be
manufactured to accept the sewer lateral pipe spigot end for
the material size and class used.
(3) Jointing. The pipe shall be carefully jointed in conformity with the
best practice and the detailed instructions of the manufacturers.
All pipe ends, rubber rings, and couplings shall be void of defects
and shall be thoroughly cleaned prior to and during the jointing
operation. Just prior to lowering the pipes, the surfaces of the joint
rings shall be wiped clean and the joint rings and rubber gasket
shall be liberally lubricated with an approved-type of vegetable oil
soap. The spigot end, with the placed in the groove, shall be
entered into the bell of the pipe already laid, making sure that both
pipes are properly aligned. The pipe ends shall be protected from
damage by equipment used to "home" the pipe. Before the joint is
fully "home," the position of the gasket in the joint shall be
determined by means of a suitable feeler gage supplied by the pipe
manufacturer. If the gasket is found not to be in the proper
position, the pipes shall be separated and the damaged gasket
replaced. Maximum joint openings shall be in accordance with the
manufacturer's recommendations. Suitable equipment shall be
used for the storage, and laying of pipe and fittings. Lifting hooks
or bars intended to be inserted into the ends of pipes will not be
permitted.
C. Sewer laterals. Polyvinyl chloride pipe, joints and fittings shall conform
to applicable portions of Subsection B(1)(a) in addition to the following
standards:
(1) Materials.
(a) Sewer lateral piping: Sewer lateral piping shall be PVC pipe
SDR 35 or Schedule 40, or ductile iron pipe, Class 52, or castiron
soil pipe, extra heavy.
(b) Wye connections: Connections shall be used at the junction of
the sewer lateral and street sewer. Tee-wye cleanouts shall be
installed in the vicinity of the street right-of-way line or as
directed by the Engineer.
§ 217-19 CHATHAM CODE § 217-19
188:620
(c) Risers: Risers shall have a cleanout at grade and cast-iron riser
cover, and shall be used for any off-street bend 45° or greater
and at the main for sewer laterals more than eight feet below
grade.
(2) Laying and jointing. The laying and jointing shall be in accordance
with approved plans and specifications and shall be in conformance
with the best practice and the detailed instructions of the
manufacturer.
D. Manholes.
(1) General.
(a) Manholes shall conform with the typical manhole details as
shown on approved plans. The walls shall be brought up
vertically to approximately three feet from the top, shall then
gradually decrease the diameter of the manhole and shall be of
proper dimensions to receive the manhole frame and cover at
the top. Watertight manholes are required as directed by the
Engineer.
(b) Concrete block manholes will be used only when approved by
the Engineer. Precast manholes will be used in all cases except
where conditions may require block manholes.
(2) Concrete block manholes walls.
(a) Manhole walls shall be constructed of precast portland cement
concrete block of proper radius, conforming to the latest
edition of the New Jersey Department of Transportation
Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction,
Section 603 and N.J.A.C. 7:9.
(b) All joints between blocks shall be completely filled with cement
mortar consisting of one part portland cement and two parts
sand. Joints shall be made to produce a smooth and uniform
surface. The outside and inside surface of each manhole shall
be plastered 1/2 inch thick and troweled smooth with cement
mortar of the same consistency. The outside plastered surface
shall be painted with one seal coat of coat tar or asphalt,
Koppers No. 50 or approved equal.
(c) Manhole bottom.
[1] Upon completion of excavation for standard manholes, six
inches of crushed stone shall be placed prior to placement
of concrete. Manhole bottoms shall be of 3,000 psi
concrete of dimensions as shown on the approved plans.
[2] Concrete channels shall be formed in the bottom with a
minimum depth of 2/3 the sewer diameter, shall slope to
the outlet and shall have as smooth a surface as possible.
§ 217-19 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 217-19
188:621
Where stubs at manholes are herein specified, channels
shall be formed to connect with stubs. The surfaces of the
bottom shall slope one inch to the channels.
(3) Precast manholes.
(a) Manholes shall consist of a precast concrete base and precast
barrel and precast reinforced concrete roof slab or precast
reinforced concrete manhole cone. On shallow manholes, a
precast slab-type top shall be used in place of the manhole
cone. Precast slab-type tops of standards manufacture may be
used, provided that detailed drawings are submitted and
approved.
(b) Precast manhole sections shall be circular, tongue-and-groove
type. They shall conform with the requirements of ASTM
Designation C478-68, Class IV, or the latest applicable revision
thereof. The minimum compressive strength of all sections
shall be 4,000 psi. Lifting holes shall be tapered holes and shall
be plugged with a rubber plug and mortar finished flush with
the walls. Joints shall be tongue-and-groove and shall be sealed
by a continuous ring gasket, free from pits or other
imperfections. When installed, the ring shall be enclosed and
compressed continuously on all sides.
(c) After the manhole is completed and prior to backfilling, all
joints shall be filled with mortar and pointed to form a dense
hard joint. Thereafter, one coat of coal tar or asphaltic pitch
shall be applied to the surface of the manhole covering all
mortared joints, lift holes, etc.
(4) Brick collars. When necessary to bring the manhole frame to
proper grade, brick collars shall be used. All brick shall be
thoroughly wet before laying and shall be laid in a full bed and joint
of mortar. Joints shall be 1/4 inch on the interior face and shall be
struck smooth with the interior face. Brick shall be laid as headers
with joints broken between courses and finished collar shall be
plastered on the outside with cement mortar as shown and
thoroughly waterproofed with two coats of asphaltic paint. The
collar shall be completely sealed to prevent water intrusion. Brick
shall conform to the requirements of ASTM C32 Grade MA.
(5) Steps. Each manhole shall have drop-type aluminum steps,
projecting six inches into the manhole, and shall extend through
the wall. The steps shall be aluminum alloy 6061-T6 or equal as
shown.
(6) Cover and frame. The manhole cover and frame shall be Type
#1203 as manufactured by Campbell Foundry Company. Manhole
cover shall be cast with the letters "Chatham Borough Sanitary
Sewer."
§ 217-19 CHATHAM CODE § 217-19
188:622
§ 217-20. Inspection and testing.
Inspection and testing shall be performed by the Engineer to insure
compliance with the requirements of this chapter, approved plans and
specifications and the manufacturers' recommendations.
(7) Pipe-to-manhole connection. All pipe-to-manhole connections shall
be watertight flexible seals and shall meet rubber gasket
Specifications ASTM C-443 and Test Performance Requirements
ASTM C-425 for compression joints.
(8) Watertightness. Each manhole shall be absolutely watertight.
Manholes that are not watertight will not be accepted. Plastering
on top of a defective joint to correct leaky conditions will not be
permitted.
A. Inspection.
(1) Inspection of the work will be conducted at all times during
construction. The contractor shall cooperate and assist in the
inspection of all work.
(2) The inspection of newly installed sewers shall be done to detect and
record any and all areas of improperly installed pipe. Improperly
installed pipe shall include those sections of pipe that are broken,
crushed, misaligned, deflected, or in any other way damaged; in
which case, the contractor shall be obligated to remove said
damaged section of pipe and make all necessary repairs and/or
replacement at the direction of and to the satisfaction of the
Engineer, to affect the proper operation and capacity of the sewer.
B. Testing.
(1) Infiltration.
(a) All infiltration noticeable during construction, whether an airexfiltration
test has been performed or not, and judged to be
above the allowable by the Engineer, shall be stopped and
corrected immediately. Infiltration shall not exceed 50 gallons
per inch of pipe diameter per mile per 24 hours.
(b) Rates of infiltration shall be determined by means of V-notch
weirs or pipe spigot in an approved manner and at such times
and locations as may be directed by the Engineer during the
progress and at the completion of the work.
(c) Testing shall be conducted during the progress of the work, at
the time and over completed pipe sections as determined by
the Engineer. No test shall be accepted unless witnessed by the
Engineer or his authorized representative. Maximum length of
test sections shall be 2,000 feet. All visible leaks shall be made
§ 217-19 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 217-20
188:623
§ 217-21. Service to commercial or industrial establishments or
other institutions.
Where sewer service is requested by any commercial or industrial
establishment or by any institution, such as a school, hospital, nursing
home and the like, the applicant shall provide engineering drawings and
specifications to be reviewed by the Borough Engineer. The applicant shall
obtain all required permits and approvals and shall have full financial
responsibility for installation of the sewer service.
tight and tests shall be repeated until the results are
satisfactory.
(2) Deflection (polyvinyl chloride pipe only). After all polyvinyl chloride
pipe has been laid and trenches backfilled, a deflection test shall be
performed on each section of pipeline between manholes. The
maximum allowable deflection shall be 5.0% and the device for
testing shall be a property sized mandrel.
(3) Low-pressure air-exfiltration test.
(a) After the pipe has been laid and backfilled, a low-pressure air
test shall be made on each section of pipe. Air shall be slowly
supplied to the unplugged section of pipe to be tested until the
internal air pressure reaches 4.0 psi greater than the average
back pressure of any groundwater that may submerge the
pipe. At least two minutes shall be allowed for temperature
stabilization before proceeding further. The back pressure of
any groundwater caused by the water head above the center
line of the pipe must be determined by a method approved by
the Engineer. This back pressure must be added to the
standard test pressures to compensate for the groundwater
effect on the air test. Maximum length of test sections shall be
650 feet.
(b) The rate of air loss shall then be determined by measuring the
time interval required for the internal pressure to decrease
from 3.5 psi to 2.5 psi greater than the average back pressure
of any groundwater that may submerge the pipe.
(c) The pipeline shall be considered acceptable when the time
interval for the 1.0 psi pressure drop is not less than the
holding time required by the Engineer.
(d) If the pipe installation fails to meet these requirements, the
contractor shall repair or replace all defective materials or
workmanship. The complete pipe installation shall meet the
requirements of this test.
§ 217-20 CHATHAM CODE § 217-22
188:624
§ 217-22. Extensions or changes in system.
Extensions to or changes in the public sewer system may be initiated by the
governing body by petition from property owners or by application from a
real estate developer. If such extension or change is deemed advisable by
the governing body, it shall prescribe the terms and conditions under which
the extension shall be made and shall require written acceptance thereof by
the petitioners or applicant.
§ 217-23. Prohibited discharges. [Amended 6-13-2005 by Ord. No.
05-20]
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water
or unpolluted industrial process water into any public or private sanitary
sewer system or individual sanitary sewage disposal facility. This section
shall be read and enforced in conjunction with and/or pursuant to Chapter
237.
§ 217-24. Discharge of unpolluted waters.
Stormwater, cooling water and all other unpolluted process water or
drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated
as storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the Health Officer.
§ 217-25. General and specific prohibitions; emergency
suspensions; notifications. [Amended 11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 09-21]
A. General prohibitions. No person shall discharge, deposit, cause, or
allow to be deposited or discharged into the Joint Meeting wastewater
facilities and wastewater treatment works or public sewer, any
substance, wastewater, or pollutant which may cause pass-through or
interference or that will:
(1) Not be susceptible to treatment or will interfere with the process or
efficiency of the treatment system, or will exhibit inhibitory toxicity
in the treatment system;
(2) Violate state or federal statutes, rules or regulations, or
pretreatment standards as the same may be promulgated from time
to time;
(3) Cause the Joint Meeting facilities to violate state or federal
statutes, rules or regulations, or pretreatment standards as the
same may be promulgated from time to time, the Joint Meeting
NJPDES Permit, applicable receiving water standards, Joint
Meeting's permit regulating sludge which is produced during the
treatment process, or any other permit issued to the Joint Meeting.
B. Specific prohibitions. No person shall discharge, deposit, cause, or
allow to be deposited or discharged into the Joint Meeting wastewater
§ 217-22 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 217-25
188:625
facilities, wastewater treatment works, or public sewer, any substance,
wastewater, or pollutant which contains the following:
(1) Stormwaters, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, swimming
pool water, subsurface drainage, foundation, floor drain or
basement sump drainage, pond water, noncontact cooling water, or
unpolluted industrial wastes.
(2) Any liquid containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, either emulsified or
not, in excess of 100 mg/l of solvent soluble materials or containing
substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures
between 32° F. and 140° F. (0° C. and 60° C).
(3) The discharge of petroleum hydrocarbons in excess of 100 mg/l
monthly average or 150 mg/l daily maximum as set forth at N.J.A.C.
7:14A-21.2(a) is prohibited.
(4) Any residues from petroleum storage, refining or processing, waste
fuels, lubricants, solvents, or paints.
(5) Any wastewater containing any liquids, solids, or gases which, by
reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either
alone or by interaction with other substances to create an
explosive, flammable, or combustible atmosphere in any part of the
Joint Meeting wastewater facilities or wastewater treatment works,
including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup
flashpoint of less than 140° F. (60° C.) using the test methods
specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
(6) Any solid or viscous substance in quantities or of such size capable
of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or interference with the
proper operation of the Joint Meeting wastewater facilities or
wastewater treatment works, such as, but not limited to, mud,
straw, metal, rags, glass, tar, plastics, wood and shavings, ashes,
cinders, sand, feathers, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshing, entrails, paper or plastic containers, etc.
(7) Any ground or unground garbage, either from a commercial
garbage disposal unit or any other source, except residential
garbage disposal systems.
(8) Any pollutant, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (biochemical
oxygen demand, chemical oxygen demand, etc.) Released in a
discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will
cause interference with the Joint Meeting wastewater facilities or
wastewater treatment works.
(9) Heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in the Joint
Meeting wastewater facilities or wastewater treatment works
resulting in interference, but in no case heat in such quantities that
the temperature at said wastewater facilities or wastewater
§ 217-25 CHATHAM CODE § 217-25
188:626
treatment works exceeds 104° F. (40° C.) unless alternate
temperature limits are approved.
(10) Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral
oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through.
(11) Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or
fumes within the Joint Meeting wastewater facilities, wastewater
treatment works or public sewer in a quantity that may cause acute
worker health and safety problems.
(12) Any waste having a pH lower than five or higher than nine or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the Joint
Meeting.
(13) Any radioactive waste or isotope of such half-life or concentration
as to be in excess of that permitted by appropriate regulatory
agencies having control over their use or in such quantity as to
cause damage or hazard to structures, equipment, personnel of the
Borough of Madison, Borough of Chatham or Joint Meeting, the
wastewater facilities, or wastewater treatment works.
(14) Any waste containing phenols, noxious or malodorous solids,
liquids, or gases, which either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, are capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life,
or are or may be sufficient to prevent entry into a sewer for its
maintenance and repair.
(15) Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants or other substances
which may, in sufficient quantity, cause injury, damage, or hazard to
personnel, structures, or equipment, or interference with the Joint
Meeting wastewater facilities, wastewater treatment works, public
sewer system, or any portion of the liquid or solids treatment or
handling processes, or that may pass through the treatment
facilities in such condition that it may not achieve state, federal, or
other existing requirements for the effluent or for the receiving
waters. Except as permitted under § 217-25D, Local limits, the
following chemicals are specifically prohibited: alcohols,
aldehydes, arsenic and arsenicals, bromine, chlorinated
hydrocarbons, compounds with chlorine demands in excess of 100
ppm, chromium or chromium compounds, copper and copper salts,
creosol, cyanide or cyanide compounds, fluorine, iodine, mercury
or mercury compounds, nickel and nickel compounds, pesticides,
silver and silver compounds, sulfonamide, toxic dyes (organic or
mineral), zinc and zinc compounds or other heavy metals; all strong
oxidizing agents such as peroxide, chromates, dichromate,
permanganates, etc.; compounds producing hydrogen sulfide or
any other toxic inflammable or explosive gases, either upon
acidification, alkalization, reduction, or oxidation; strong reducing
§ 217-25 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 217-25
188:627
agents such as nitrates, sulfites, and sulfides; and strong acids or
strong alkalis, except to the extent set forth herein.
(16) Any material which exerts or causes:
(a) Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or
of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride
and sodium sulfate).
(b) Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye
solutions and vegetable tanning solutions) which cannot be
removed by the wastewater treatment works. In no case shall a
discolored discharge be permitted if, in the opinion of the Joint
Meeting, said discharge is likely to interfere with the operation
of the wastewater treatment system or to cause a violation of
the facility's NJPDES permit, applicable water quality criteria,
or sludge disposal regulations.
(c) Unusual BOD, COD, or chlorine requirements in such
quantities as to constitute an unacceptable load or
interference on the Joint Meeting wastewater facilities or
wastewater treatment works.
(d) Any unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes
constituting a "slug" of such volume or strength so as to cause
a treatment process upset and subsequent loss of treatment
efficiency.
(17) Septage or wastes from septic tanks, cesspools, or other such
sources of sanitary sewage.
(18) Any water added for the purpose of diluting wastes which would
otherwise exceed applicable maximum concentration limits.
C. Categorical standards. No person shall discharge, deposit, cause, or
allow to be deposited or discharged into the wastewater facilities or
wastewater treatment works of the MCJM, or public sewer, any waste
which violates applicable categorical standards. As pretreatment
standards for toxic or other industrial wastes are promulgated by the
USEPA for a given category of industrial user, all industrial users shall
conform to the USEPA timetable for complying with applicable
discharge limitations. Notwithstanding anything set forth herein, an
industrial user shall comply with all local limits and any more stringent
standards which are established by the MCJM or other regulatory
agencies. Changes and additions may be implemented as necessary
from time to time by resolution of the MCJM or ordinance of the
Borough. Categorical standards can be modified only through the
federal regulatory mechanisms available pursuant to 40 CFR 403.7.
D. Local limits. (Reserved)
§ 217-25 CHATHAM CODE § 217-25
188:628
E. Compliance determination.
(1) Compliance determinations with respect to any conformance with
ordinances or permit conditions or limitations may be made on the
basis of instantaneous grab samples, sequential grab samples, or
composite samples. Sequential grab samples or composite samples
may be taken over a twenty-four-hour period, or any other time
span, as deemed necessary by the NJDEP, to meet the requirements
of a specific situation.
(2) Whenever it shall be necessary for the purpose of these general
sewer use requirements, authorized representatives of the MCJM,
NJDEP, USEPA, or other governmental authorities having
jurisdiction may, upon presentation of credentials, enter upon the
premises of any user as follows:
(a) During business hours, on notice to authorized personnel of
the user, but without the necessity of a warrant, for the
purposes of inspecting, copying, or photographing any records
required to be kept.
(b) At any time without a warrant or prior notice for the purpose of
installing or inspecting any monitoring equipment or method,
inspecting the process wastewater pretreatment facility, and/
or measuring, sampling and/or testing any discharge of
wastewater either from process wastewater pretreatment
facilities or the point of discharge to the MCJM wastewater
facilities or wastewater treatment works. The user shall
instruct security personnel to provide immediate access to
such representatives upon presentation of valid credentials at
any hour and under any and all circumstances. The user's
security personnel will be entitled to accompany the entering
representatives.
(c) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy
access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be
promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request
of the MCJM and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing
such access shall be borne by the user.
(d) Immediate access shall be granted to authorized
representatives of the MCJM, NJDEP, USEPA, or other
governmental authorities having jurisdiction upon
presentation of valid credentials. Unreasonable delays in
allowing access to the uer's premises shall be a violation of this
article.
(3) Each user shall reimburse the MCJM for the actual costs incurred
by the MCJM for such monitoring, sampling, investigation,
engineering evaluation, administrative costs, legal services, or
other services which are necessary or appropriate, in addition to
those services which are minimally required and which are
§ 217-25 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 217-25
188:629
properly allocable to the user's operation. Payment for such
expenses shall be made by the user within 10 days after the
submission of an invoice by the MCJM.
F. Emergency suspensions.
(1) Upon advance notice to the Borough Administrator and the Health
Officer, the Superintendent of the MCJM may immediately suspend
a user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such
suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge
which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or
substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons.
Upon advance notice to the Borough Administrator and the Health
Officer, the Superintendent of the MCJM may also immediately
suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to
respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the
POTW, which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the
environment, or for noncompliance with pretreatment standards
and requirements.
(2) Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately
stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to
immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, and
upon advance notice to the Borough Administrator and the Health
Officer, the Superintendent may take such steps as deemed
necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection,
to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream,
or endangerment to any individuals. The Superintendent of the
MCJM and/or the NJDEP may allow the user to recommence its
discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of
the Superintendent and/or the NJDEP that the period of
endangerment has passed.
G. Affirmative defenses to general prohibitions. A user shall have an
affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for
noncompliance with the general prohibitions in § 217-25 if it can prove
that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or
in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause passthrough
or cause interference and that either:
(1) A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was
in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the
pass-through or interference; or
(2) No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially
in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the
MCJM was regularly in compliance with its NJPDES permit, and, in
the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge
use or disposal requirements.
H. Notification of changed conditions. Each user must notify the
Superintendent of the MCJM, and obtain prior written approval, at least
§ 217-25 CHATHAM CODE § 217-25
188:630
10 days in advance of any planned significant changes to the user's
operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume
of its wastewater, or result in the user meeting the definition of
"significant indirect user" established at N.J.A.C. 7:14A-1.2, or of any
substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in their
discharge. The MCJM reserves the right to deny or condition new
or increased contributions of pollutants, or changes in the nature of
pollutants, where such contributions do not meet applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements or where such contributions
would cause the MCJM to violate its NJPDES permit.
(1) The Superintendent of the MCJM may require the user to submit
such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the
changed condition.
(2) For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but
are not limited to, flow increases of 20% or greater, and the
discharge of any previously unreported pollutants.
I. Notification of slug discharges.
(1) An industrial user shall immediately notify the MCJM of any
incident of accidental or slug discharge. The notification shall
include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration
and volume.
(2) An industrial user shall take immediate action to contain and
minimize the accidental or slug discharge so as to prevent
interference with the treatment process, damage to the treatment
system, and pass-through to the receiving stream or contamination
of the sludge.
(3) Within five days following accidental and/or slug discharge, the
industrial user shall submit to the NJDEP and MCJM a detailed
written report describing the date, time, and cause of the
discharge, the quantity and characteristics of the discharge and
corrective action taken at the time of the discharge, and the
measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future
occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any
expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a
result of damage to treatment system, fish kills, or any other
damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve
the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be
imposed by any permit or other applicable law.
J. Notification of significant indirect user status. The MCJM shall notify
the NJDEP, at least annually, which facilities within the sewer service
area meet the definition of "significant indirect user" as set forth at
N.J.A.C. 7:14A-1.2. The MCJM may use a variety of sources to identify
SIUs, including, but not limited, to user surveys, existing MCJM files,
water use and billing records, utility company records, sewer
connection permits, business license records, Chamber of Commerce
§ 217-25 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 217-25
188:631
§ 217-26. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors or traps. [Amended
11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 09-21]
rosters, the local telephone directory, property tax records, industrial
directories, newspapers, advertisements, World Wide Web, and drivebys.
Once a potential discharger has been identified, the MCJM may,
if it is uncertain of the operations of that facility, send the user a
questionnaire in order to better evaluate the user's potential of being
classified as an SIU. Alternatively, the MCJM may conduct inspections
of some or all such facilities.
K. Indemnification. The industrial user shall indemnify and save harmless
the MCJM and the Borough of Chatham for any expense, loss, or
damage occasioned the MCJM, by reason of permit violation, the
discharge of process wastewater or any prohibited substance,
including, but not limited to the following:
(1) Any cost incurred by the MCJM in removing, correcting,
preventing, or terminating any adverse effects upon the MCJM
wastewater facilities or wastewater treatment works;
(2) Any increase in the cost of sludge processing or disposal;
(3) Any fines or penalties assessed against the MCJM for such
violations of its permits;
(4) The reasonable costs of any investigative inspection or monitoring
survey which leads to the establishment of a violation of a NJPDES
Significant Indirect User Permit and the reasonable costs of
preparing and litigating any action successfully concluded against
the user for such violation; and
(5) Any other actual or compensatory damages to the MCJM resulting
from the discharge.
A. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors or traps shall be provided for the
proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive
amounts or any flammable wastes, sand, and other harmful ingredients
at all food establishments and in such other connections deemed
necessary in the opinion of the Plumbing Code Official or Health Officer,
except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living
quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and
capacity approved by the Plumbing Code Official and designed in
accordance with Standard PDI-G 101 entitled, "Testing and Rating
Procedure for Type 1 Hydro Mechanical Grease Interceptors with
Appendix of Installation and Maintenance" and shall be located as to be
readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
B. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious
materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in
temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight, and
§ 217-25 CHATHAM CODE § 217-26
188:632
§ 217-27. Preliminary treatment facilities.
equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in place,
shall be gastight and watertight.
C. Where installed, all grease, oil, and sand interceptors or traps shall be
maintained by the owner, at his or her expense, in continuously efficient
operation at all times. The user shall be responsible for the
maintenance of said interceptor(s) or trap(s) and for the removal and
disposal of the captured material and shall maintain records of the
dates and means of disposal. All interceptors or traps shall be in
conformance with applicable plumbing code requirements.
D. Where installed, all grease and oil interceptors or traps shall be
inspected every six months by the Health Department and the
provisions of this § 217-26 shall be enforced by the Health Department.
Failure to maintain grease interceptors or traps in a satisfactory
manner will result in notification of said condition by the inspecting
officer. The owner shall have five days to correct routine maintenance
violations, and 10 days to effect mechanical repairs, from the date of
written notice, or shall be subject to the violations and penalties more
fully set forth in § 217-34 of this article.
E. Application fees, inspection fees, and use fees for grease, oil, and sand
interceptors or traps shall be paid to the Borough in accordance with
the applicable rate schedule.
A. The admission into the public sewers of any wastes or waters having a
five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 300 parts per million,
by weight, of suspended solids; or any quantity of substances having the
characteristics described in § 217-26; or an average daily flow greater
than 2% of the average daily sewage flow of the Borough sewage
treatment plant shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Health Officer.
B. Where necessary in the opinion of the Health Officer and the Borough
Engineer, the owner shall provide, at his own expense, such preliminary
treatment as may be necessary to:
(1) Reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 300 parts per million by
weight; or more than 350 parts per million, by weight, of
suspended solids; or
(2) Reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents so that they
do not exceed the maximum limits provided in § 217-25; or
(3) Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or
wastes.
C. Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to
proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the
approval of the Health officer and the Borough Engineer. Construction
§ 217-26 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 217-27
188:633
§ 217-28. Control manhole.
When required by the Health Officer, the owner of any property served by
a sewer lateral carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole in the house service connection to facilitate observation, sampling
and measuring of the wastes. Such manhole; when required, shall be
accessible and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with
plans approved by the Borough Engineer. The manhole shall be installed by
the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe
and accessible at all times.
§ 217-29. Measurements, tests and analyses.
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in §§ 217-25 and 217-27 shall be
determined in accordance with recognized standard methods for the
examination of water and sewage, and shall be determined at the control
manhole provided for in § 217-28 or upon suitable samples taken at said
control manhole. If a special manhole has not been required, the control
manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the
street sewer to the point at which the sewer lateral is connected.
§ 217-30. Special agreements with industrial concerns.
No provision of this article shall be construed to prevent a special
agreement or arrangement between the Borough and an industrial concern
whereby industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted
by the Borough for treatment subject to additional payment therefor by the
industrial concern.
§ 217-31. Protection from damage.
No person shall break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any
structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part of a private or public
sewer system.
§ 217-32. Right of entry by authorized officials.
The Borough Engineer, Health Officer and other duly authorized officers
and employees of the Borough, bearing proper credentials and
identification, shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the
purpose of inspection, observation, measurements, sampling and testing.
of such facilities shall not be commenced until approval is obtained in
writing.
D. Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or
wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and
effective operation by the owner at his expense.
§ 217-27 CHATHAM CODE § 217-33
188:634
§ 217-33. Liability for expenses.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be liable to the
Borough for any expense, loss or damage incurred by the Borough by reason
of such violation.
§ 217-34. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this article except § 217-31
shall be served by the Borough with written notice stating the nature of
the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated
in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
B. Any person who continues any violation beyond the time limit provided
for in said notice described in Subsection A of this section or any person
who violates the provisions of § 217-31 shall, upon conviction thereof,
be punished as provided in Chapter 1, § 1-14. A separate offense shall
be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation
continues.
§ 217-33 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 217-34
188:635

ARTICLE II
Sewer Service Charge
[Adopted 5-8-1989 by Ord. No. 10-89 (Ch. 118, Art. III, of the 1975
Code)]
§ 217-35. Charge established. [Amended 2-23-2004 by Ord. No.
04-03]
There is hereby established a sewer service charge for the use of the
sanitary sewer, to be imposed quarterly upon the owners of property
connected to said sanitary sewer as hereafter provided. The money so
collected shall be paid into the general revenue of the Borough.
§ 217-36. Water usage to be metered.
All users of the sewer system shall either have all water usage metered or
shall have the discharge into the sewer system metered by an approved
meter installed and maintained by the user. The Borough shall have the
right to inspect and check all meters and readings at any time.
§ 217-37. Computation of charges. [Amended 12-10-1990 by Ord.
No. 20-90; 3-22-1993 by Ord. No. 4-93; 2-14-00 by Ord. No. 2-2000;
3-24-2003 by Ord. No. 03-03; 11-24-2003 by Ord. No. 03-25;
2-23-2004 by Ord. No. 04-03; 3-14-2005 by Ord. No. 05-02;
2-13-2006 by Ord. No. 06-03; 4-26-2010 by Ord. No. 10-04]
A. The sewer service charge for each connected property shall be set
annually by resolution of the Borough Council. Each connected
property which is separately listed on the tax duplicate shall be treated
as a single property, regardless of the number of meters employed.
Where two or more such properties separately listed are located in the
same building, if their individual usage is not separately metered, the
total usage shall be apportioned in proportion to their assessed values.
[Amended 4-11-2011 by Ord. No. 11-04]
B. All properties having separate meters approved by the Borough for
measuring outside water usage that does not enter the sanitary sewer
system shall have such outside water usage subtracted from their total
water usage for the purpose of calculating the sewer service charge.
C. All properties paying at least $4,000 in annual property taxes and that
do not have separate water meters for measuring outside water usage
shall be granted an outside water usage credit of up to 1,000 cubic feet
per quarter for the two quarterly bills rendered during the third and
fourth quarters of each year.
D. Nonresidential users who regularly dispose of metered water other
than into the sanitary sewer system may apply for an additional credit if
such water exceeds 2,000 cubic feet per year. Said credit may be
allowed by resolution of the Borough Council, provided the Borough
Engineer certifies to the Council that it is impossible or impractical for
§ 217-35 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 217-37
188:637
§ 217-38. Payment of charges. [Amended 2-23-2004 by Ord. No.
04-03]
§ 217-39. Exemptions. [Amended 2-8-2010 by Ord. No. 10-01]
the user to install additional water or discharge meters and that the
method and evidence presented by the user reasonably establish the
amount of metered water which the user did in fact dispose of other
than into the sanitary sewer system during the preceding year.
E. All connected properties shall pay a minimum quarterly sewer service
charge that is equal to the minimum quarterly service charge for water
service based on meter size regardless of the total or net water usage
metered during the quarter.
A. The Borough Administrator shall determine the amount of sewer
service charge, if any, for each sewered property and shall bill the
owner of the sewered property for the quarterly sewer service charge
at the same time as the quarterly water service charge is billed.
B. The charges hereby imposed shall be payable to the Borough and shall
draw the same interest as taxes upon real estate and shall be a lien
upon the property connected to the sanitary sewer until paid, and the
Borough shall have the same remedies for collection thereof, with
interest, costs and penalties, as it has by law for the collection of taxes
on real estate.
A. No sewer service charge shall be levied or collected hereunder from
those properties which are connected to the Borough sewer system
pursuant to and subject to the agreement dated April 1, 1968, between
the Boroughs of Madison and Chatham and the Township of Chatham,
as amended.
B. No service charge shall be levied or collected hereunder from those
properties which are connected to the Borough sewer system in use by
the Borough of Chatham Emergency Squad.
§ 217-37 CHATHAM CODE § 217-39
188:638
ARTICLE III
Sewer Connection Fees
[Adopted 5-22-2006 by Ord. No. 06-14]
§ 217-40. Application for sanitary sewer connection; fees.
[Amended 7-10-2006 by Ord. No. 06-17]
No sewer connection shall be made, altered or affected except based on an
application filed at the Borough Hall. All applications must be accompanied
by a fee in the amount of $35.
§ 217-41. Fees for permanent sewer connections.
Where there is no existing sewer connection or an existing connection is to
be altered or affected to add one or more residential or other units, there
is hereby imposed the following fees to be paid to the Borough before such
unit or units are connected:
A. Each family unit connected or added in the case of single- and multipledwelling
buildings: $1,500 per unit.
B. In the case of any building or portion thereof to be used for industrial,
commercial, educational or other than dwelling purposes, the Borough
Engineer shall determine by accepted standards the number of units to
be connected or added to an existing connection; where a unit equals
an annual average daily flow of 265 gallons or fraction thereof: $1,500
per unit.
§ 217-40 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 217-41
188:639
Chapter 221
SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Newspaper vending machines — See Ch. 180.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 244.
Food handling establishments — See Ch. 284.
§ 217-41 CHATHAM CODE § 217-41
188:640
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 221-1. Title.
This chapter may be known and cited as "Chapter 221 of the Code of the
Borough of Chatham," or as the "Sidewalk Ordinance."
§ 221-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — Any person who makes the application for a sidewalk
encumbrance permit, sidewalk dining license or sidewalk permit, as
applicable.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Chatham, County of Morris, State of New
Jersey.
COMMERCIAL PROPERTY — A property where the primary use is to
generate income.
DIRECTOR — The person in charge of the Department of Public Works in
the Borough or his authorized deputy or representative.
EMERGENCY — Any unforeseen circumstance or occurrence, the existence
of which constitutes a clear and immediate danger to persons or properties.
MAIN STREET COMMERCIAL STREETSCAPE SIDEWALKS — The
sidewalks adjacent to or abutting commercial properties in the Borough of
which the Borough has maintenance responsibilities as part of streetscape
improvements pursuant to Jurisdictional Agreement No. 4476 between the
Borough of Chatham and State of New Jersey dated September 15, 2005,
and as shown on the "New Jersey Department of Transportation,
Jurisdictional Limit Map, Route 124 Streetscape, From Hillside Avenue
to Elmwood Avenue, Borough of Chatham, County of Morris, Scale: As
Indicated, Revised: April 2005" attached to said Jurisdictional Agreement.
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY — Anybody corporate and politic created
pursuant to the laws of the State of New Jersey.
PAVED WALKWAY — Can be composed of an authorized material to include
but not be limited to concrete, brick, stone, or pavers.
PERMITTEE — Any person who has been issued a sidewalk encumbrance
permit and has agreed to fulfill all the terms of this article.
PERSON — Includes any natural person, partnership, firm, association,
utility, corporation or authority created pursuant to an act of the New Jersey
General Assembly. Whenever used in any section prescribing and imposing
a penalty, the term "person" as applied to associations, shall mean the
partners or members thereof, and as applied to a corporation, the officers
thereof.
§ 221-1 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 221-2
188:641
PUBLIC UTILITY COMPANY — Any company subject to the jurisdiction of
and controlled by the New Jersey Public Utility Commission.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Property on which is situated one- or twofamily
homes, excluding apartment dwellings. For purposes of this chapter,
Article V, properties owned and used by a 501(c)(3) organization shall be
treated as residential properties.
SIDEWALK — A paved walkway for pedestrian traffic, located along the side
of a public street, whether in a commercial or residential area.
SIDEWALK DINING LICENSE — A license issued by the Borough Clerk
pursuant to Article II of this chapter to permit portions of the public
sidewalks in front of eating establishments to be used for sidewalk dining.
SIDEWALK ENCUMBRANCE PERMIT — A permit issued by the Borough
Clerk pursuant to this chapter to place or cause to be placed any structure,
merchandise, equipment, sign or other object projecting beyond the
building line into or over any sidewalk, public street or highway, within the
limits of the Borough of Chatham.
SIDEWALK PERMIT — A permit issued by the Borough Clerk pursuant to
this chapter for the construction, repair or maintenance of a sidewalk within
the Borough.
STREET — Includes a public street, public easement, public right-of-way,
public highway, public alley, public way or public road accepted or
maintained by the Borough.
SURFACE — All area within the public right-of-way, including but not
limited to the paved area and the shoulder area.
TERMS — The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall
include the feminine and the neuter.
§ 221-2 CHATHAM CODE § 221-2
188:642
ARTICLE II
Sidewalk Dining
§ 221-3. Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of this article is to allow portions of the public
sidewalks in front of eating establishments to be used for sidewalk dining
subject to issuance of a sidewalk dining license and in strict compliance
with all conditions set forth herein. This limited authorization to use the
public sidewalks is intended to advance the public purposes of stimulating
economic activity and providing amenities in the business districts of the
Borough of Chatham, and such authorization shall be solely in the nature
of a revocable license which shall not be deemed to vest licensees with any
property interest or other rights in the public sidewalk.
§ 221-4. License required.
No person shall engage in or allow sidewalk dining on any public sidewalk
without having first obtained a sidewalk dining license.
§ 221-5. Application for sidewalk dining license.
An application, sworn to by the applicant, for a sidewalk dining license shall
be filed annually with the Borough Clerk on forms supplied by the Borough
Clerk. The forms shall require the following information and such additional
information as deemed necessary:
A. The name of the applicant and the address.
B. The name and address of the eating establishment where sidewalk
dining is to be maintained.
C. A brief description of the dimensions of the to-be-used-for-sidewalkdining
area along with a drawing showing the design, number and
location of all temporary structures proposed, including tables, chairs,
planters and other equipment, as well as lighting and electrical outlet
locations, if any.
D. Consent of the owner of the premises, if other than the applicant.
E. A certificate of insurance providing at least $500,000 of comprehensive
general liability extending premises coverage to all activities associated
with sidewalk dining and listing the Borough of Chatham as an
additional insured with respect to such activities.
F. A statement that the permittee shall hold the Borough harmless, and
shall indemnify the Borough for any claims for damages or injury to
property or persons from the use of the sidewalk.
G. A check payable to the Borough of Chatham in the amount of the license
fee required by § 221-7.
§ 221-3 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 221-6
188:643
§ 221-6. Application review.
§ 221-7. Fee.
The annual fee for a sidewalk dining license shall be set from time to time
by duly adopted resolution of the Mayor and Borough Council.
§ 221-8. Sidewalk dining license terms and conditions.
§ 221-9. Restrictions and requirements; temporary suspension.
A. The Borough Clerk shall review each application for a sidewalk dining
license. The Borough Clerk shall approve or deny the application,
taking into account all factors which he/she may deem relevant,
including, but not limited to the factors set forth in §§ 221-3 and 221-10
herein, within 10 days.
B. Any applicant who is denied a sidewalk dining license may, in writing,
request a hearing on said denial before the Borough Administrator.
A. A sidewalk dining license shall be valid only through October 31 of a
given year, and a new license must be obtained for each year.
B. A sidewalk dining license may not be transferred, sold or assigned.
C. A sidewalk dining license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on
the premises at all times.
A. The conduct of sidewalk dining pursuant to a sidewalk dining license
issued under this article shall be subject to all of the following
restrictions and requirements:
(1) Sidewalk dining may be conducted in districts zoned for business;
additional signage advertising sidewalk dining is prohibited.
(2) Sidewalk dining areas must not inhibit pedestrian traffic on public
sidewalks. A minimum space of at least four feet of unrestricted
pathway shall be maintained between the closest edge of the
sidewalk dining area and the curbline. Ingress and egress to all
storefronts must be kept clear. Planters, posts with ropes or other
removable enclosures are encouraged as a means of defining the
sidewalk dining area where space allows.
(3) Restaurateurs shall not place any table in such a manner as to
block any municipal sign, litter container, public bench, or other
amenity, including fire hydrants.
(4) Restaurateurs must provide for the disposal of recyclables and
other solid waste generated by outdoor dining. Public litter
containers shall not be used for this purpose. Public sidewalks shall
be kept clean and free of debris at all time. Establishments
providing sidewalk dining shall be responsible for the clearing of
tables and disposing of refuse.
§ 221-6 CHATHAM CODE § 221-9
188:644
§ 221-10. Suspension and revocation of license.
A sidewalk dining license may be suspended or revoked for good cause by
the Borough Council, including but not limited to noncompliance with the
terms and conditions of this article, a misrepresentation of the information
supplied in the application, the conviction of a crime, or a violation of any
ordinance, statute or government regulation.
(5) Sidewalk dining shall be restricted to only those establishments
currently conducting indoor dining business. Sidewalk dining shall
be limited to the rear yard or side yard of the property or the
sidewalk area immediately in front of the establishment's building
or storefront.
(6) Restaurateurs shall not provide service to drivers or passengers of
parked cars.
(7) External sound systems are prohibited.
(8) All food preparation shall be conducted in the regular kitchen area
of the restaurant, not outside.
(9) All outdoor food service is subject to the regulations contained in
Chapter 12 of the New Jersey Sanitary Code.
(10) Sidewalk dining may commence annually on April 15 and continue
through October 31. Sidewalk dining shall be permitted between
8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
(11) The service or consumption of alcoholic beverages is prohibited.
(12) All tables, chairs, and other materials shall be removed from the
sidewalk and sidewalks must be washed every day by 10:30 p.m.
B. The Borough retains the right to temporarily suspend a sidewalk dining
license to allow for construction activity, utility repairs, special events
or for such other reasons as deemed appropriate by the Borough
Council with reasonable notice.
§ 221-9 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 221-10
188:645

ARTICLE III
Snow and Ice Removal
§ 221-11. Responsibility of owners, tenants and occupants.
§ 221-12. Placement upon sidewalk or paved path prohibited.
§ 221-13. Snow or ice removal by Borough; costs to become lien.
A. All property owners, tenants or occupants of lands adjacent to or
abutting a sidewalk within the Borough of Chatham shall remove all
snow and ice from the sidewalks in front of and, if a corner lot,
alongside of their premises and including corner crosswalks, within the
first 12 hours of daylight after same shall fall or be formed thereon, so
as to effect a pathway or walkway having a width of not less than four
feet, or, in the case of ice which may be so frozen as to make removal
impracticable, shall cause the same to be thoroughly covered with sand,
ashes, sawdust or other suitable material within 12 hours of daylight
after the same shall fall or be formed thereon.
B. In cases where a building is occupied by more than one family or
multiple tenants, the property owner, tenants and occupants thereof
are jointly and severally responsible for the removal of snow and ice as
herein provided.
A. No person shall place or cause to be placed any snow or ice upon any
sidewalk, paved path or public place within the Borough in any manner
so as to interfere with public travel or to obstruct the access to or the
operation of any fire hydrant.
B. No person shall place or cause to be placed any snow or ice upon any
sidewalk, paved path or public place within the Borough in such a
manner to interfere with, or detract from the plowing or shoveling of
said sidewalk, paved path or public place.
A. In the event of the refusal or neglect of any property owner, tenant or
occupant to comply with any of the provisions of this article within the
time limit stated therein, the Director of Public Works may cause the
snow or ice to be removed from such sidewalks. The cost of removal, as
clearly as can be ascertained, shall be certified by the Director of Public
Works to the Borough Council. The Borough Council shall examine such
certification and, if found to be correct, shall cause such cost to be
certified to the Tax Collector and charged against such real estate so
abutting or bordering upon such sidewalks, and the amount so charged
shall forthwith become a lien and a tax upon such real estate or land
and be added to, recorded and collected in the same way and manner as
the taxes next to be levied and assessed upon such premises, and shall
bear interest and be enforced and collected by the same officers and in
the same manner as other taxes.
§ 221-11 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 221-13
188:647
B. For the purpose of this chapter, each twenty-four-hour period following
a snowfall or formation of ice shall constitute a separate offense for
which prosecution shall be brought.
C. The imposition and collection of a fine imposed for a violation of this
article shall not constitute any bar to the right of the Borough to collect
the cost as certified for the removal of such snow and ice in the manner
herein authorized.
§ 221-13 CHATHAM CODE § 221-13
188:648
ARTICLE IV
Sidewalk Encumbrances
§ 221-14. Sidewalk encumbrance permit required; denial.
§ 221-15. Specifications.
The lowest fabric portions of any table umbrellas, awnings or other
overhead shade or rain protection must be at least seven feet above the
sidewalk or walking surface, and the lowest rigid portion or framework
supporting any table umbrellas, awnings or other overhead shade or rain
protection must be at least 7 1/2 feet above the sidewalk or walking surface.
§ 221-16. Failure to remove sidewalk encumbrance.
In the event a person fails to remove any structure, merchandise,
equipment, sign or other object erected or maintained in violation of this
article within five days written notice thereof, the Borough Engineer may
remove such any structure, merchandise, equipment, sign or other object
and collect the cost of such removal, together with the penalty imposed by
this chapter, from the person constructing or maintaining same.
§ 221-17. Fees.
The annual fee for a sidewalk encumbrance permit shall be set from time to
time by duly adopted resolution of the Borough Council.
§ 221-18. Exceptions.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed any
structure, merchandise, equipment, sign or other object projecting
beyond the building line into or over any sidewalk, public street or
highway, within the limits of the Borough of Chatham without a
sidewalk encumbrance permit issued by the Clerk of the Borough of
Chatham and subject to the terms set forth herein.
B. The Borough Clerk shall review each application for a sidewalk
encumbrance permit. The Borough Clerk, upon the recommendation of
the Borough Engineer, shall approve or deny the application, taking
into account all factors which it may deem relevant including within 10
days.
C. Any applicant who is denied a sidewalk encumbrance permit may, in
writing, request a hearing on said denial before the Borough
Administrator.
A. The provisions of this article shall not apply to loading, unloading,
moving, or transportation of such merchandise, equipment, or other
objects.
§ 221-14 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 221-18
188:649
§ 221-19. Bicycles and skateboards.
No person shall ride or operate a bicycle, skateboard, scooter, skates, or
similar apparatus upon the sidewalks within the central business district
of the Borough, as defined in Chapter 165, Land Development Regulations,
provided that this section shall not apply to the use of such apparatus by
children under 10 years of age, nor to children's carriers, nor to the use of
such apparatus by persons with disabilities.
B. In case of an emergency, the Chief of Police may grant permission to
permit a sidewalk encumbrance for such period as may be reasonable
under the circumstances.
§ 221-18 CHATHAM CODE § 221-19
188:650
ARTICLE V
Construction, Maintenance and Repair of Sidewalks
§ 221-20. Destruction of sidewalks.
No person shall negligently or willfully break, damage, injure or destroy any
curb or sidewalk within the Borough.
§ 221-21. Sidewalk construction standards.
§ 221-22. Restoration of site; cleanup.
Upon completion of sidewalk construction, repair or maintenance, all
equipment, unused materials and refuse shall be removed from the site of
the work, and all public and private properties damaged or disturbed during
the course of construction shall be replaced or repaired. The site shall be
put as nearly as possible into conditions corresponding to that which existed
prior to construction, all to the satisfaction of the Borough Engineer or his
authorized representative.
§ 221-23. Responsibility for new sidewalk construction; proper
maintenance and repair for existing sidewalks.
A. Sidewalks adjacent to or abutting residential properties within the
Borough shall conform to the specifications in Residential Site
Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.19).
B. Sidewalks adjacent to or abutting commercial properties shall be
constructed, maintained and repaired in a manner which meets the
requirements of Section 607 of the NJDOT Standard Specifications, and
the concrete shall be Class B air-entranced and shall conform to the
requirements of Section 914 of the NJDOT Standard Specifications,
unless otherwise directed by the Borough Engineer.
C. Main Street commercial streetscape sidewalks shall continue to be
constructed, maintained or repaired in conformity with the Borough's
streetscape standard as adopted by the Borough Engineer.
A. Except as set forth in § 221-23B herein, the Borough of Chatham shall
be responsible for the construction, reconstruction and proper
maintenance and repair for sidewalks adjacent to or abutting
residential properties in the Borough and the Main Street commercial
streetscape sidewalks.
B. The owner of property adjacent to or abutting a sidewalk within the
Borough shall be responsible for the construction, reconstruction and
proper maintenance and repair for sidewalks to the appropriate
minimum standards set forth in § 221-21 in connection with:
(1) The repair or replacement of sidewalks damaged or removed by a
property owner, tenant, occupant or contractor during work done
at his/her property;
§ 221-20 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 221-23
188:651
§ 221-24. Sidewalk permit required; fee; appeals.
(2) The repair or replacement of sidewalks damaged by privately
owned tree roots or landscaping;
(3) The repair or replacement of sidewalks damaged by heavy vehicle
traffic to and from said property;
(4) The repair or replacement of sidewalks damaged by drainage from
private property;
(5) The construction of new sidewalks by the abutting or adjoining
property owner on his/her own initiative where a sidewalk does not
currently exist; and
(6) The construction, reconstruction, replacement or repair of
sidewalks where the construction of a new one- or two-family
dwelling is proposed on the abutting or adjacent property; and
(7) The construction, reconstruction, replacement or repair of a
driveway or driveway apron to the abutting or adjoining property.
C. Where an abutting or adjacent property owner is required to construct,
reconstruct, maintain or repair any Main Street commercial
streetscape sidewalk pursuant to § 221-23B, the Borough shall perform
the construction, reconstruction, maintenance or repair of the Main
Street commercial streetscape sidewalk, and the abutting or adjacent
property owner shall reimburse the Borough for all costs of such
construction, reconstruction, maintenance or repair.
D. It shall be the duty of any owner of commercial property adjacent to or
abutting a sidewalk for which the Borough does not have maintenance
responsibility pursuant to § 221-23A to construct, reconstruct, repair
and maintain said sidewalk to the appropriate minimum standards set
forth in § 221-21.
E. If the Borough Engineer determines that there is a need to construct,
reconstruct, repair or maintain the sidewalk under § 221-23B or D,
written notice shall be given to the abutting or adjacent property owner
requiring the necessary specified work to be undertaken within the
time stated in the notice.
A. Where an abutting or adjacent property owner is required to construct,
reconstruct, repair or maintain any sidewalk within the Borough
pursuant to § 221-23B or D, said property owner shall first make
application in writing on the form prescribed by the Borough for, and
obtain, a sidewalk permit to do so from the Borough Clerk.
B. Every such application shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount
which shall be set from time to time by duly adopted resolution of the
Mayor and Borough Council for the processing of the application and
§ 221-23 CHATHAM CODE § 221-24
188:652
§ 221-25. Sidewalk repair and maintenance; costs to become lien.
§ 221-26. Sidewalk inspection; repair and maintenance policy.
issuance of the sidewalk permit and, further, for the inspection of the
completed repairs.
C. Construction shall not commence under this section until a sidewalk
permit has been issued.
D. If the application for a sidewalk permit is denied, the applicant may
appeal said denial in writing to the Borough Administrator. The decision
of the Borough Administrator shall be final.
A. Whenever an abutting or adjacent property owner fails to construct,
reconstruct, repair or maintain the sidewalk abutting said property
pursuant to § 221-23B or D, or to reimburse the Borough for all costs of
the construction, reconstruction, maintenance or repair of a Main
Street commercial streetscape sidewalk pursuant to § 221-23C, written
notice shall be given to said owner directing said owner to perform the
construction, reconstruction, maintenance or repair or reimburse the
Borough, as appropriate, within 30 days from the date of service of the
notice. Whenever any property is unoccupied and the property owner
cannot be found within the Borough, or in case such owner is a
nonresident of the Borough or his or her post office address cannot be
ascertained, then notice shall be given as specified in N.J.S.A. 40:65-14.
B. If the abutting or adjacent property owner does not comply with the
requirements of the notice described herein, the Borough Engineer may
cause the required work to be done at said owner's expense.
C. The cost of such work, or the cost of the construction, reconstruction,
maintenance or repair of a Main Street commercial streetscape
sidewalk pursuant to § 221-23C, as appropriate, shall be certified by the
Borough Engineer to the Tax Collector of the Borough. Upon the filing
of the certification of costs with the Tax Collector, the amount of the
cost of such work shall be and become a lien upon the abutting property
to the same extent that assessments for local improvements are liens in
the Borough, and shall be collected in the manner provided by law for
the collection of such other assessments, and shall bear interest at the
same rate.
D. In addition thereto, the Borough may have an action to recover the
same amount against the owner of the lands, in any court having
competent jurisdiction thereof.
E. The imposition and collection of a fine imposed for a violation of this
article shall not constitute any bar to the right of the Borough to collect
the cost as certified for sidewalk construction, reconstruction, repair or
maintenance in the manner herein authorized.
§ 221-24 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 221-26
188:653
A. On a periodic basis, the Borough Engineer shall be responsible for
causing the inspection of all sidewalks adjacent to or abutting
residential properties and the Main Street commercial streetscape
sidewalks. The extent and location of any irregularities or defects on
any such sidewalks shall be noted and made part of the Borough's
inventory of all such sidewalks.
B. Any person may notify the Borough of any alleged irregularity or
defects to any sidewalks within the Borough on the prescribed form
submitted to the Borough Clerk. The Borough Engineer shall cause the
inspection of the subject sidewalk in a timely manner considering
manpower and workload.
C. It is the intention of this article to implement and prioritize the
maintenance and repair of sidewalks adjacent to or abutting residential
properties and the Main Street commercial streetscape sidewalks over
a period of time by utilizing available resources based on the Borough's
inventory of all such sidewalks and to balance sidewalk safety and
appearance with other Public Works priorities. The funding of sidewalk
repair and maintenance shall be determined by the sole discretion of
Borough Council, upon the recommendation of the Borough Engineer,
except where there is a dangerous condition of a sidewalk needing
immediate repair or replacement.
§ 221-26 CHATHAM CODE § 221-26
188:654
ARTICLE VI
Enforcement, Violations and Penalties
§ 221-27. Enforcement authority.
The Borough Clerk shall be responsible for licensing, permitting and the
collection of all fees set forth under this chapter. This chapter shall
otherwise be enforced by the Borough Engineer and the Chatham Borough
Police Department as well as the Board of Health as to the Sanitary Code.
§ 221-28. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty set
forth in Chapter 1, § 1-14.
B. The continuation of such violation of each successive day shall
constitute a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or
permitting the continuation of the violation may be punished as
provided above for each separate offense.
§ 221-27 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 221-28
188:655
Chapter 224
SINGLE-USE BAGS AT RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 224-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CUSTOMER — Any person purchasing goods or services from a retail
establishment.
OPERATOR — Any person in control of, or having the responsibility for, the
operation of a retail establishment, which may include, but is not limited to,
the owner of the retail establishment.
PERSON — Any natural person, firm, corporation, partnership, or other
organization or group however organized.
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment that conducts retail trade
as defined in Chatham Code § 165-10.93
REUSABLE BAG — A durable carry-out bag with stitched handles for
reinforcement made from any natural or synthetic material other than
plastic film including, but not necessarily limited to, woven or nonwoven
plastic or cloth, that is at least 10 mils thick, and that is specifically
designed and manufactured for multiple reuse, and that is washable or is
made from a material that can be cleaned or disinfected regularly.
SINGLE-USE PLASTIC CARRY-OUT BAG — Any bag made predominantly of
plastic that is not made or intended for reuse that is provided by an operator
of a retail establishment to a customer at the point of sale. This definition
specifically exempts the following from the category of "single-use plastic
carry-out bag":
Bags provided by operators and used by consumers inside retail
establishments to:
Package bulk items, such as fruit, vegetables, nuts, grains, candies,
or small hardware items;
(1)
Contain or wrap frozen foods, meat, or fish, whether packaged or
not;
(2)
Contain or wrap flowers, potted plants, or other items where
dampness may be an issue;
(3)
(4) Contain live animals, such as fish or insects sold in pet stores;
(5) Contain unwrapped prepared foods or bakery goods;
(6) Contain pharmacy prescriptions or medicines; or
A.
93.Editor's Note: See Ch. 165, Land Development Regulations.
§ 221-28 CHATHAM CODE § 224-1
188:656
§ 224-2. Single-use plastic carry-out bags prohibited.
§ 224-3. Paper bags subject to mandatory fee.
Function as "produce bags" or "product bags," which shall mean
bags used exclusively to carry produce, meats, or other food items
to the point of sale inside a retail establishment or, for reasons of
public health and safety, to prevent such food items from coming
into direct contact with other purchased items.
(7)
Newspaper bags for home delivery, door-hanger bags, laundry and/or
dry-cleaning bags, or bags sold in packages containing multiple bags
intended for use as food storage bags, garbage bags, yard waste bags,
or pet waste bags.
B.
A. Effective March 1, 2020, no retail establishment shall provide any
single-use plastic carry-out bags, as defined in § 224-1 above, to any
customer at the point of sale. The point of sale in such transactions is
deemed to be at the retail establishment, regardless of where payment
for the transaction physically occurs.
B. Effective March 1, 2020, single-use plastic carry-out bags may not be
distributed on Borough property or at Borough-sponsored events.
A. Effective March 1, 2020, all retail establishments shall make available
to customers, upon request by the customer, for a fee of $0.10 per bag,
paper bags for the purpose of carrying goods or other materials away
from the point of sale, subject to the provisions of this chapter. The fee
charged shall be reflected in the sales receipt and shall be subject to
applicable tax. The fee charged shall be retained by the retail
establishment.
B. The following bags shall be exempt from the ten-cent fee and are
provided by operators inside retail establishments to:
(1) Package bulk items, such as fruit, vegetables, nuts, grains, candies,
or small hardware items;
(2) Contain unwrapped prepared foods or bakery goods;
(3) Take home uneaten food that has been served in a restaurant;
(4) Take-out foods intended for consumption away from the retail
establishment for reasons of public health and safety during the
transportation of such food products;
(5) Contain pharmacy prescriptions and medicinal products; or
(6) Function as "produce bags" or "product bags," which shall mean
bags used exclusively to carry produce, meats, or other food items
to the point of sale inside a retail establishment or, for reasons of
public health and safety, to prevent such food items from coming
into direct contact with other purchased items.
§ 224-1 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 224-4
188:657
§ 224-4. Promotion of reusable bags.
§ 224-5. Exempt customers.
§ 224-6. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. Each retail establishment shall be strongly encouraged to educate its
staff to promote the use of reusable bags and to post signs encouraging
customers to use reusable bags rather than paper carry-out bags.
B. Each retail establishment shall be strongly encouraged to educate its
staff to make inquiry to a customer whether the customer desires a
paper carry-out bag or has supplied his/her own reusable bags before
offering the paper carry-out bags to the customer.
C. Each retail establishment shall inform customers that if they choose a
paper carry-out bag they will be charged a fee of $0.10 per paper bag.
D. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit customers from using bags of any
type that they choose to bring to retail establishments themselves, in
lieu of using bags available for a fee from the retail establishment, or
from carrying away goods that are not placed in a bag.
E. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a retail establishment from
providing a credit to a customer who has supplied his/her own bags.
F. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a retail establishment from
offering for sale reusable bags as defined in this chapter.
G. The Borough of Chatham shall undertake a reusable bag education
program that includes:
(1) Distributing information and free reusable bags as part of a bring
your own bag (BYOB) campaign; and
(2) Maintaining "give one take one" reusable bag collection boxes in
municipal and other facilities.
A. Any customer who states that she or he participates in, or is a
beneficiary of, any United States government (federal) welfare
program, including but not limited to the Special Supplemental
Nutrition Program for Women, Infants and Children (WIC) or any local
or county welfare assistance program, or any New Jersey state welfare
program, including but not limited to the New Jersey Supplemental
Nutritional Assistance Program (SNAP) or the New Jersey State
Supplemental Security Income Program (SSI) shall be provided paper
bags or reusable bags without charge. No further identification is
necessary.
B. Any person who receives food, household items and/or personal care
items from a food pantry or food distribution program shall be provided
paper or reusable bags without charge.
§ 224-4 CHATHAM CODE § 224-6
188:658
Chapter 228
(RESERVED)
Chapter 233
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 173.
A. The Chatham Borough Police Department shall have the responsibility
for enforcement of this chapter. The Borough Administrator may
designate additional Borough officers, employees or agencies as he
deems necessary to enforce this chapter. No such designation shall take
effect until it is filed with the Borough Clerk.
B. Any retail establishment that violates or fails to comply with any of the
requirements of this chapter after an initial written warning notice shall
be liable for same.
C. If a retail establishment has subsequent violations of this chapter after
the issuance of an initial written warning notice of a violation, the
following penalties shall be payable by the operator of the retail
establishment upon a plea of guilty entered pursuant to the adopted
local violations schedule or after trial and conviction in municipal court:
(1) For the first violation after the first written warning notice is given:
$100;
(2) For the second violation after the written warning notice is given:
$200; and
(3) For the third and any subsequent violations after the written
warning notice is given: $500.
D. Fines shall be imposed for each day a violation occurs or is allowed to
continue. A retail establishment shall not be subject to more than one
fine for violations or continuing violations that occur on the same day.
§ 224-6 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 224-6
188:659

ARTICLE I
Recycling; Collection and Disposal; Service Charges
[Adopted 8-11-1986 by Ord. No. 12-86; amended in its entirety
12-12-1988 by Ord. No. 22-88 (Ch. 125 of the 1975 Code)]
§ 233-1. Definitions. [Amended 8-12-1991 by Ord. No. 10-91;
3-25-1996 by Ord. No. 3-96; 7-14-2008 by Ord. No. 08-15]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL — Any nonresidential building or establishment, including
but not limited to those used for retail, wholesale, dining, offices,
professional services, shipping and receiving areas and cafeterias.
COMMINGLED — A combining of nonputrescible source-separated
recyclable materials for the purpose of recycling.
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials designated
within the Morris County District Solid Waste Management Plan or
pursuant to the Borough Code to be source separated for the purpose of
recycling. These are materials which would otherwise become solid waste,
and which may be collected, separated, or processed and returned to the
economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or products. These
materials include:
AEROSOL CANS — A dispenser that holds a substance under pressure
and that can release it as a fine spray (usually by means of a propellant
gas). Aerosol cans must be empty. Aerosol cans that are not empty must
be deposited at the Morris County Household Hazardous Waste Facility.
(NOTE: This item is mandated by the Borough only.)
A.
ALUMINUM CANS — Cans made from aluminum that was
manufactured to hold a serving of a beverage. Specifically omitted from
this definition are aluminum foil and aluminum pie plates.
B.
ALUMINUM FOIL — A very thin, pliable, easily torn sheet of aluminum
used for cooking, packaging, cosmetics, and insulation. (NOTE: This
item is mandated by the Borough only.)
C.
BROWN PAPER BAGS — Brown paper bags of the type used by food
and other stores to hold the purchases of a customer. (NOTE: This item
is mandated by the Borough only.)
D.
BRUSH — Branches, woody plants and other similar vegetative
material. Leaves and grass do not constitute brush.
E.
CORRUGATED CARDBOARD — The term used to identify a type of
paper in which a portion has been made to have a wavy surface
(alternating ridge and grooves) and is placed between two flat surfaces
for the sake of strength and which is commonly used to form cartons.
Includes shipping containers made with kraft paper linerboard and
corrugated medium.
F.
§ 233-1 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 233-1
188:661
GLASS BOTTLES AND JARS — Bottles and jars made from glass,
including clear, brown and green glass. A bottle is defined as a
receptacle having a narrow neck and a mouth that can be corked
or capped. A jar is defined as a wide-mouthed container that can
be capped. Caps and lids not included. Specifically omitted from this
definition are drinking glasses, windows, mirrors, light bulbs, and
anything made of Pyrex® or ceramic.
G.
GRASS CLIPPINGS — Vegetative material generated when grass
(lawns) are cut.
H.
HAZARDOUS DRY CELL BATTERIES — Rechargeable batteries, such
as nickel-cadmium, nickel-iron, nickel metal hydride, lithium ion, small
sealed lead acid, etc. These are often used as substitutes for
nonrechargeable batteries in standard sizes such as AAA, AA, C, D
and 9V. Rechargeable batteries are commonly found in cordless tools,
cellular and cordless phones, laptop computers, cameras, remote
controls, toys, etc. Also included in this definition are nonrechargeable
batteries that are hazardous as defined by the Resource Conservation
Recovery Act ("RCRA"), regardless of the RCRA exclusion of household
waste from the definition of hazardous waste pursuant to 40 C.F.R.
261.4(b). Nonrechargeable, hazardous batteries include older alkaline
and carbon zinc batteries as well as silver oxide, mercury and
magnesium button-type batteries, etc. It should be noted that
domestically manufactured alkaline and carbon zinc nonrechargeable
batteries made after circa 1994 eliminated mercury content to the point
that they should not be considered RCRA hazardous and therefore are
not included in this material category. Items in this category are not
eligible for curbside recycling.
I.
HOUSEHOLD DRY CELL BATTERIES — Single-use dry cell batteries,
types AAA, AA, C, D, 9-volt and button cell. (NOTE: This item is
mandated by the Borough only.)
J.
LEAD-ACID BATTERIES — Storage batteries in which the electrodes
are grids of lead containing lead oxides that change in composition
during charging and discharging, and the electrolyte is dilute sulfuric
acid. These include starting batteries such as car batteries that deliver
a short burst of high power to start the engine. In addition, they
may include deep cell batteries found on boats or campers used to
power accessories like trolling motors, winches or lights. Items in this
category must be deposited at the Morris County Household Hazardous
Waste Facility.
K.
LEAVES — Vegetative material, typically generated in the autumn when
they fall from trees and then are raked from residents' and/or
commercial lawns.
L.
MAGAZINES AND CATALOGUES — A category of mixed paper
comprised of periodicals with stapled or glued bindings. (NOTE: This
item is mandated by the Borough only.)
M.
§ 233-1 CHATHAM CODE § 233-1
188:662
METAL APPLIANCES — Appliances composed predominantly of metal,
and may include stoves, washing machines and dryers, for example,
if the appliance is predominantly metal. Also included are air
conditioners, refrigerators and dehumidifiers if they are predominantly
metal. If these appliances on the latter list contain refrigerants that
are prohibited by the Clean Air Act from being knowingly vented, the
refrigerant must be recovered accordingly. Items in this category are
not eligible for curbside recycling, but may be placed for bulk waste
collection.
N.
METAL POTS AND PANS — Metal cooking vessels that are usually
round and deep; often have a handle and lid. (NOTE: This item is
mandated by the Borough only.)
O.
MILK AND JUICE CARTONS — All paper cartons containing milk, juice,
soups, custards, sauces, etc. (NOTE: This item is mandated by the
Borough only.)
P.
MIXED PAPER — Various categories of recyclable paper, including but
not limited to white and colored paper used in printers, photocopiers
and fax machines, white and colored ledger paper, carbonless copy
paper, construction paper, undeliverable mail, mailed promotional
letters/ advertisements/circulars, magazines and catalogues,
envelopes, soft-cover (paperback) books, hardcover books (with cover
removed), wrapping paper and phone books.
Q.
NATURAL WOOD WASTE — Logs, stumps, branches and other wood
tree parts. Dimensional lumber is omitted from inclusion in this
definition.
R.
NEWSPAPER — A publication containing news, information and
advertising, usually printed on low-cost paper called newsprint.
Newspaper may include glossy inserts which come with the paper,
dependent upon the market conditions at the time. The Borough will
collect glossy inserts which come with the paper.
S.
OIL-CONTAMINATED SOIL — Nonhazardous soil that contains
petroleum hydrocarbons (gasoline, diesel, kerosene, jet fuel, No. 4
and No. 6 heating oils and certain other refinery products including
coal tar). This type of soil shall be determined to be nonhazardous in
accordance with the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:26. Items in this
category are not eligible for curbside recycling.
T.
PAINT CANS (LATEX) — Metal cans used to contain latex paint. Latex
paint is a water-based paint made with a synthetic binder (latex), such
as acrylic, vinyl acrylic, or styrene acrylic latex. (NOTE: This item is
mandated by the Borough only.)
U.
PAPERBOARD/ CHIPBOARD — A heavy layered paper, usually at least
100 pounds per ream or more. It is intended to be a rigid, durable
form of paper, often used in packaging. Some examples include: cereal
boxes, shoe boxes, dry food boxes, tissue boxes, paper cups, file folders,
V.
§ 233-1 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 233-1
188:663
noncorrugated linerboard and packaging materials. This term does not
include containers with coatings such as plastic, poly, wax or metals.
(NOTE: This item is mandated by the Borough only.)
PLASTIC BOTTLES (CODED 1 AND 2) — - Plastic bottles coded to
indicate that they are comprised of the specific types of plastic
compounds (polymers) known as polyethylene terephthalate (PETE)
or high-density polyethylene (HDPE). See symbols below. A bottle is
defined as a receptacle having a narrow neck and a mouth that can
be corked or capped. Caps and lids not included. Any item made of
plastic that is not a bottle, and any plastic bottle without one of the
symbols shown to the left is specifically omitted from this definition.
Empty bottles which contained hazardous materials, such as motor oil,
antifreeze, etc., should not be recycled.
W.
PLASTIC CONTAINERS — Plastic containers coded to indicate that
they are comprised of the specific types of plastic compounds
(polymers) known as polyethylene terephthalate (PETE) or high-density
polyethylene (HDPE). See symbols below. Empty containers which
contained hazardous materials, such as motor oil, antifreeze, etc.,
should not be recycled. (NOTE: This item is mandated by the Borough
only.)
X.
STEEL (TIN) CANS — An air-tight container for the distribution or
storage of goods, composed of thin, usually ferrous, metal. This
includes steel cans coated with tin and other metal cans which are not
all aluminum. Examples are soup cans and tuna fish cans. The following
metal cans shall not be classified as ferrous containers and shall not be
recycled: any can which contained hazardous materials.
Y.
USED MOTOR OIL — Motor oil from motor vehicles, lawn mowers,
boats, etc., which has served its intended useful purpose. Items in this
category may be deposited at the Morris County Household Hazardous
Waste Facility or with participating service stations and/or garages.
Z.
§ 233-1 CHATHAM CODE § 233-1
188:664
ELECTRONIC EQUIPMENT — Includes computers, machines, keyboards,
mice, printers, stereos, wire, telecommunications equipment, printer ink
cartridges, DVD players, main frames, scanners, televisions, fax machines,
monitors, speakers, VCRs. Items in this category must be deposited at the
Morris County Household Hazardous Waste Facility.
HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE — Waste substances which can pose a
substantial or potential hazard to human health or the environment when
improperly managed. These items include: aerosol cans (not empty),
automotive fluids, diesel fuel, fluorescent light bulbs and ballasts, gasoline,
hazardous dry cell batteries, herbicides, kerosene, lead-acid batteries, nonlatex
driveway sealants or roofing tar, oil-based paints, oil-contaminated
soil, stains, varnishes, paint thinners and removers, pesticides, pool and
photographic chemicals, propane cylinders, unknown materials, used motor
oil, and whole tires.
INSTITUTION — An established organization or foundation dedicated to
public service or culture, including but not limited to religious, educational,
health-care and governmental establishments.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — Any building or structure, or complex of
buildings, in which three or more dwelling units are owner-occupied or
rented or leased, or offered for rental or lease, for residential purposes
(see N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13a) and shall include hotels, motels, or other guest
houses serving transient or seasonal guests as those terms are defined
under Subsection (j) of Section 3 of the "Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law,"
P.L. 1967, c. 76 (N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq.).
MUNICIPAL RECYCLING DEPOT — Any site designated by the Borough
Council for the dropoff of recyclable materials.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE (MSW) STREAM — All solid waste generated
at residential, commercial, and institutional establishments within the
boundaries of the municipality of the Borough of Chatham.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Those materials which would otherwise
become solid waste, and which may be collected, separated, or processed
and returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or
products; includes designated recyclable material and textiles.
RESIDENT — Any person who owns, leases and/or occupies dwellings
within the municipality, including those in multifamily dwellings and/or
single-family developments.
SOLID WASTE UTILITY — A self-liquidating agency with a dedicated budget
created to transact solid waste collection and disposal services as outlined
below within the Borough of Chatham; said utility operations are separate
and distinct but not autonomous from other municipal operations as
provided for under N.J.S.A. 40A:4-34 through 40A:4-36.
WHOLE TIRES — Tires that are whole, not chipped into small pieces.
(NOTE: This item is mandated by the Borough only. Tires are allowed to
be recycled and/or incinerated for energy recovery.)
AA.
§ 233-1 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 233-1
188:665
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Recyclable materials
which are separated at the point of generation, by the generator thereof,
from solid waste for the purposes of recycling;
SOURCE SEPARATION — The process by which recyclable materials are
separated at the point of generation, by the generator thereof, from solid
waste for the purposes of recycling.
TEXTILES — Any cloth or goods produced by weaving, knitting, or felting.
This category includes clothing, sheets, towels, blankets, and similar
materials, and shoes. Textiles do not include rugs and carpets.
§ 233-1.1. Acceptance of municipal solid waste recycling goal.
[Added 7-14-2008 by Ord. No. 08-15]
As set forth in N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13.3.b.(4)(c), the Borough of Chatham
accepts the goal of 50% recycling of municipal solid waste by 2015 and shall
monitor its level of recycling and solid waste disposal and shall strive to
achieve the recycling of 50% of the municipal solid waste generated within
its borders.
§ 233-2. Contracts and regulations pertaining to collection and
disposal of solid waste. [Amended 8-12-1991 by Ord. No. 10-91;
3-25-1996 by Ord. No. 3-96; 7-14-2008 by Ord. No. 08-15]
§ 233-3. Separation of recyclable materials. [Amended 3-25-1996 by
Ord. No. 3-96; 7-14-2008 by Ord. No. 08-15]
A. The Borough Council may make provision by contract or otherwise, as
circumstances may require, for the collection and disposal of solid
waste. By resolution it may also establish and promulgate reasonable
regulations as to such collection and disposal.
B. Designated recyclables shall be those items listed as designated
materials as specified in § 233-1. The Borough Council, from time to
time, may identify additional materials which are recyclable or which in
any event should not be disposed of in the same manner as other solid
waste and which will be collected or brought to one or more locations
for separate disposal.
C. Definitions and requirements as to the preparation of solid waste,
including recyclables, for collection, when set forth in contracts for
collection made by the Borough, shall also be considered regulations
adopted pursuant hereto. These contracts as well as all regulations
adopted pursuant hereto shall be on file in the office of the Borough
Clerk and may be examined on request.
A. Designated recyclable materials, textiles, and electronic equipment as
specified herein shall be source separated from solid waste before such
waste is placed for collection. Such designated recyclable materials,
textiles, and electronic equipment shall then be disposed of in
accordance with such regulations or this article. It shall be unlawful to
§ 233-1 CHATHAM CODE § 233-3
188:666
§ 233-3.1. Collection of recyclable materials and solid waste.
[Added 7-14-2008 by Ord. No. 08-15]
The collection of recyclable material shall be in the manner prescribed as
follows:
combine designated recyclable materials, textiles, and electronic
equipment with other solid waste. Failure to source separate
designated recyclable materials, textiles, and electronic equipment for
recycling is a violation of this article.
B. Institutional and commercial establishments shall source separate all
designated recyclable materials, textiles, and electronic equipment for
recycling. Designated recyclable materials, textiles, and electronic
equipment may be deposited at the municipal recycling depot during
the hours it is open, collected and disposed of via an agreement with
the Borough or via an agreement with a private company. In the case of
multigenerator buildings such as apartment buildings, office buildings,
etc., the building management, the owner, as well as the generator shall
be responsible for compliance with the requirements of this article.
C. All of the aforementioned provisions may, from time to time, be
modified by the Municipal Recycling Coordinator to the extent that
procedures are developed for establishments to have their recyclables
recycled.
A. All containers and brown paper bags containing recyclable materials
and all receptacles containing solid waste shall be placed, prior to
collection, between the curb and the sidewalk, or in the absence of curb
and sidewalk, as near to the street as not to constitute a danger, where
such receptacles shall be readily accessible to the collector without
providing obstruction to pedestrians. The owner or occupant of the
premises shall keep all solid waste and recycling receptacles clean and
in safe handling condition. Receptacles or other items to be disposed of
shall be placed as noted above anytime after 5:00 p.m. of the day
immediately preceding the day of collection, but no later than 6:00 a.m.
of the day of collection. After collection, any containers shall be
removed from the curbside by no later than 7:00 p.m. of the day of
collection.
B. Solid waste that cannot be placed at the curb includes: household
hazardous waste, electronic equipment, textiles, brush, grass clippings,
leaves (except during periods designated by the Borough) and natural
wood waste. Metal appliances may only be placed at the curb on bulk
pickup days.
C. All receptacles or dumpsters shall be kept clean and in a safe manner.
§ 233-3 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 233-3.2
188:667
§ 233-3.2. Residential dwelling compliance requirements. [Added
7-14-2008 by Ord. No. 08-15]
The owner of any property shall be responsible for compliance with this
article. For multifamily units, the management or owner is responsible
for setting up and maintaining the recycling system, including collection
of recyclable materials, in accordance with guidelines or regulations
established by the appropriate municipal office. Violations and penalty
notices will be directed to the owner or management, in those instances
where the violator is not easily identifiable. The management shall issue
notification and collection rules to new tenants when they arrive and every
six months during their occupancy.
§ 233-3.3. Nonresidential establishment compliance requirements.
[Added 7-14-2008 by Ord. No. 08-15]
§ 233-3.4. New developments of multifamily residential units or
commercial, institutional, or industrial properties. [Added
7-14-2008 by Ord. No. 08-15]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13a and 13:1E-99.16C:
A. All commercial and institutional generators of solid waste shall be
required to comply with the provisions of this article.
B. The arrangement for collection of designated recyclable materials
hereunder shall be the responsibility of the commercial, institutional or
industrial property owner or their designee. All commercial,
institutional or industrial properties which provide outdoor litter
receptacles and disposal service for their contents shall also provide
receptacles for designated recyclable materials, for those materials
commonly deposited, in the location of the litter receptacle, and shall
provide for separate recycling service for their contents.
C. Every business, institution, or industrial facility shall report on an
annual basis to the Municipal Recycling Coordinator, on such forms as
may be prescribed, on recycling activities at their premises, including
the amount of recycled material, by material type, collected and
recycled and the vendor or vendors providing recycling service.
D. All food-service establishments (defined as a place where food is
provided for individual portion service directly to the consumer,
whether the food is provided free of charge or sold and whether the
food is consumed on or off the premises; including restaurants, eating
and drinking establishments, employee cafeterias, bakeries, and bars)
shall, in addition to compliance with all other recycling requirements,
be required to recycle grease and/or cooking oil created in the
processing of food or food products, and maintain such records as may
be prescribed, for inspection by any person authorized by § 233-9
herein to enforce this article.
§ 233-3.2 CHATHAM CODE § 233-3.4
188:668
§ 233-4. Documentation. [Amended 3-25-1996 by Ord. No. 3-96;
7-14-2008 by Ord. No. 08-15]
All commercial, institutional or multifamily dwellings which are not serviced
by municipal recycling collection systems must submit recycling
documentation on an annual basis to the Municipal Recycling Coordinator.
The reporting period shall be from July 1 to June 30. Reports shall be due
on or before July 15.
§ 233-5. Applicability.
Every person placing solid waste or recyclable materials for collection and
the owner, lessee or occupant of the premises at which or in front of which
the solid waste or recyclable material is placed shall be responsible to
comply with this article and the regulations established pursuant hereto.
§ 233-6. Private disposal of recyclable materials. [Amended
7-14-2008 by Ord. No. 08-15]
Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, any person may donate
or sell recyclable material, including designated recyclable materials, to
any person, partnership or corporation, whether operating for profit or
A. Any application to the Planning Board of the municipality of the
Borough of Chatham, for subdivision or site plan approval for the
construction of multifamily dwellings of three or more units, singlefamily
developments of 50 or more units or any commercial,
institutional, or industrial development for the utilization of 1,000
square feet or more of land, must include a recycling plan. This plan
must contain, at a minimum, the following:
(1) A detailed analysis of the expected composition and amounts of
solid waste and recyclables generated at the proposed
development; and
(2) Locations documented on the application's site plan that provide
for convenient recycling opportunities for all owners, tenants, and
occupants. The recycling area shall be of sufficient size, convenient
location and contain other attributes (signage, lighting, fencing,
etc.) as may be determined by the Municipal Recycling
Coordinator.
B. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the Borough, the
owner of any new multifamily housing or commercial, institutional, or
industrial development must supply a copy of a duly executed contract
with a hauling company for the purposes of collection and recycling of
designated recyclable materials, in those instances where the
municipality does not otherwise provide this service.
C. Provision shall be made for the indoor, or enclosed outdoor, storage and
pickup of solid waste, to be approved by the Borough Engineer.
§ 233-3.4 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 233-6
188:669
not for profit. Such sale or donation, however, shall be handled directly
and privately and in a manner that does not interfere with the regulated
methods of collection. No such person, partnership or corporation shall
appropriate recyclable material placed for collection pursuant to such
regulations. Any person, partnership or corporation disposing of recyclable
material pursuant to this section shall submit documentation to the Borough
Recycling Coordinator as described in the preceding section.
§ 233-7. Ownership of materials following placement for collection.
[Added 3-25-1996 by Ord. No. 3-96; amended 7-14-2008 by Ord. No.
08-15]
From time of placement at the designated collection point, the designated
recyclable materials shall be the property of the Borough or its designated
agents, and the revenues collected from the sale of designated recyclable
materials, if any, shall be the property of the Borough or its designated
agents.
§ 233-8. Unlawful acts. [Added 3-25-1996 by Ord. No. 3-96;
amended 7-14-2008 by Ord. No. 08-15]
§ 233-9. Enforcement. [Amended 3-25-1996 by Ord. No. 3-96;
amended 7-14-2008 by Ord. No. 08-15]
The Municipal Recycling Coordinator, Director and/or Deputy Director of
Public Works and any member of the Chatham Borough Police Department
are hereby authorized and directed to enforce this article. Enforcement
of this article may include random inspections of recyclable materials and
solid waste set out for disposal in order to determine compliance with this
article.
§ 233-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-25-1996 by Ord. No.
3-96; 7-14-2008 by Ord. No. 08-15]
Any person, corporation, occupant, or entity that violates or fails to comply
with any provision of this chapter or any of the rules and regulations
promulgated in Article I, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine
not less than $25, nor more than $1,000.
A. It shall be unlawful to combine designated recyclables materials with
other solid waste. Failure to Source Separate designated recyclable
materials for recycling is a violation of this article.
B. It shall be unlawful for solid waste collectors to collect solid waste that
contains visible signs of designated recyclable materials. It shall be the
responsibility of the resident whose solid waste was not removed
because it contained designated recyclable materials to properly
segregate the uncollected waste for proper recycling. Allowing such
unseparated solid waste to accumulate will be considered a violation of
this article.
§ 233-6 CHATHAM CODE § 233-11
188:670
§ 233-11. Solid waste utility. [Added 8-12-1991 by Ord. No. 10-91;
amended 7-14-2008 by Ord. No. 08-15]
§ 233-12. Recovery of costs; fees. [Added 8-12-1991 by Ord. No.
10-91]
The costs associated with the collection and disposal of solid waste shall
be recovered as may be provided in the contract or contracts made by the
Borough for such services, plus uniform fees fixed from time to time by
the Borough Council and collected from the property owners to whom the
service is available.
§ 233-13. Service charge. [Added 7-27-1992 by Ord. No. 2-92]
There is hereby established a solid waste service charge to be imposed
annually upon the owners of those properties for which solid waste
collection and disposal service is made available by the Borough. The funds
so collected shall be paid into the dedicated Solid Waste Utility Fund of the
Borough.
§ 233-14. Computation of service charge. [Added 7-27-1992 by Ord.
No. 2-92]
The solid waste service charge for residential properties served, unless and
until nonresidential properties are served, shall be computed by dividing
the approved annual budget of the Solid Waste Utility by the number of
residential units to which the service will be made available by the Borough.
§ 233-15. Payment of service charge. [Added 7-27-1992 by Ord. No.
2-92; amended 7-14-2008 by Ord. No. 08-15]
A. A solid waste utility is hereby created to transact the collection and
disposal of solid waste, as provided by law.
B. Said solid waste utility shall be self-liquidating with a dedicated budget
as provided by N.J.S.A. 40A:4-34 through 40A:4-36.
A. Upon approval of the annual service charge by the Borough Council, the
Borough Administrator shall bill the owner of each property to which
the service is available, based upon the number of residential units
therein, during the first 30 days of each year or as soon thereafter as is
practical. Each annual solid waste service charge shall be paid in two
equal installments, the first being due on February 1 and the second on
August 1 each year.
B. The charges hereby imposed shall be payable to the Borough, and each
payment shall draw the same interest as taxes upon real estate
beginning 30 days after the due date and shall be a lien upon the
property to which service was made available until paid. The Borough
shall have the same remedies for collection of the charges hereby
§ 233-11 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 233-15
188:671
imposed, with interest, costs and penalties, as it has by law for the
collection of taxes on real estate.
§ 233-15 CHATHAM CODE § 233-15
188:672
ARTICLE II
Yard Waste
[Adopted 6-13-2005 by Ord. No. 05-23]
§ 233-16. Definitions. [Amended 7-14-2008 by Ord. No. 08-15]
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CONTAINERIZED — The placement of yard waste in a trash can, bucket,
bag or other vessel, such as to prevent the yard waste from spilling or
blowing out into the street and coming in contact with stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive
or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway
and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavements, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within the street lines.
YARD WASTE — All grass clippings, hedge clippings, leaves, yard rakings,
brush, branches and limbs up to five inches in diameter and six feet long.
The following materials are not considered to be yard waste: stumps, scrap
metal, concrete materials, household refuse, building materials, trunk wood
nor limbs in excess of five inches in diameter and over six feet long.
§ 233-17. Time frame for placement in street prior to collection.
Sweeping, raking, blowing or otherwise placing yard waste that is not
containerized at the curb or along the street is only allowed during the
seven days prior to a scheduled and announced collection and shall not be
placed closer than 10 feet from any storm drain inlet. Placement of such
yard waste at the curb or along the street at any other time or in any other
manner is a violation of this article. If such placement of yard waste occurs,
the person responsible for the placement of the yard waste must remove the
yard waste from the street or said person shall be deemed in violation of
this article.
§ 233-18. Enforcement officer.
The Director of Public Works of the Borough of Chatham is hereby
designated as the enforcement officer for the purposes of enforcement of
the provisions of this article. All members of the Chatham Borough Police
§ 233-16 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 233-18
188:673
Department are hereby designated as assistant enforcement officers for the
purposes of the enforcement of this article.94
94.Editor's Note: Former § 233-19, Violations and penalties, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 7-14-2008 by Ord. No. 08-15.
§ 233-18 CHATHAM CODE § 233-18
188:674
ARTICLE III
Construction and Demolition Debris
[Adopted 4-23-2012 by Ord. No. 12-08]
§ 233-19. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPROVED RECYCLING FACILITY — A recycling, composting, materials
recovery or reuse facility which accepts construction and demolition debris
and which is an approved/licensed New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection Class A-D recycling center, or a facility
recognized by the Municipal Recycling Coordinator.
COVERED PROJECT — A new construction or demolition project for which
a building permit and/or demolition permit, as those terms are defined
elsewhere in the Borough Code, is required, excluding single-family and
duplex residential, or a remodel/addition/alteration project with
construction valuation equal to or greater than $50,000, excluding singlefamily
and duplex residential.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS — Waste building materials,
packaging, and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair,
alteration, and/or demolition operations on pavements, houses, all
residential and nonresidential developments, and other structures and may
include, but is not limited to, concrete, asphalt, wood, metals, bricks, block
masonry, dirt, rocks, and landscape waste.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION SUMMARY REPORT — The form
prescribed and provided by the Borough on which an applicant for building
permit and/or demolition permit shall provide information including, but
not limited to, the types and amounts of construction and demolition debris
diversion the applicant has achieved.
DISPOSAL — The final depositing of solid waste other than construction and
demolition debris at a permitted landfill or facility.
DIVERSION OR DIVERT — The reduction or elimination of solid waste from
landfill disposal.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any solid waste that is defined or identified as
a hazardous waste pursuant to the Solid Waste Management Act, N.J.S.A.
13:1E-1 et seq., N.J.A.C. 7:26-8, or 40 CFR Part 261 or as set forth elsewhere
in the Borough Code.
MUNICIPAL RECYCLING COORDINATOR — The Municipal Recycling
Coordinator of the Borough.
RECYCLING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Recycling Enforcement
Officer of the Borough.
WASTE REDUCTION AND RECYCLING PLAN — The form prescribed and
provided by the Borough on which an applicant for a building permit and/
or demolition permit shall provide information including, but not limited to,
§ 233-19 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 233-19
188:675
the types and amounts of construction and demolition debris the applicant
anticipates each building permit and/or demolition permit will generate and
the construction and demolition debris diversion expected to be achieved.
The waste reduction and recycling plan shall also detail how the applicant
shall ensure that at least 50% of all construction and demolition debris will
be separated and reused, recycled and otherwise diverted from disposal.
§ 233-20. Submittal and review of waste reduction and recycling
plan.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this article, a waste reduction and
recycling plan shall be filed by the entity performing the covered
project with the Municipal Recycling Coordinator and/or Recycling
Enforcement Officer prior to the commencement of a covered project.
The waste reduction and recycling plan shall identify the types and
estimated quantities of construction and demolition debris to be
generated from the covered project, how each material will be
managed, and the name of each Approved Recycling Facility or service
provider that the entity performing the covered project will use to
manage each material. The plan shall further detail how the entity
performing the covered project shall ensure that a minimum of 50% of
the materials to be generated will be separated and recycled.
B. No building permit or demolition permit shall be issued unless the
entity performing the covered project has submitted a properly
completed waste reduction and recycling plan approved by the
Municipal Recycling Coordinator and/or Recycling Enforcement Officer
pursuant to this article.
C. The Municipal Recycling Coordinator and/or Recycling Enforcement
Officer shall review the submitted waste reduction and recycling plan
and approve said plan if it contains all information required by this
article. The approved waste reduction and recycling plan shall be
marked "approved" and returned to the entity performing the covered
project.
D. The waste reduction and recycling plan may be denied under the
following conditions:
(1) It does not contain all information required by this article.
(2) The form is illegible.
(3) The calculations included are inaccurate or unrealistic, in the sole
discretion of the Municipal Recycling Coordinator and/or Recycling
Enforcement Officer.
E. A waste reduction and recycling plan that is not approved shall be
returned to the applicant with a written notification stating the reason
said plan has not been approved. In order to obtain the building or
demolition permit sought, the entity performing the covered project
shall make the required changes and resubmit the debris recovery plan
§ 233-19 CHATHAM CODE § 233-20
188:676
§ 233-21. Construction and demolition debris measurement and
rates.
§ 233-22. Submittal and review of construction and demolition
debris summary report.
to the Municipal Recycling Coordinator and/or Recycling Enforcement
Officer.
A. Construction and demolition debris shall be measured by weight or by
volume, whichever is most accurate and practicable. All construction
and demolition debris shall be weighed on a scale which is in
compliance with all federal, state, and local regulatory requirements for
accuracy and maintenance of such scale.
B. Construction and demolition debris for which the measurement by
weight is not practicable, shall be measured by volume and the
volumetric measurements converted to weight using the standardized
rates established in the Borough construction and demolition debris
conversion rate tables.95
C. The Municipal Recycling Coordinator and/or Recycling Enforcement
Officer reserves the right to establish weights for various types of
construction and demolition debris based upon accepted average
weights for such items. Any such weights shall be listed in the Borough
construction and demolition debris conversion rate tables.
A. Upon completion of the covered project, but before the final inspection,
the entity performing the covered project shall submit in person or by
certified mail to the Municipal Recycling Coordinator and/or Recycling
Enforcement Officer the documentation required to demonstrate that
the entity has met the diversion requirement. The required
documentation shall include the following:
(1) A completed construction and demolition debris summary report,
signed by an authorized representative of the entity performing the
covered project, indicating the quantity of each material generated
during the covered project diverted or disposed;
(2) Receipts from all approved recycling facilities or service providers
utilized to divert and dispose materials generated during the
covered project; and
(3) Any additional information that the entity performing the covered
project believes is relevant to determining compliance with the
diversion requirement set forth in this article.
B. All proof showing satisfactory diversion of construction and demolition
debris shall be submitted on a yearly basis (calendar year) or upon
substantial completion of the covered project, whichever is sooner.
95.Editor's Note: The conversion rate tables are on file in the Borough offices.
§ 233-20 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 233-23
188:677
§ 233-23. Compliance with diversion requirement.
The Municipal Recycling Coordinator and/or Recycling Enforcement Officer
shall review the construction and demolition debris summary report and
any other information submitted pursuant to this article and determine
whether the entity performing the covered project has complied with the
construction and demolition debris diversion requirement set forth herein.
This compliance determination shall be provided to the entity carrying out
the covered project in writing.
§ 233-24. Enforcement.
The Municipal Recycling Coordinator and the Recycling Enforcement
Officer are hereby individually and severally empowered to enforce the
provisions of this article. Enforcement of this article may include random
inspections of the construction and demolition debris set out for disposal in
order to determine compliance with this article.
§ 233-25. Violations and penalties.
Any person, corporation, occupant, or entity that violates or fails to comply
with any provision of this article or any of the rules and regulations
promulgated hereunder shall be fined in accordance with the graduated
scale set forth herein:
§ 233-26. Implementation.
The Borough may, by resolution, set forth rules and regulations and
prescribe standard forms for the implementation of the provisions of this
article.
A. First offense: $50 to $250.
B. Second offense: $250 to $1,000.
C. Third offense: $500 to $2,000.
D. Fourth offense: $1,000 to $3,000.
E. Fifth offense: $2,000 to $5,000.
§ 233-23 CHATHAM CODE § 233-26
188:678
Chapter 237
STORM SEWER SYSTEM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land development regulations — See Ch. 165 Sewers — See Ch. 217.
§ 233-26 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 233-26
188:679

ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 237-1. Word usage; terms defined.
A. Word usage. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the
present tense include the future, words used in the plural number
include the singular number, and words used in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and
not merely directory. The definitions below are the same as or based on
corresponding definitions in the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A-1.2.
B. For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their
use in the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or
household operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or nonphysical connection that
discharges domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process
wastewater or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Borough of
Chatham, unless that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES permit
other than the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit (NJPDES
Permit Number NJ0141852). Nonphysical connections may include, but
are not limited to, leaks, flows or overflows into the municipal separate
storm sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Nondomestic waste, including, but not limited
to, those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b) or (c) of the
Federal Clean Water Act [33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b) or (c).]
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A
conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade
channels or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the
Borough of Chatham or other public body, and is designated and used
for collecting and conveying stormwater.
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperature
for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact
with any raw material, intermediate product (other than heat) or
finished product. Noncontact cooling water may, however, contain
algaecides or biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat
exchangers and/or corrosion inhibiter.
§ 237-1 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 237-1
188:681
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm or
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing
or processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the
production or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished
product, byproduct or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but
is not limited to, leachate and cooling water other than noncontact
cooling water.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain
and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or
drainage facilities or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs,
streams and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural
or artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject
to its jurisdiction.[Added 9-13-2010 by Ord. No. 10-21]
§ 237-1 CHATHAM CODE § 237-1
188:682
ARTICLE II
Storm Sewer System
§ 237-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit the spilling, dumping or disposal
of materials other than stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer
system (MS4) operated by the Borough of Chatham so as to protect the
public health, safety and welfare and to prescribe certain penalties for
failure to comply.
§ 237-3. Prohibited conduct.
The spilling, dumping or disposal of materials other than stormwater into
the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) operated by the Borough
of Chatham is prohibited. The spilling, dumping or disposal of materials
other than stormwater in such a manner as to cause the discharge of
pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system is also prohibited.
§ 237-4. Exceptions.
Exceptions to the prohibitions described in § 237-3 above include the
following:
A. Water line flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
B. Uncontaminated groundwater (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising ground
waters).
C. Air-conditioning condensate (excluding contact and noncontact cooling
water).
D. Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff).
E. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows.
F. Residential car washing water and residential swimming pool
discharges.
G. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
H. Flows from fire-fighting activities.
I. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water:
(1) Beach maintenance equipment immediately following their use for
their intended purposes;
(2) Equipment used in the application of salt and de-icing materials
immediately following salt and de-icing material applications. Prior
to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt and de-icing materials
must be removed from equipment and vehicles to the maximum
§ 237-2 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 237-4
188:683
§ 237-5. Illicit connection to municipal storm sewer system.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by
the Borough of Chatham any domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water,
process wastewater or any other industrial waste (other than stormwater).
extent practicable using dry-cleaning methods (e.g., shoveling and
sweeping). Recovered materials are to be returned to storage for
reuse or properly discarded. Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the
above situation, is limited to exterior, undercarriage and exposed
parts and does not apply to engines or other enclosed machinery.
§ 237-4 CHATHAM CODE § 237-5
188:684
ARTICLE III
Refuse Containers and Dumpsters
[Added 9-13-2010 by Ord. No. 10-2196]
§ 237-6. Purpose; additional definition.
§ 237-7. Covering of containers; prevention of leaks and discharges.
§ 237-8. Exceptions.
Exceptions are as follows:
A. The purpose of this article is to require dumpsters and other refuse
containers that are outdoors or exposed to stormwater to be covered at
all times and prohibiting the spilling, dumping, leaking, or other such
discharging of liquids, semi-liquids, or solids from the containers to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Borough of
Chatham and/or the waters of the state so as to protect public health,
safety, and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
B. In addition to the provisions and definitions contained in Chapter 237,
§ 237-1, the following additional definition, not contained in the New
Jersey Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) at N.J.A.C.
7:14A-1.2, but promulgated separately by the New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection, is included for the purposes of this article:
REFUSE CONTAINER — Any waste container that a person controls
whether owned, leased, or operated, including dumpsters, trash cans,
garbage pails, and plastic trash bags.
A. Any person who controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster is
covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out or
overflowing.
B. Any person who owns, leases, or otherwise uses a refuse container or
dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does not leak or
otherwise discharge liquids, semi-liquids, or solids to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough of Chatham.
A. Permitted temporary demolition containers.
B. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers).
C. Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers.
D. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid NJPDES permit.
96.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also renumbered former §§ 237-6 and 237-7 as §§ 237-12
and 237-13, respectively.
§ 237-6 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 237-8
188:685
E. Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, white
goods) placed curbside for pickup.
§ 237-8 CHATHAM CODE § 237-8
188:686
ARTICLE IV
Private Storm Drain Inlet Retrofitting
[Added 9-13-2010 by Ord. No. 10-21]
§ 237-9. Purpose; additional definition.
§ 237-10. Prohibited conduct.
No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with one
single-family house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the
repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip
sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing
or altering any surface that is in direct contact with an existing storm drain
inlet on that property unless the storm drain inlet either:
§ 237-11. Design standard.
Storm drain inlets identified in Chapter 237, § 237-10, above shall comply
with the following standard to control passage of solid and floatable
materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this section, "solid
and floatable materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating,
suspended, or settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard see Chapter
237, § 237-11C, below.
A. The purpose of this article is to require the retrofitting of existing storm
drain inlets which are in direct contact with repaving, repairing,
reconstruction, or resurfacing or alterations of facilities on private
property; to prevent the discharge of solids and floatables (such as
plastic bottles, cans, food wrappers, and other litter) to the municipal
separate storm sewer system operated by the Borough of Chatham so
as to protect public health, safety, and welfare, and to prescribe
penalties for the failure to comply.
B. In addition to the provisions and definitions contained in Chapter 237,
§ 237-1, the following additional definition, not contained in the New
Jersey Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) at N.J.A.C.
7:14A-1.2, but promulgated separately by the New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection, is included for the purposes of this article:
STORM DRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to collect
stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curbopening
inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
A. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid
and floatable materials; or
B. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in Chapter 237, § 237-11,
below prior to the completion of the project.
A. Grates.
§ 237-9 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 237-11
188:687
(1) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever
they use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water
body under that grate:
(a) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicycle
safe-grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT
Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning and
Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
(b) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate
has an area of no more than 7.0 square inches, or is no greater
than 0.5 inch across the smallest dimension.
(2) Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate
inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination
inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates,
and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground
surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open
channels, and stormwater basin floors.
B. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in
that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening
has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than 7.0
square inches, or be no greater than 2.0 inches across the smallest
dimension.
C. This standard does not apply:
(1) Where the municipal engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably
be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
(2) Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end-of-pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin
hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all
solid and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the
following:
(a) A rectangular space 4.625 inches long and 1.5 inches wide
(this option does not apply for outfall netting facilities); or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
(3) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars; or
(4) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an
§ 237-11 CHATHAM CODE § 237-11
188:688
undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New Jersey Register-listed historic property.
§ 237-11 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 237-11
188:689

ARTICLE V
Enforcement; Violations and Penalties
§ 237-12. Enforcement. [Amended 9-13-2010 by Ord. No. 10-21]
This chapter shall be enforced by the Borough Administrator or the Health
Officer, or any of their authorized representatives, or any Chatham Borough
Police Officer.
§ 237-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-13-2010 by Ord. No.
10-21]
A. Any person violating any part of this chapter shall be punishable as
provided in Chapter 1, § 1-14. However, where the penalty for such
offense may be limited by a state statute, then such limitation shall be
applicable notwithstanding the provisions of this article.
B. Each and every violation of this chapter for each and every day that any
provision of this chapter shall be violated shall be construed as a
separate and distinct violation.
C. Each and every violation of the provisions of this chapter concerning
private storm drain inlet retrofitting shall be deemed a separate
violation for each storm drain inlet that is not retrofitted to meet this
design standard.
§ 237-12 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 237-13
188:691
Chapter 240
(RESERVED)
Chapter 244
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 139.
Newspaper vending machines — See Ch. 180.
Sidewalks — See Ch. 221.
§ 237-13 CHATHAM CODE § 237-13
188:692
ARTICLE I
General Use Regulations
§ 244-1. Playing of games in public places.
No person shall engage or participate in any practice, sport or exercise
having a tendency to annoy, disturb or frighten any person on any sidewalk,
street, road, avenue, park or other public place.
§ 244-2. Removal or damaging of warning lights, signals and signs.
No person shall remove, displace, break or change any sign or light or
signal set up or placed in any street or public places as a warning of danger,
or indicating an excavation or obstruction, or showing that any street or
public places is closed to traffic. No person shall, between the hours of
sunset and sunrise, extinguish any light used for any purpose set forth in
this section.
§ 244-3. Opening of manholes and drain inlets.
No person shall open any manhole or drain inlet, or remove the cover
or grate thereof, without authorization from the Director of Public Works
or other administrative authority. Such opening shall be appropriately
barricaded and shall be so marked both day and night, as to be plainly seen
at a distance of 50 feet. The barricade shall be maintained as long as the
manhole shall remain opened or uncovered. Barricades must conform to
the requirements of the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, latest
edition, and shall be approved by the Borough Engineer.
§ 244-4. (Reserved)97
§ 244-5. Temporary closing of streets.
The Borough Administrator or his agent or designee may close any street or
public place or section thereof to public traffic for the purpose of repairing,
constructing or reconstructing the same.
§ 244-6. Parades.
No person shall organize or conduct or assist in the organization or conduct
of any parade upon any of the public streets or public places without
obtaining a permit therefor from the Borough Clerk.
§ 244-7. Fires on roadways.
No person shall make, light, start or maintain any fire upon any street or
roadway.
97.Editor’s Note: Former § 244-4, Riding or driving on sidewalks, was repealed 7-8-2013 by
Ord. No. 13-16. See now Ch. 221.
§ 244-1 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 244-8
188:693
§ 244-8. (Reserved)98
98.Editor’s Note: Former § 244-8, Destruction of sidewalks, was repealed 7-8-2013 by Ord.
No. 13-16. See now Ch. 221.
§ 244-8 CHATHAM CODE § 244-8
188:694
ARTICLE II
Drainage Structures and Obstructions
§ 244-9. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct or install a drainage
ditch, culvert, drain pipe, bridge or any other drainage structure or
obstruction affecting the drainage of any type of premises in the Borough
without first obtaining permission therefor from the Borough Engineer or
his designee or other agency having jurisdiction.
§ 244-10. Permit applications.
Applications for permits under this article shall be submitted in writing to
the Borough Engineer and shall include the following:
§ 244-11. Referral of application to Engineer; recommendation to
Council.
Applications for permits under this article shall be immediately referred
to the Borough Engineer or other authority designated by the Borough
Council. The application and site shall be examined by such Engineer
or other authority for its compliance with § 244-10 and a report or
recommendation shall be made concerning the proposal to the Mayor and
Council at its next subsequent meeting. If the permit is made directly to the
Engineer in § 244-10 then this can be added to it.
§ 244-12. Criteria for granting permit.
In passing upon applications for permits under this article, the Borough
Engineer shall require that all drainage structures which drain water off
the premises of the applicant shall be extended and tied into storm drains,
ditches or other existing publicly owned or controlled drainage for the area.
It shall also require that the pipe or structure be of sufficient size and
be installed to the proper grade, taking into consideration the size of the
area to be drained. If all standards are complied with and the drainage
A. A map or diagram of the property with the location of all present or
proposed ditches, streams, brooks, pipes and/or drainage structures.
B. Elevations based on United States Geodetic datum of all such features
shown.
C. The percentage of grade of the flow line of the proposed drainage
structure, pipe or other construction.
D. The disposition which will be made of the water being drained or
channeled from the premises.
E. Permits or statements of nonjurisdiction from the appropriate county,
state or federal agencies.
§ 244-9 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 244-12
188:695
structure meets good construction and engineering practice, a permit shall
be granted by the Borough Engineer or his designee.
§ 244-13. Drainage structures to be kept open; obstructions
prohibited.
All drainage ditches, culverts, drains, pipes and drainage structures shall be
kept open and free flowing at all times. It shall be unlawful for any person
to throw or place debris or material of any manner whatsoever or to cause
such to be thrown or placed into any drainage ditch or drainage structure
under the control of the Borough or any municipal, county, state or federal
governmental agency.
§ 244-12 CHATHAM CODE § 244-13
188:696
ARTICLE III
Vegetation Bordering Public Ways
§ 244-14. Height restrictions.
When it shall be deemed by the Borough Zoning Officer to be expedient for
the preservation of public safety, owners or tenants of lands lying within
the Borough may be required to keep all brush, hedges and other plant life
growing within 10 feet of any roadway or within 25 feet of the intersection
of two or more roadways cut to a height of not more than 2 1/2 feet.
§ 244-15. Notice to owner or tenant to cut vegetation.
In such cases, the Borough Zoning Officer shall give written notice to
the property owner or tenant, specifying the reasons why it is deemed
necessary that the brush, hedges or other plant life be cut to required
height and directing such property owner or tenant to comply with the
order of the Borough Zoning Officer within 10 days from the receipt of such
notice.
§ 244-16. Cutting of vegetation by Borough; costs to be charged
against land.
If the notice provided for in § 244-15 is not complied with in the time
specified, the Director of Public Works may direct the cutting of the brush,
hedges or other plant life to the required height. In such case, the Director
of Public Works shall certify the cost thereof to the Borough Council, and
if such cost is found to be reasonable, it shall be charged against the land
affected. Should the Borough Council determine the cost as certified to be
excessive, it shall cause the reasonable cost thereof to be charged against
such lands.
§ 244-17. Costs to become lien.
The amount charged pursuant to § 244-16 shall forthwith become a lien
upon such lands and shall be added to and become a part of the taxes next
to be assessed and levied thereon, the same to bear interest at the same
rate as other taxes and to be collected and enforced by the Tax Collector in
the same manner as taxes.
§ 244-14 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 244-17
188:697

ARTICLE IV
Street Construction Standards
§ 244-18. Compliance required.
Whenever it is required by the Borough Council or Planning Board that
streets be installed or upgraded by a property owner or developer, such
streets shall conform to the specifications and construction standards and
procedures set forth in this article.
§ 244-19. Conformance with state standards.
All work, methods, procedures and materials shall conform to New Jersey
Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction of 1989 and addenda to said specifications, unless otherwise
stated herein and shall be referenced to herein as the "NJDOT Standard
Specifications."
§ 244-20. Minimum standards of road construction drawing.
(Reserved)
§ 244-21. Street opening permits.
All work performed in the public right-of-way shall require a street opening
permit, issued by the Borough Engineer or his designee in accordance
with the requirements more fully set forth in Article VI of this chapter.
Construction permits shall be required in developments where site plans
have been approved by the Borough Planning Board or Board of Adjustment
and proper performance bonds have been posted.
§ 244-22. Inspection of improvements and installations.
All improvements shall be installed under the supervision and inspection
of the Borough Engineer or his authorized representative. No underground
installation shall be covered until inspected and approved by the Borough
Engineer or his authorized representative.
§ 244-23. Responsibility for costs of review and inspections.
In all roadway construction and improvement work requiring municipal
approval and/or inspections, the Borough shall be reimbursed for the cost
of reviewing plans and/or inspections. Inspection costs shall also include
laboratory tests required by the Borough Engineer or his authorized
representative of any materials to be used in the construction project.
§ 244-24. Specifications.
A. Public utilities. All construction work for the installation of electric
power and light, gas mains, and telephone services shall be performed
§ 244-18 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 244-24
188:699
in accordance with the regulations and requirements of the public
utility having jurisdiction thereto.
B. Public water supply. The installation of water mains shall be in
accordance with the approved plans and the regulations and
requirements of the Chatham Borough Water Department.
C. Street drainage. All drainage work, including piping, catch basins,
manholes and other appurtenances shall be installed in accordance
with the approved plans and as directed by the Borough Engineer or his
authorized representative. Drainage design shall be based on the
requirements of or as specified by the Borough Engineer.
D. Street sewers. All new sanitary sewers, including house connections
within the public right-of-way, shall be installed in accordance with the
approved plans, and as directed by the Borough Engineer of his
authorized representative.
E. Curbing. Concrete curbing shall conform to the details shown on the
roadway construction standards drawing and requirements of the
NJDOT Standard Specifications.
F. Pavement.
(1) General provisions.
(a) Road pavements and pavement width shall conform to the
approved plans and to the details shown on the roadway
construction standards drawing.
(b) Where existing road pavements are excavated, broken up, or
show other visible signs of damage caused by the installation of
public utilities or construction traffic, the replaced roadway
subgrade, base, and surface shall be better than or equal to the
original.
(c) Material excavated from the roadway may be used as trench
backfill, provided that it is free from roots, large stones,
chunks of clay, concrete or asphalt and should be backfilled
with three-fourths-inch quarry process stone.
(d) The dense graded, aggregate base course, bituminous
stabilized base course, and bituminous concrete surface course
shall conform to the approved plans, to the details shown on
the roadway construction standards drawing, and to the
NJDOT Standard Specifications.
(e) In all cases, the bituminous concrete surface course material
shall extend to the furthest limit of surface damage, in the
construction area, as determined by the Borough Engineer or
his authorized representative, or 1 1/2 times the excavation
width beyond all sides of the trench area, whichever is greater.
§ 244-24 CHATHAM CODE § 244-24
188:700
(f) All areas where new surface material shall meet existing
surface material shall be smooth, tight seams.
(2) Dense graded aggregate.
(a) Materials. The materials shall be broken stone of traprock,
granite, gneiss, dolomite or limestone or blast furnace slag.
The large aggregate shall be 2 1/2 inches in size. The materials
shall conform to the requirements of Section 901 of the NJDOT
Standard Specifications.
(b) Methods of construction.
[1] Dense graded aggregate shall not be laid on the subgrade
until the subgrade has been thoroughly inspected by the
Borough Engineer or his duly authorized representative
and meets with his approval.
[2] The dense graded aggregate base course shall be rolled to
a minimum thickness of four or six inches as specified,
with a power roller weighing not less than 10 tons and a
weight on the rear rolls of not less than 330 pounds per
inch of width of roll. The rolling shall begin at the sides
and progress to the center parallel to the center line of the
road.
[3] The dense graded aggregate base course shall be placed in
a manner which meets the requirements of Section 301 of
the NJDOT Standard Specifications.
(3) Bituminous stabilized base course Type CA-BC.
(a) Materials.
[1] Bituminous stabilized base course materials shall conform
to the requirements therefor as specified in Section 903 of
the NJDOT Standard Specifications.
[2] Bituminous stabilized base course shall be Mix 1-2 as
specified in Section 903 of the NJDOT Standard
Specifications.
(b) Methods of construction.
[1] The bituminous stabilized base course shall be spread, in
conformance with the cross section shown on the roadway
construction standards drawing, by a bituminous concrete
paver which shall be self-contained, power-propelled,
provided with an activated screed or strike-off assembly.
No bituminous concrete material shall be placed when the
atmospheric temperature is below 45° F. or when the
weather is foggy, rainy or otherwise unfavorable unless
§ 244-24 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 244-24
188:701
approved by the Borough Engineer or his duly authorized
representative.
[2] After the material has been properly spread, initial
compaction shall be obtained by rolling with a three-wheel
power-driven roller having a load of not less than 330
pounds per inch of width of rear wheel and a total metal
weight of not less than the 10 tons.
[3] Subsequent rolling shall be done with a two-axle tandem
roller which shall be power driven and shall have a load of
not less than 250 pounds per inch of width of tread of drive
roll and shall have a total metal weight of not less than
eight tons.
[4] Rolling shall begin at the sides and progress gradually to
the center, until the entire surface has been rolled by the
rear wheels. If the width of the base course permits, it
shall be subjected to a diagonal rolling crossing the lines of
the first. Placement of the base course shall be in a manner
which meets the requirements of Section 304 of the
NJDOT Standard Specifications.
[5] Any pavement that becomes loose and broken or mixed
with dirt or is in anyway defective shall be removed and
replaced with new material which shall be immediately
compacted to conform to the surrounding area. Any area
showing an excess of bituminous material shall be
removed and replaced.
[6] When directed by the Borough Engineer or his duly
authorized representative, core samples shall be cut from
the completed pavement and the same forwarded to the
Borough Engineer. The areas of pavement so removed
shall be replaced with new material and refinished. No
structure served by said street shall be occupied during
the period between November 15 and March 15 unless the
bituminous stabilized base course has been installed or
unless otherwise consented to by the Borough Council.
(4) Bituminous concrete surface course.
(a) Material. Bituminous concrete surface course, Mix 1-5,
materials shall conform to the requirements therefor as
specified in Section 903 of the NJDOT Standard Specifications.
(b) Methods of construction.
[1] The bituminous concrete surface course shall be spread in
conformance with the cross section shown on the roadway
construction standards drawing by a bituminous concrete
paver which shall be self-contained, power propelled,
§ 244-24 CHATHAM CODE § 244-24
188:702
§ 244-25. Concrete sidewalks.
provided with an activated screed or strikeoff assembly.
No bituminous concrete material shall be placed when
the atmospheric temperature is below 45° F., or when the
weather is foggy, rainy or otherwise unfavorable, unless
approved by the Borough Engineer or his duly authorized
representative.
[2] After the material has been properly spread, initial
compaction shall be obtained by rolling with a three-wheel
power-driven roller, have a load of not less than 330
pounds per inch of width of rear wheel and a total metal
weight of not less than 10 tons.
[3] Subsequent rolling shall be done with a two-axle tandem
roller which shall be power driven and shall have a load of
not less than 250 pounds per inch of width of tread of drive
roll and shall have a total metal weight of not less than
eight tons.
[4] Rolling shall begin at the sides and progress gradually to
the center, until the entire surface has been rolled by the
rear wheels. If the width of the surface course permits, it
shall be subjected to a diagonal rolling in two directions,
the second diagonal rolling crossing the lines of the first.
Rolling shall be continued until all roller marks are
eliminated and the finished surface meets the
requirements specified in Section 404 of the NJDOT
Standard Specifications.
[5] Along curbs and at other places not accessible to the roller,
the material shall be thoroughly compacted with hand or
mechanical tampers and hot smoothing irons in a manner
which shall be suitable to the Borough Engineer or his duly
authorized representative.
[6] Any pavement that becomes loose or broken or mixed with
dirt, or is in any way defective, shall be removed and
replaced with new material which shall be immediately
compacted to conform to the surrounding pavement area.
Any area showing an excess of bituminous material shall
be removed or replaced.
[7] When directed by the Borough Engineer or his duly
authorized representative, core samples shall be cut from
the completed pavement and the same forwarded to the
Borough Engineer. The areas of pavement so removed
shall be replaced with new material and refinished.
§ 244-24 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 244-25
188:703
§ 244-26. Restoration of site; cleanup.
Upon completion of construction, all equipment, unused materials and
refuse shall be removed from the site of the work, and all public and private
properties damaged or disturbed during the course of construction shall
be replaced or repaired. The site shall be put as nearly as possible into
conditions corresponding to that which existed prior to construction, all to
the satisfaction of the Borough Engineer or his authorized representative.
§ 244-27. Closing of streets; access to driveways.
Under special and extraordinary circumstances an existing street or
roadway may be completely closed to vehicular traffic during construction
or reconstruction. Access to existing driveways having ingress and egress
to existing public streets or roadways being affected by said improvements
shall be maintained at all times. Road closings and/or traffic detours and
diversions shall not be permitted unless approved by the Chatham Borough
Police Department pursuant to Article XVI, Work Zone Regulations,
§ 139-78, Road closings and detours.
§ 244-28. Winter construction restricted.
No roadway or utility construction on any roadways shall be performed
during the winter months between November 15 and March 15 of any
year unless written approval has been obtained from the Borough Engineer
or his authorized representative to allow construction of said utilities or
improvements during this time period.
A. Concrete sidewalks shall conform to the details shown on the roadway
construction standards drawing.
B. The concrete shall be Class B air-entranced and shall conform to the
requirements of Section 914 of the NJDOT Standard Specifications.
C. Concrete sidewalks shall be constructed in a manner which meets the
requirements of Section 607 of the NJDOT Standard Specifications.
§ 244-25 CHATHAM CODE § 244-28
188:704
ARTICLE V
Snow Removal and Snowplowing Operations.
[Added 7-8-2013 by Ord. No. 13-1699]
§ 244-29. Depositing of snow or ice on streets or public places
prohibited.
§ 244-30. Obstruction of snowplowing operations prohibited.
§ 244-31. Placement of snow when shoveling or plowing.
Snow shall not be shoveled or plowed from a driveway across a street,
avenue, public highway or public place and piled at the opposite curb.
Snow shall be plowed or shoveled back onto the property from which it was
plowed or shoveled and feathered along the curbline of said property.
§ 244-32. Parking on snow-covered streets prohibited.
A. No person shall place or caused to be placed any snow or ice upon any
street, avenue, public highway or public place within the Borough.
B. A commercial snowplow operator clearing accumulated snow on
private property shall not deposit snow on any sidewalk, public road,
street, or highway, or on public lands within the Borough.
A. No person shall interfere with the snowplowing of any portion of any
street, avenue, public highway, paved path or public place within the
Borough by obstructing the travel or operation of a snowplowing
vehicle operated on behalf of the Borough by placing any object,
vehicle, or one's own person in a manner that prevents movement of the
snowplowing vehicle past any point on any street, avenue, public
highway or public place within the Borough of Chatham or prevents the
movement or depositing of snow in any location.
B. Any vehicle interfering with the work of removing or plowing snow or
ice may be removed or towed by or under the direction of the Chief of
Police at the vehicle owner's sole cost and expense.
A. No person shall park a vehicle upon either side of any street, avenue,
public highway or public place within the Borough or allow any portion
of a vehicle to extend into a street, avenue, public highway or public
place when any accumulation of snow has completely covered the
street, avenue, public highway or public place to such a depth that snow
removal operations will be required.
B. The above parking prohibitions shall remain in effect after the snow has
ceased until the streets, avenues, public highways and public places
99.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. V, Construction, Repair, and
Maintenance of Sidewalks, consisting of §§ 244-29 through 244-34. See now Ch. 221.
§ 244-29 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 244-32
188:705
§ 244-33. through § 244-34. (Reserved)
within the Borough of Chatham have been plowed sufficiently and to
the extent that parking will not interfere with the normal flow of traffic.
C. The effectiveness of this section is contingent upon signs being erected
as required by law.
D. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this section
shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper
regulation of traffic, and any police officer may provide for the removal
of such vehicle. The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal
and storage which may result from such removal before regaining
possession of the vehicle. The payment of reasonable costs of removal
and storage shall be in addition to any fine assessed for such violation
pursuant to § 244-52.
§ 244-32 CHATHAM CODE § 244-33
188:706
ARTICLE VI
Construction Work on Dedicated Public Ways
§ 244-35. Definitions and word usage.
§ 244-36. Permit required; exception for emergencies; waiver of
fees.
A. The following words, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the
context clearly indicates otherwise:
APPLICANT — Any person who makes the application for a permit.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Chatham, County of Morris, State of New
Jersey.
DIRECTOR — The person in charge of the Department of Public Works
in the Borough or his authorized deputy or representative.
EMERGENCY — Any unforeseen circumstance or occurrence, the
existence of which constitutes a clear and immediate danger to persons
or properties.
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY — Any body corporate and politic created
pursuant to the laws of the State of New Jersey.
PERMITTEE — Any person who has been issued a permit and has
agreed to fulfill all the terms of this article.
PERSON — Includes any natural person, partnership, firm, association,
utility, corporation or authority created pursuant to an act of the New
Jersey General Assembly. Whenever used in any section prescribing and
imposing a penalty, the term "person" as applied to associations, shall
mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to a corporation,
the officers thereof.
PUBLIC UTILITY COMPANY — Any company subject to the jurisdiction
of and controlled by the New Jersey Public Utility Commission.
STREET — Includes a public street, public easement, public right-ofway,
public highway, public alley, public way or public road accepted or
maintained by the Borough
SURFACE — All area within the public right-of-way, including but not
limited to the paved area and the shoulder area.
B. The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include
the feminine and the neuter.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to place any form of construction, in,
over or upon any Borough-owned or unaccepted dedicated street,
avenue, highway, lane, alley or public place in the Borough without first
obtaining a permit from the Borough for each separate undertaking.
Any public utility maintaining pipe, line or other underground facility in
or under the surface of any street may proceed with an opening without
§ 244-35 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 244-36
188:707
§ 244-37. Additional work beyond that specified in permit.
No person to whom a permit has been granted shall perform any work
beyond that specified in the permit without approval by the Director for
additional work under the provisions of the permit. Any additional deposit
required shall be provided prior to commencement of the additional work.
§ 244-38. Commencement of work.
Work for which a permit has been issued shall commence within six months
after issuance of the permit therefor. If not so commenced, the permit shall
be automatically terminated unless the permittee applies to the Director
for an extension of time. A new application must be filed if an extension of
time is not requested within the six-month period after the issuance of the
original permit.
§ 244-39. Transferability of permits.
Permits are not transferable from one person to another, and the work shall
not be made in any place other than the location specifically designated in
the permit.
§ 244-40. Expiration of permits; extensions.
Every permit shall expire within the time stated in the permit. If work is
not completed within the specified time, the applicant shall submit to the
Director, in writing, a request for an extension of time setting forth therein
the reasons for the requested extension. If, in the opinion of the Director,
such an extension is necessary and will not cause disruption to public safety,
the permittee may be granted additional time for the completion of the
work.
§ 244-41. Supervision of utility cuts; exemption from fee, deposit
and insurance requirements.
All street openings required by utilities owned and/or operated by the
Borough shall be made and restored under the direction and supervision
of the Director. The permit fee, deposit and insurance requirements of this
a permit when emergency circumstances demand the work to be done
immediately. The utility shall thereafter apply for a permit on the first
regular business day. In all cases where emergency openings are
necessary, the Borough Police Department shall be notified prior to
each opening.
B. A permit is required for any and all street openings within the Borough
of Chatham.
C. Road opening permit fees shall be waived for any public utility. The
standard permit applications, however, still apply.
§ 244-36 CHATHAM CODE § 244-41
188:708
article shall not be applicable to any openings made by the Borough. Permit
fees shall also be waived for any public utility.
§ 244-42. Revocation of permit; time period to correct violation.
§ 244-43. Form and content of permit application.
A. Any permit may be revoked by the Director after notice to the permittee
for:
(1) A violation of any condition of the permit or of any provision of this
article.
(2) A violation of any provision of any other applicable law or
ordinance relating to the work.
(3) Existence of any condition or the doing of any act constituting or
creating a nuisance or endangering safety or property.
B. A permittee shall be granted a period of three days from the date of the
notice from the Director to correct the violation and to proceed with the
diligent prosecution of the work authorized by the permit before said
permit is revoked. Written notice shall consist of a certified letter to the
permittee from the Director briefly outlining the reasons for revoking
the permit. Revocation of any permit shall give the Borough the right to
complete the work and restore the street to the proper condition as
outlined in this article. Any and all expenses incurred by the Borough
shall be recovered from the deposit made or bond filed with the
Borough.
A. Application for a permit shall be made to the Director on the form
provided at least 48 hours in advance of any construction. No work shall
commence until the applicant has paid and provided all fees, deposits,
certificates and bonds required by this article. The permit shall be
issued by the Director after the application has been made.
B. The application form shall correctly state:
(1) The name of the property owner (service work).
(2) The house number and street.
(3) The contractor's name, phone number and address.
(4) The type of work proposed.
(5) Material to be used, including pipe material and any structures.
(6) The purpose of the trench or excavation.
(7) The date work is to be started and the date work is to be completed.
(8) A list of equipment to be used.
§ 244-41 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 244-43
188:709
§ 244-44. Agreements and responsibilities of permittees.
Any person receiving a permit shall agree to the following:
§ 244-45. Application fees.
Any person submitting an application for a permit shall pay a permit fee of
$25 at the time of application. Public utility companies may, upon written
C. In addition, the applicant shall furnish, in triplicate, a plan showing the
work to be performed under said permit. Two copies of such plan shall
be returned to the applicant at the time the permit is granted. The plan
shall include:
(1) The size of the opening or limits of work to be performed.
(2) The depth of the opening.
(3) The location of work with respect to the nearest intersection.
(4) A plan of piping or other structures to be constructed. (Schematic
drawings are acceptable except for road openings longer than 150
feet.)
D. Finally, the applicant agrees to save the Borough, its officers,
employees and agents harmless from any and all costs, damages and
liabilities which may accrue by reason of any work performed under
said permit. The acceptance of any permit under this article shall
constitute such an agreement by the applicant whether the same is
expressed or not.
A. Work will not interfere with proper drainage of the street.
B. The Chatham Borough Police Department will be contacted prior to the
commencement of the work for approval of traffic control procedures,
signs and other road safety precautions if the road is to be closed for
any length of time.
C. No work will be started until the Director has:
(1) Inspected the proposed work location.
(2) Approved the plan submitted with the application.
(3) Stamped the application as "approved."
D. The applicant will comply with all provisions of this article and other
Borough ordinances.
E. The applicant shall notify the Director:
(1) Prior to completion of temporary pavement replacement.
(2) Prior to completion of permanent pavement.
§ 244-43 CHATHAM CODE § 244-45
188:710
notice to the Director, elect to be billed monthly for such fees as they
accrue.
§ 244-46. Deposits.
A. Computation of deposit.
(1) Upon receipt of a properly completed application, the Director
shall determine the amount of the deposit to be made by the
permittee prior to commencement of the work. The minimum
deposit shall be $200. Should the Director determine that the
deposit shall be more than the minimum, a schedule of charges and
projected cost will be provided to the applicant.
(2) The deposit shall be paid at the time the permit is received. The
amount to the deposit shall be used to reimburse the Borough for
the cost of any work and/or materials furnished by the Borough in
connection with the work authorized by the permit to cover all
necessary inspections, replacements and repairs of said work and
for any other purpose set forth in its this article.
(3) The Borough may elect to waive this requirement insofar as it
pertains to a public utility company if such company files with the
Borough its corporate bond in a form satisfactory to the Borough
Attorney conditioned upon the payment paid out of such a deposit.
In the event any public utility company elects to file such a bond,
the Borough shall bill such company monthly for costs as they
accrue.
B. Form of deposit. The deposit may either be in the form of a certified
treasurer's or cashier's check or lawful money of the United States.
C. Insufficient deposit. If any deposit is less than sufficient to pay all costs
accrued by the Borough, the permittee shall, upon written notification,
pay to the Borough an amount equal to the deficiency. If the permittee
fails or refuses to pay such deficiency within three days after being
notified, the subject permit is automatically revoked. The Borough may
institute an action to recover the deficiency in any court of competent
jurisdiction. Until such deficiency is paid in full, no additional permits
shall be issued to such permittee.
D. Yearly deposits. Whenever any public utility, if it does not elect to file a
corporate bond as provided in Subsection A of this section, such public
utility may post one deposit in an amount and form as provided above
for the calendar year or part thereof to cover the cost of deposits for
any and all work.
E. Decision on costs. The Director shall determine the cost of any work
done or repairs or replacements made by him or under his direction
pursuant to the provisions of this article. Cost shall include direct labor,
equipment and material costs as incurred by the Borough or agent of
the Borough. Cost for inspections during temporary and final pavement
§ 244-45 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 244-46
188:711
§ 244-47. Restrictions on street openings and excavations.
replacement shall be $25 per hour. In the event a permittee disputes
the amount charged by the Borough for work or repairs, the Borough
Administrator shall determine the amount due to the Borough.
F. Refund of deposit. Upon notification by the permittee that all work
authorized by the permit has been completed, and after the Director
has approved final restoration of the opening, the Borough shall refund
the permittee his deposit less all costs incurred by the Borough in
connection with said permit. In no case shall the deposit be refunded
less than one year after temporary restoration.
A. No opening or excavation in any street shall extend beyond the center
line of the street before being backfilled and the surface of the street
temporarily restored.
B. All utilities shall be notified by the applicant prior to commencement or
work. The applicant is also responsible for calling the toll-free number
for utility locations (800-272-1000).
C. Pipe drains, pipe culverts, drainage basins, right-of-way monuments
and other facilities shall be properly protected from damage by the
permittee.
D. All spoils from an excavation shall be disposed of by the permittee. The
Borough will not assume any responsibility for dump-site locations.
Spoils and other excavation material which cannot be used as backfill
must be disposed of in the proper manner by the permittee. Any spoils
or other excavation material must be removed from the traveled
roadway prior to the end of the working day. In the event the spoils or
other excavation material is not removed, the Director shall cause such
removal, and the cost incurred shall be paid by the permittee or
deducted from his deposit.
E. Every permittee shall place around the project such barricades, lights,
warning flags and danger signs as shall be approved by the Chatham
Borough Police Department for the protection of the public. Barricading
and signs shall be in accordance with the regulations set forth in the
United States Department of Transportation, Federal Highway
Administration, Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets
and Highways, latest edition. The control of traffic shall conform to the
requirements of Chapter 139, Vehicles and Traffic, Article XVI.
F. Except for service openings, the permittee shall notify or request the
Borough to notify, at the expense of the permittee, all property owners
within 100 feet of any excavation. Property owners shall be notified at
least 48 hours in advance if access to private driveways cannot be
provided at any time during performance of the work outlined in the
permit. In no event shall access to driveways be restricted during
§ 244-46 CHATHAM CODE § 244-47
188:712
§ 244-48. Backfilling and restoration.
nonworking hours. Free access shall be provided at all times to fire
hydrants.
G. Work authorized by a permit shall be performed between the hours 9:00
a.m. to 4:00 p.m. pursuant to the work zone regulations in Chapter 139,
Vehicles and Traffic, Article XVI, § 139-73 et seq.
H. In granting a permit the Director may attach such other conditions
thereto as may be reasonably necessary to prevent damage to public or
private property or to prevent the work from being conducted in an
unsafe manner or in a manner likely to create a nuisance. Such
conditions may include, but shall not be limited to:
(1) Limitations on the period of the year which the work may be
performed.
(2) Restrictions as to the size and type of equipment.
(3) Requirements concerning trench sheeting, dewatering or blasting.
(4) Requirements as to dust control, street cleaning, the prevention of
noise and other results offensive or injurious to the neighborhood,
the general public, or any portion thereof.
(5) Regulations as to the use of streets in the course of the work.
A. All pavement cuts, openings and excavation shall be properly made,
backfilled and restored in accordance with Article IV of this chapter,
Street Construction Standards.
B. The restoration shall be performed in two stages when a cut has been
made in roadway paving.
(1) Temporary pavement replacement. On the same day that a road
opening is backfilled, the opening shall be restored on a temporary
basis as follows: The trench or opening shall be backfilled in layers
not to exceed six inches in thickness. The layers shall be compacted
with hand or mechanical tamping equipment. The temporary
paving shall consist of at least a six-inch-thick dense graded
aggregate subbase course if the subbase contains excessive
quantities of clay or organic material. The subbase course shall be
compacted with mechanical tamping equipment as outlined in the
street specifications. A bituminous stabilized base course Mix 1-2
shall be applied no less than six inches in thickness and shall be
maintained even with the surface of the road.
(2) Permanent pavement replacement. After a period of six months
from date of temporary pavement replacement and no more than
one year following temporary pavement replacement, the
permittee shall make a permanent repair of the opening. The top
course shall be bituminous concrete surface course Mix I-5. The top
§ 244-47 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 244-48
188:713
§ 244-49. Street list.
course shall extend six inches beyond the edge of the opening on
all sides and shall adhere to the existing pavement by using an
asphaltic tack material. The surface course shall be thoroughly
compacted according to the street specifications. If settlement of
the opening occurs after the permanent replacement, the Director
shall require the pavement to be removed and replaced with a fourinch
bituminous stabilized base course and a two-inch bituminous
concrete course. In any event, the deposit will not be refunded
prior to one year following temporary pavement replacement.
C. If paving surfaces adjacent to the street opening have been damaged or
where equipment used has caused damage to the street, the permittee
shall restore those areas also in the same manner as the road openings.
D. All openings and damaged areas shall be squared off with a saw cutter
prior to excavation. A jackhammer may be used for the opening if
approval is given by the Director. This shall be indicated on the permit
application. The Director shall make such inspections as he may deem
necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article.
E. The permittee shall notify the Director, in writing, prior to completion of
all work. Return of any amounts from the deposit shall constitute
approval of the restoration by the Director.
F. The Director may also issue a certificate of final inspection indicating
that the work authorized by the permit has been performed according
to the Borough specifications. The final inspection may be made when
the permanent restoration is completed. However, the deposit shall be
refunded no sooner than one year following temporary pavement
replacement.
G. In no case shall any opening made by a permittee be considered in the
charge or care of the Borough or any of its officers or employees, and no
officer or employee is authorized in any way to take or assume any
jurisdiction over any such opening, except in the exercise of the police.
A. Every person owing, using, controlling, or having an interest in pipes,
conduits, ducts or other structures under the surface of any street used
for the purpose of supplying or conveying gas, electricity,
communication impulses, water or stream to or from the Borough or to
or from its inhabitants or for any other purposes shall file with the
Director within 120 days after the adoption of this article a written
statement containing the names of the Borough's streets wherein the
aforementioned facilities owned by such persons are located, and a
schematic plan indicating said facilities. This plan will not be used for
location information, only as a reference.
§ 244-48 CHATHAM CODE § 244-49
188:714
§ 244-50. Abandoned facilities.
B. Within 90 days after the first day of January of each and every year,
such person shall forward to the Director an updated statement and
plan required in Subsection A above.
A. Whenever any pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel or other structure located
under the surface of any street or the use thereof, is abandoned, the
person owning, using, controlling or having an interest therein shall,
within 30 days after such abandonment, file with the Director a
statement in writing giving in detail the location of the structure so
abandoned.
B. Whenever there are manholes or tunnels associated with abandoned
underground facilities, such manholes or tunnels shall be filled in at a
time of abandonment and the Director shall be notified thereof in
writing.
C. When the Borough plans to pave or improve streets in which there are
abandoned facilities, the owners of such facilities shall be required to
remove them if, in the opinion of the Director, their removal is in
conflict with work to be performed by the Borough. If the owner shall
refuse to remove such facilities, the owner shall reimburse the Borough
for such removal.
§ 244-49 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 244-50
188:715

ARTICLE VIA
Vacation of Municipal Streets and Alleys
[Added 11-13-2006 by Ord. No. 06-24]
§ 244-50.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to fix fees and establish procedures for the
orderly administration of the municipal process when private individuals
solicit Chatham Borough to vacate certain streets or alleys. The further
purpose of this article is to ensure that Chatham Borough is compensated
for its time and costs when private individuals petition Chatham Borough to
vacate certain streets and alleys.
§ 244-50.2. Procedure; fees and costs.
A. Any person who seeks to have Chatham Borough vacate any
municipally owned street or alley not needed for public use shall first
obtain from the Chatham Borough Tax Assessor's Office a request for
street/alley vacation form. Such person(s) shall then complete this form
and return it to the Tax Assessor's Office, together with a fee to be
established annually by resolution.
B. The Chatham Borough governing body shall annually by resolution
establish any fees and costs required for the vacation of streets and
alleys, including but not limited to the application fee, legal and
engineering costs, survey, and title and recording costs. Such fees are
nonrefundable.
C. The fees must be paid to an escrow account to be held by the Borough
of Chatham pending completion of due diligence by the Borough of
Chatham. Thereafter, if the fees and costs are more than the amount
held in escrow, the Borough of Chatham reserves the right and privilege
to charge for the additional fees and costs; if the fees and costs are less
than the amount held in escrow, the Borough of Chatham will refund the
balance to the person(s) at the address listed on the street/alley
vacation form.
D. If the request for the vacation of the street or alley originates or arises
as a result of municipal governmental action to recommend the
vacation of the street or alley in the public interest, the provisions of
this Article VIA will apply.
E. The Borough of Chatham will not undertake any action to vacate the
street/alley listed on the vacation form until the escrow is paid.
F. Upon completion of due diligence by the Borough of Chatham, the
proposed street/alley to be vacated will be evaluated by the governing
body, and, if satisfactory, an ordinance to vacate the proposed street/
alley will be placed on the Regular Council Agenda for first reading.
§ 244-50.1 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 244-50.3
188:717
§ 244-50.3. Exceptions.
If the request for the vacation of the street or alley originates or arises as
a result of federal, state or municipal governmental action which directly
causes or creates the necessity to vacate the street or alley in the public
interest, the provisions of this Article VIA will not apply.
§ 244-50.3 CHATHAM CODE § 244-50.3
188:718
ARTICLE VII
Enforcement, Violations and Penalties100
§ 244-51. Enforcement officer.
The enforcement officer shall be the Borough Engineer of the Borough of
Chatham or his or her designee.
§ 244-52. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-8-2013 by Ord. No.
13-16]
A. Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, § 1-14.
B. The continuation of such violation of each successive day shall
constitute a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or
permitting the continuation of the violation may be punished as
provided for each separate offense.
C. For the purposes of this chapter, each twenty-four-hour period following
a snowfall or formulation of ice shall constitute a separate offense for
which prosecution shall be brought.
100. Editor’s Note: The former title of this article, “Enforcement,” was amended to read
“Enforcement, Violations and Penalties” 7-8-2013 by Ord. No. 13-16.
§ 244-51 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 244-52
188:719
Chapter 250
TAXICABS AND LIVERIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 139.
§ 250-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTO LIVERY — Any automobile or vehicle engaged in the business of
carrying passengers for hire and operating from private property, either by
the trip, hour or day or longer period of time, and which does not solicit
passengers for hire upon the public streets of the Borough of Chatham.
DRIVER — The driver of either a taxicab or an auto livery.
TAXICAB — Any automobile or motor vehicle licensed to engage in the
business of carrying passengers for hire and offered, announced or
advertised to operate or run as a taxicab from any public taxi stand in the
Borough of Chatham.
VEHICLE — Includes both a taxicab and an auto livery unless they are
specifically mentioned by name.
§ 250-2. License regulations.
A. Owners' licenses. No vehicle shall be operated upon the public streets
of the Borough of Chatham unless the owner thereof shall first obtain a
license for such purpose as provided herein. Such license shall show the
following:
(1) Owner: name, place of business, name of company (if any),
residence and signature.
(2) Vehicle: name of manufacturer, body type, year, serial number,
engine number, color, bill-of-sale number and state registration
number.
(3) Borough license number and date of issuance.
B. Drivers' licenses. No person shall drive a vehicle upon the public streets
of this Borough unless he shall first obtain a license for such purpose as
provided herein. Such license shall show the following:
(1) Name, residence, age, photograph and signature.
(2) Borough license number and date of issuance.
§ 244-52 CHATHAM CODE § 250-2
188:720
C. Granting of owners' and drivers' licenses. The Mayor and Council of the
Borough of Chatham may grant to such and so many persons as it
considers proper licenses to own and operate or to drive vehicles within
the meaning of this chapter, in accordance with its provisions.
D. License period. Owners' and drivers' licenses shall be issued as of the
calendar year and shall be effective for such period unless sooner
suspended or revoked as provided herein.
E. License fees. [Amended 5-12-1986 by Ord. No. 7-86]
(1) The license fees for taxicab and auto livery owners' and drivers'
licenses shall be as follows:
(a) Owners' licenses. [Amended 2-12-1996 by Ord. No. 1-96]
[1] Taxicabs. For each taxicab, $50 per year, payable upon
making application for the license.
[2] Auto livery. For each such auto livery, $50 per year,
payable upon making application for the license.
(b) Drivers' licenses. For each driver of a taxicab or auto livery,
$10 per year.
(2) Licenses shall be issued and fees collected by the Borough Clerk
upon application and approval by the Mayor and Council of the
Borough of Chatham as provided by this chapter. The Borough
Clerk shall keep a record of all such licenses granted. The
provisions of this chapter are for proper regulation in the interests
of public safety.
F. Revocation or suspension. Every license granted in pursuance of this
chapter may be suspended or revoked by the Mayor and Council of the
Borough of Chatham for the violation of any provision of this chapter.
The Chief of Police, in the interest of public safety, may suspend any
Borough driver's license pending action by the Mayor and Council of
the Borough of Chatham. Such suspension must be promptly reported
by the Chief of Police in writing to the Borough Council.
G. Qualifications for taxicab owners' and drivers' licenses.
(1) Owners' licenses. An applicant, to be approved for vehicle owner's
license, must be a citizen of the United States, of good moral
character, at least 21 years of age and able to read and write the
English language.
(2) Drivers' licenses.
(a) An applicant, to be approved for a vehicle driver's license, must
be a person of good moral character, at least 18 years of age
and able to read and write the English language. He must also
be of sound physique and fit for the safe operation of a motor
§ 250-2 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 250-2
188:721
§ 250-3. Maintenance and operation of vehicles.
vehicle and must annually pass a physical examination and
be certified in this respect by the Borough Physician or a
practicing physician of the State of New Jersey. In case of
a question as to an applicant's physical or mental fitness to
operate a vehicle, the Borough Council may appoint a board of
three physicians to examine the applicant and to render their
opinion and make a recommendation, which shall be followed.
(b) An applicant must be the holder of a New Jersey motor vehicle
driver's license and must have had such for a period of at least
one year prior to granting of a license hereunder.101
H. Application for licenses. All applications for owners' and/or drivers'
licenses shall be made to the Borough Clerk on forms supplied by the
Borough and shall be transmitted to the Chief of Police. The Chief of
Police shall cause such investigation to be made as he shall deem
necessary and proper and report to the Borough Council as to the
eligibility of the applicant. All applications shall be filed by the Borough
Clerk after being acted upon by the Mayor and Council of the Borough
of Chatham, and the applicant shall be notified as to the action taken. In
the case of denial of an application, the applicant shall be notified by
the Borough Clerk in writing. [Amended 5-12-1986 by Ord. No.
7-86]
I. Housing of vehicles. Every applicant for an owner's license shall
indicate the address where the vehicle will be located when it is not
actually in service. Such location shall not be changed except after
written notice to the Borough Clerk. If the vehicle is so located or
housed within the Borough of Chatham, it shall be at the owner's place
of business. If such place of business is otherwise properly located in a
residential zone, nevertheless, no more than two vehicles shall be
housed at that address. [Added 5-12-1986 by Ord. No. 7-86]
A. No vehicle shall be operated on the streets of this Borough unless
mechanically safe to operate, with brakes, lights, windshield wipers and
signaling devices in good working order. All vehicles shall be inspected
as required by the State Motor Vehicle Code, and, in addition, the Chief
of Police may require any vehicle to be inspected at the cost of the
owner whenever he shall deem the same to be necessary or desirable. A
vehicle, particularly the interior thereof, shall be kept clean and in good
condition. [Amended 5-12-1986 by Ord. No. 7-86]
B. Equipment of vehicle. The equipment of each licensed vehicle shall
include the following provisions:
101. Editor's Note: Former Subsection G(2)(c), which provided that an applicant must be
photographed and fingerprinted, and which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed 5-12-1986 by Ord. No. 7-86.
§ 250-2 CHATHAM CODE § 250-3
188:722
(1) A rate schedule card in a frame as approved by the Chief of Police
must be displayed on the back of the driver's seat.
(2) Any radio in the vehicle operating between 550 and 1,600
kilocycles shall be operated at the discretion of the passenger and
at no other time.
C. Equipment of driver.
(1) A driver shall wear a badge, as supplied by the Borough,
conspicuously displayed on the right chest of his outermost
garment at all times while operating the vehicle. The badge shall
show the license number assigned to the driver's license. Said
badge shall be returned to the Borough upon leaving the employ of
the taxi or livery owner.
(2) A driver shall carry his Borough driver's license at all times while
operating the vehicle. He shall show the license to any police
officer or passenger upon request.
(3) A receipt book of forms showing the driver's full name and badge
number shall be carried. A receipt showing the fare charged must
be given to any passenger whenever there is a dispute over the
fare.
(4) A driver shall keep a trip record by days of all trips made by the
vehicle. Such trip records are to be kept by the owner for at least
six months from date of issuance and subject to inspection at any
time by the Police Department or someone authorized by Borough
Council. The daily trip records must contain the following
information:
(a) The state registration number of the vehicle.
(b) Name and badge number of driver.
(c) Time and location of the beginning of each trip and termination
place of each trip; also the termination time of each hourly trip.
(d) The amount of fare collected for each trip.
D. Conduct of driver.
(1) A driver shall not operate a vehicle while to any degree under the
influence of drugs or intoxicating liquors.
(2) Smoking while carrying passengers is prohibited except with the
permission of the passenger.
(3) Disrespectful conduct or the use of abusive or insulting language to
a passenger is prohibited.
§ 250-3 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 250-3
188:723
§ 250-4. Public taxicab stands.
§ 250-5. Insurance. [Amended 5-12-1986 by Ord. No. 7-86;
3-22-2010 by Ord. No. 10-11]
No owner’s license shall be granted by the Mayor and Council of the
Borough of Chatham nor shall any such license remain in effect unless the
owner can demonstrate that he is in full compliance with the maximum
insurance requirements fixed by the State of New Jersey for the vehicle’s
operation as a taxicab or livery as set forth in N.J.S.A. 48:16-1 et seq.
and with the following minimum requirements of the Borough of Chatham:
personal injury liability coverage in an amount not less than $500,000 per
occurrence for taxicabs and not less than $1,500,000 per occurrence for
auto liveries and all other regulated vehicles and property damage liability
coverage in an amount not less than $100,000 per occurrence for taxicabs,
auto liveries and all other regulated vehicles.
§ 250-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided in
(4) A driver shall not solicit patronage for restaurants, nightclubs,
cabarets, dance halls, hotels or like places nor solicit for any place
maintained in violation of the law.
(5) A driver shall not refuse service to any orderly person unless he is
previously engaged.
(6) A driver shall thoroughly search the interior of the vehicle
immediately after the termination of each trip and note if the
passenger has left any article therein. Any property so found shall
be taken to police headquarters and turned in to the officer in
charge within 24 hours.
(7) A driver shall solicit fares only from the driver's seat or in a position
within five feet of his vehicle.
(8) A driver of a taxicab entering a taxi stand shall do so by taking his
position at the rear of any taxicabs already on the stand.
A. The Borough Council may designate as taxicab stand spaces on the
public streets where and in such number as it may consider necessary
to the public welfare; also the number of cabs to occupy each such
stand.
B. The regulation of such designated taxi stands shall be under the
jurisdiction of the Police Department.
C. No taxicab driver shall solicit business except from a public taxicab
stand, and no vehicles except licensed taxicabs shall occupy space in a
designated taxicab stand.
§ 250-3 CHATHAM CODE § 250-6
188:724
Chapter 1, § 1-14. The continuation of such violation for each successive day
shall constitute a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or
permitting the continuation of the violation may be punished as provided
above for each separate offense.
Chapter 256
TOWING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 139. Fire zones — See Ch. 148.
§ 256-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish rules and regulations, pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.49 et seq., and the Predatory Towing Prevention Act,
P.L. 2007, c. 193 and P.L. 2009, c.39 (A3812/S2567),102 for the towing
and storage of motor vehicles from public roadways by towing companies
engaged in such business.
§ 256-2. Scope.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to those businesses that engage in
towing and storage of motor vehicles within the Borough of Chatham.
§ 256-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED VEHICLE — A motor vehicle, which the owner or operator
leaves on a public roadway, or other public property, or on private property
without consent of the owner or person in charge of the property, for
more than 48 hours, without notifying the Borough Police Department or
attempting to repair and remove the same. A vehicle which has remained
on or along a highway or other public property for any period without
current license plates shall be presumed to be an abandoned vehicle. It is
further unlawful for any person to abandon a motor vehicle on or along
any limited access highway without the consent of the State Department
of Transportation or other entity having jurisdiction over the limited access
highway. A vehicle which remains on or along such a limited access highway
for a period of more than four hours or for any period without current
license plates shall be presumed to be an abandoned motor vehicle. Vehicles
used or to be used in the construction, operation or maintenance of public
utility facilities and which are left in a manner which does not interfere with
the normal movement of traffic shall not be considered abandoned vehicles
102. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 56:13-7 et seq.
§ 250-6 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 256-3
188:725
for the purposes of this section. Vehicles lawfully left in a rest area for not
more than 12 hours shall not be considered abandoned vehicles.
CRASH VEHICLE — A motor vehicle which has been involved in a motor
vehicle crash.
DISABLED VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle which is unable to operate under
its own power.
HEAVY-DUTY RECOVERY — The recovery of any motor vehicle 25,001
pounds gross vehicle weight rating or over which requires the vehicle and/
or its contents to be uprighted and/or recovered from either on or off the
traveled portion of a public roadway.
HEAVY-DUTY TOWING — The towing of any motor vehicle 25,001 pounds
gross vehicle weight rating or over.
IMPOUNDED VEHICLE — A vehicle which, at the direction of the Borough
Police Department, is taken into police custody because the operator was
engaged in violation of the law.
JUNK VEHICLE — A motor vehicle incapable of being operated safely or of
being put in a safe operational condition except at a cost in excess of the
value thereof, for which a junk title may be required.
LIGHT-DUTY RECOVERY — The recovery of any motor vehicle less than
7,000 pounds gross vehicle weight rating which requires the vehicle and/
or its contents to be uprighted and/or recovered from either on or off the
traveled portion of a public roadway.
LIGHT-DUTY TOWING — The towing of any motor vehicle less than 7,000
pounds gross vehicle weight rating.
MEDIUM-DUTY RECOVERY — The recovery of any motor vehicle between
7,000 and 25,000 pounds gross vehicle weight rating which requires the
vehicle and/or its contents to be uprighted and/or recovered from either on
or off the traveled portion of a public roadway.
MEDIUM-DUTY TOWING — The towing of any motor vehicle between 7,000
and 25,000 pounds gross vehicle weight rating.
MOTOR VEHICLE — All vehicles propelled otherwise than by muscular
power, including trailers and recreational campers, excepting such vehicles
as run only upon rails or tracks and motorized bicycles.
PUBLIC SAFETY AND EMERGENCY SERVICES COMMITTEE — The
overseers of the fire, police and public works.
SMALL CLEAN-UP — Minor motor vehicle debris or material within the
area surrounding the vehicle or within public road or highway and shall not
include hazardous materials or debris.
STORAGE RATES — The fees charged for the storage of motor vehicles and
shall accumulate by the calendar day.
TOWING COMPANY — A person(s) offering or performing towing services.
§ 256-3 CHATHAM CODE § 256-3
188:726
TOWING LIST — A rotating list of all towing companies for removal and
transportation of a motor vehicle.
TOWING TRUCK — A motor vehicle employed by a towing company for
the purpose of towing, transporting, conveying or removing motor vehicles
from public roadways.
TRACTOR TRAILER — The tractor and trailer portion of a motorized
vehicle, and both the tractor and trailer combined shall equate to one
vehicle for purposes of recovery, removal and release.
§ 256-4. Removal of motor vehicles.
Whenever a police officer orders the removal of a motor vehicle from private
or public property, the police officer shall utilize the towing list established
in § 256-5 of this chapter.
§ 256-5. Towing list.
A. At every annual reorganization meeting, the Borough Council shall
establish by resolution a list of automobile towing contractors and
heavy duty truck towing contractors to be utilized by the Borough
Police Department on a rotating basis. A towing contractor may, if
qualified, be on both lists. Such lists shall be utilized by members of the
Borough Police Department on a nonexclusionary and
nondiscriminatory basis. Only those towing contractors who meet the
minimum standards of operator performance set forth in this chapter
shall be included on such lists. There shall be no limit on the number of
towing contractors on either list. Towing contractors may be added to
the list at the annual reorganization meeting.
B. Towing contractors who are not on the towing list but have requested to
tow for the Borough of Chatham shall have the towing company's name
placed on a towing contractor waiting list. The waiting list shall be
prepared and maintained by the office of the Chief of Police. Towing
contractors must file a written request to be added to the waiting list on
or before October 1 preceding the next annual reorganization meeting.
C. Background check: Each owner of a towing company that applies to be
a towing operator on the rotational towing list must execute the
"Authorization by Subject of Request and Privacy Act Notification" area
of Form SBI-213A (Request for Criminal History Record Information for
a Noncriminal Justice Purpose) and submit to a criminal background
investigation pursuant to N.J.S.A. 53:1-20.5 et seq. This investigation
shall include disclosure of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any
municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and the punishment or
penalty assessed. Additionally, the Chief of Police shall also cause the
applicant to be fingerprinted for the purpose of a criminal history
check. All applicants must submit a cashier's check, certified check or
money order drawn on a United States bank in the amount of the
prevailing rate, payable to the Division of State Police-SBI for the
criminal history search. If the applicant is a corporation then this
§ 256-3 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 256-5
188:727
§ 256-6. Insurance.
§ 256-7. Rules and regulations.
requirement shall apply to the officers of the corporation. As a result
of such investigation, the Chief of Police shall note, in writing, his
recommendation and reasons therefore to the Borough Clerk. The
Borough Clerk shall present the completed application, along with
the recommendation of the Chief of Police as to whether the towing
company shall remain or be placed on the rotational towing list, at
the next regularly scheduled public meeting. If the Borough so directs,
the Borough Clerk shall approve the application to be placed on the
rotational list.
A. Each towing contractor on the approved list shall furnish the Borough
Clerk with a certificate of insurance from an insurance company
satisfactory to the Borough, but at a minimum, rated A- (A minus) by the
latest available edition of A.M. Best's Insurance Rating Guide. Each
certificate of insurance shall identify the coverage provided and provide
that such insurance shall not be changed or canceled without giving 30
days' prior written notice to the Borough Clerk by certified mail, return
receipt requested. Specific reference to the rotating lists of towing
companies shall be made on all policies of insurance.
B. Each towing contractor must have bodily injury liability, property
damage liability, employer's liability and motor vehicle liability
coverage with combined policy limits of $2,000,000. Each approved
towing contractor must also have statutorily required worker's
compensation coverage.
C. Each towing contractor shall indemnify and save the Borough of
Chatham harmless from all damages and claims for damages which may
be made by any person for bodily injury or property damages as a result
of the towing contractor's performing pursuant to this chapter.
A. Availability and response time. Each towing company must be available
24 hours a day, seven days a week.
B. All towing companies placed on the towing list shall be available to
respond to a call in accordance with the towing rotation schedule of oncall
status established by the Chief of Police.
C. All towing companies shall respond to a call in any part of the Borough
of Chatham within 20 minutes during normal business hours between
8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., and 30 minutes during nighttime and weekend
hours, of the original telephone call request by the Borough Police
Department. If a towing company does not respond within the time
designated above, the towing company next on the list shall be called
and entitled to provide services as needed, and the first towing
company shall lose any claim to compensation.
§ 256-5 CHATHAM CODE § 256-7
188:728
§ 256-8. Predatory towing practices.
Predatory towing practices are prohibited pursuant to P.L. 2007, c. 193 and
P.L. 2009, c. 39 (A3812/S2567).103
D. Licensing and registration. All drivers and operators of towing vehicles
shall be properly licensed to operate a motor vehicle within the State of
New Jersey and are subject to driver's license checks by the Borough
Police Department. All towing vehicles shall be properly registered and
inspected in accordance with any applicable law.
E. Safety. All vehicles must be towed in a safe manner. All towing vehicles
must have an amber light permit and amber emergency warning lights
mounted on the vehicle as to warn approaching traffic of their
presence. The size and location of these lights must conform to New
Jersey Division of Motor Vehicle standards.
F. Roadside services. All towing companies shall be capable of providing
reasonable roadside services to disabled vehicles. Such services will
only be performed if they can be done so safely, as determined by the
police officer in consultation with the towing company on the scene.
G. Rates/fees. All towing companies shall make available a copy of its basic
rates and business practices including business terms, as established
by the Borough of Chatham, as well as a copy of its business card. If the
towing company accepts credit card payments in accordance with the
Predatory Towing Prevention Act, N.J.S.A. 56:13-1 et seq., it shall
prominently post credit card payment regulations and information in
public view in the lobby of its principal place of business.
H. Records. All towing companies shall keep accurate records of all motor
vehicles towed and stored at the direction of the Borough Police
Department. A copy of such records shall be provided to the Borough
Clerk upon request.
I. Notification of abandoned or crash vehicles. Towing companies shall
not remove any motor vehicle which has been abandoned or involved in
an accident in any public roadway without first notifying the Borough
Police Department.
J. Private property; parked and abandoned vehicles. Vehicles parked or
abandoned on private property are the responsibility of the owner or
owner representative. Where a vehicle is abandoned on private
property, the property owner may make a complaint to the police
department and a responding officer may issue a summons. The owner
representative is responsible for having the vehicle removed.
K. Abandoned and junk vehicles; processing. Abandoned and junk vehicles
shall be processed by the towing company pursuant to § 256-13 below.
103. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 56:13-12 and N.J.S.A. 56:13-9, respectively.
§ 256-7 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 256-8
188:729
A. While the majority of towing companies in New Jersey are reputable
service providers, some unscrupulous towing companies are engaged in
predatory practices victimizing consumers whose vehicles are parked
on public streets and on private property. Such practices are strictly
prohibited.
B. Predatory towing practices include charging unwarranted or excessive
fees, particularly in connection with towing vehicles from private
parking lots which do not display any warnings to vehicle owners, or
overcharging consumers for towing services provided under
circumstances where the consumer has no meaningful opportunity to
withhold consent.
C. The legitimate business interests of towing companies and the needs of
private property owners for relief from unauthorized parking must be
balanced with the interest in providing appropriate protection to
consumers.
D. Therefore, wherever authority exists in the law to regulate towing and
towing companies it is in the public interest to create a coordinated,
comprehensive framework to establish and enforce minimum standards
for tow truck service providers.
E. It shall be an unlawful practice for any towing company to:
(1) Fail to provide a schedule of rates/fees.
(2) Fail to provide a schedule of rates/fees to any person who was not
present at the time the towing services were provided.
(3) Make, give or cause any undue or unreasonable preference or
advantage or undue or unreasonable prejudice or disadvantage to
any person in any particular locality, with respect to providing
towing services.
(4) Give any benefit or advantage, including a pecuniary benefit, to any
person for providing information about motor vehicles parked for
unauthorized purposes on privately owned property or otherwise in
connection with towing from privately owned property motor
vehicles parked without authorization. Nothing in this section shall
preclude a towing company, acting on behalf of a club or
association, from charging members of the club or association a fee
at a rate established by contract between the towing company and
the club or association, which is lower than that rate specified in
the towing company's schedule on file with the Borough Clerk,
provided that membership to such club or association is generally
available to the public.
(5) Fail, when so requested by the owner or operator of a vehicle
subject to nonconsensual towing, to release a vehicle to the owner
or operator that has been, or is about to be, hooked or lifted but has
not actually been moved or removed from the property when the
§ 256-8 CHATHAM CODE § 256-8
188:730
§ 256-9. Storage facilities.
§ 256-10. Clean-up.
Towing companies are required, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-56.8, to remove
debris surrounding a motor vehicle, or be subject to penalty. Any towing
company under contract to the Borough of Chatham, after being called to
remove a disabled motor vehicle, who fails to remove from public roads
or highways any minor motor vehicle debris or material within the area
surrounding that vehicle, shall be subject to a fine of not less than $25
vehicle owner or operator returns to the vehicle, or to charge the
owner or operator requesting release of the vehicle more than a
decoupling fee.
(6) Charge any rate/fee, other than those charges established by
municipal ordinance, or the rate/fee specified in the towing
company's schedule on file with the Borough Clerk, or to charge a
rate/fee in an amount or for a service not listed on the schedule on
file with the Borough Clerk at the time. Nothing in this section shall
preclude a towing company, acting on behalf of a club or
association, from charging members of the club or association a
rate/fee established by contract between the towing company and
the club or association, which is lower than the rate/fee specified in
the towing company's schedule on file with the Borough Clerk,
provided that membership in such club or association is generally
available to the public.
(7) Refuse to accept payment in lieu of such as a debit card, charge
card or credit card, if the operator ordinarily accepts such payment
at his place of business. Terms of use for debit, charge and/or credit
cards shall be posted by the towing company in accordance with
this chapter.
A. All storage facilities operated or used by the towing companies shall
meet all local zoning and code requirements, and must be located
within the Borough of Chatham.
B. All storage facilities shall have a business office open to the public
between normal business hours at least five days a week, excluding
holidays.
C. All outside storage facilities shall be secured and lighted.
D. A towing company shall not charge a release fee or other charge for
releasing motor vehicles to their owners after normal business hours or
on weekends.
E. All towing companies shall be responsible for ensuring the proper and
safe storage of all motor vehicles towed pursuant to this chapter, and
shall be liable for any damage incurred by such motor vehicles while in
transit to or while stored in the storage facilities.
§ 256-8 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 256-10
188:731
nor more than $50 if the debris or material is likely to cause injury to a
person operating a motor vehicle or substantial damage to another motor
vehicle. A towing company is not required to remove any hazardous debris
or material.
§ 256-11. Towing vehicle and equipment specifications.
§ 256-12. Rights of owners/operators of motor vehicles required to
be towed.
Section 256-12 does not apply to impounds.
A. All towing services engaged in light-duty towing shall have at least one
rollback truck. Each truck must have a manufacturer's capacity of at
least 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight and a wheel lift with a
capacity of 4,000 pounds or two tons. Proof of capacity must be
supplied to the Police Department at the time of registration.
B. All towing services engaged in medium-duty towing shall have one
heavy-duty wrecker with a manufacturer's capacity of not less than
32,000 pounds gross vehicle weight and a boom capacity of not less
than 25,000 pound rating independently or 25 tons jointly; air brakes so
constructed as to lock rear wheels; and heavy-duty under-reach.
C. All towing services engaged in heavy-duty recovery shall have two
heavy-duty wreckers with manufacturer's capacity of not less than
32,000 pounds gross vehicles weight and boom capacity of not less than
25,000 pounds independently or 24 tons jointly; two power winches
with pulling capacity of not less than 25,000 pounds each; at least 200
feet of cable at least 9/16 inch diameter on each drum; double boom to
permit splitting, or single boom hydraulically elevated and extendible
with a three-hundred-sixty-degree swivel on the end of the boom; air
brakes so constructed as to lock rear wheels; heavy-duty under-reach
with a twenty-five-thousand-pound rating; two snatch blocks and two
scotch blocks.
D. All towing vehicles must have radio equipment with a twenty-four-hour
dispatch service or a cellular telephone for the purpose of maintaining
communications with the police department radio desk.
E. All towing vehicles must be equipped with at least one five-pound ABCtype
fire extinguisher, safety chains, substances for application to minor
liquid spills, and stiff push brooms to clean up debris at the scene.
F. Proof of towing vehicle and equipment specifications shall be provided
to the Borough Clerk with the registration application.
G. All towing vehicles are to conform to all applicable state and federal
laws and shall be subject to inspection by the Borough Police
Department during normal business hours at the time of registration
and on an annual basis thereafter.
§ 256-10 CHATHAM CODE § 256-12
188:732
§ 256-13. Abandoned or unclaimed vehicles.
A. If a motor vehicle operator or owner wishes to have his vehicle towed
by a particular towing company, their request shall be honored,
provided they are not blocking the roadway, and providing the police
officer in charge at the scene has not already dispatched a towing
company, or the police officer has determined that the motor vehicle in
question will not be removed in an expeditious or safe manner and will
jeopardize public safety, in which case the motor vehicle operator or
owner shall be required to utilize a compensated dispatched towing
company.
B. The owner or operator of any motor vehicle required to be towed or
stored shall have the right to remove all personal items and effects from
the motor vehicle unless the Borough Police Department has placed a
police hold on any such items.
C. The motor vehicle owner or his representative shall have the right to
take photographs of any stored vehicle for insurance purposes.
D. Upon request of the motor vehicle owner or his representative, a towing
company shall provide a detailed and itemized bill for all services
rendered.
A. Junk vehicles. If the vehicle is unclaimed by the owner or other person
having legal right thereto for a period of 15 business days, the towing
contractor shall notify the Chief of Police or his designee that the
vehicle has been held for the statutory time and that the vehicle is ready
for sale. The Borough Clerk shall supply titles for abandoned junk
vehicles in accordance with N.J.S.A. 39:10A-1 and 39:10A-3.
B. Abandoned vehicles. If the vehicle is unclaimed by the owner or other
person having legal right thereto for a period of 20 business days, the
towing contractor shall notify the Chief of Police or his designee that
the vehicle has been held for the statutory time and that the vehicle is
ready for sale pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:10A-1 to 39:10A-4.
C. After the expiration of 20 business days, the Borough Police
Department shall make application for title to the Division of Motor
Vehicles.
D. Sales of all junk and abandoned vehicles shall be conducted in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:10A-1 et seq.
E. Proceeds from sale. Proceeds from the sale of junk or abandoned
vehicles shall be used to satisfy any towing or storage charges which
may have accumulated on the subject vehicle. Excess proceeds shall be
paid to the Borough Treasury. If the proceeds are insufficient to cover
the accumulated costs, such excess shall be waived by the towing
contractor, and no further funds will be due from the Borough of
Chatham or the purchaser of the vehicle. This section will be
administered in accordance with N.J.S.A. 39:10A-1 et seq.
§ 256-12 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 256-13
188:733
§ 256-14. Operators' dealings with public.
§ 256-15. Rates and fees; general.
§ 256-16. Collection of fees and obligations of owner.
All towing companies shall be responsible for collection of all fees for
services rendered. Owners are required to pay in full all municipally
authorized fees and charges to the authorized towing contractor prior to
release of the vehicle consistent with N.J.S.A. 56:13-1 et seq. and N.J.S.A.
2A:44-20.
§ 256-17. Transportation of inoperable vehicle; payment for repairs.
If a towing company cannot repair the inoperable vehicle to the satisfaction
of the motorist, the towing company shall, with the motorist's consent, or
at the direction of the Borough Police Department, subject to the provisions
F. Failure to follow statutory procedures. Any operator found to be
disposing of vehicles in violation of this procedure will be charged with
misapplication of entrusted property (N.J.S.A. 2C:21-15) and will be
prohibited from providing service for the Borough of Chatham.
A. The operator shall always act in a professional manner and at all times
be courteous and respectful toward members of the public, as well as
representatives of the Borough of Chatham.
B. Repeated reports of discourteous behavior by the operator which can
be substantiated and documented may be considered by the Borough of
Chatham as sufficient cause for removal of the operator from the
towing list.
A. Fees and rates for the towing and storage of motor vehicles, including
automobiles, trucks and fees for road service set forth in this chapter,
shall be modified by resolution of the Mayor and Borough Council at the
annual reorganization meeting, which rates shall be based on the usual,
customary and reasonable rates of towing companies towing and
storing motor vehicles in the Borough of Chatham.
B. Fees and rates for the towing and storage of motor vehicles, including
automobiles, trucks and fees for road service, shall be reviewed by the
Chief of Police on an annual basis, and shall be revised, if necessary, by
resolution of the Mayor and Borough Council. The Chief of Police shall
advise all towing companies placed on the towing list of any such
revisions.
C. The fees and rates set by this chapter, and any subsequent revisions
thereto, shall be submitted to the Division of Consumer Affairs for
review within 90 days of adoption of any resolution establishing the
rates for towing and storage, and shall be made available to the public
during normal business hours of the Borough of Chatham.
§ 256-13 CHATHAM CODE § 256-17
188:734
of P.L. 2007, c. 194 (N.J.S.A. 56:13-7 et seq.), transport the vehicle to the
operator's place of business or to another mutually agreed upon location.
The vehicle, once repaired, may be retained in the possession of the
operator or other repairer, pending payment pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:44-20
et seq. The operator, if other than the repairer, shall be eligible for
reimbursement for transporting the vehicle to the repair site. If the
estimated cost of repairs exceeds $50, the motorist shall be given a written
estimate of the repair costs before such repairs are made.
§ 256-18. Clean-up fees.
Reasonable clean-up fees shall be charged. Towers shall not charge for any
vehicles not actually used in the clean-up effort, or for any vehicles that are
only used to transport recovery workers to the scene.
§ 256-19. Towing and storage fee schedule. [Amended 1-6-2020 by
Res. No. 20-66]
Fees for towing and storage shall be assessed as follows:
Tow/recovery Day
Night/Weekends/
Holidays
Light-duty:
Tow $125 $150
Recovery $150 $200
Medium-duty:
Tow $250 $300
Recovery $350 $450
Heavy-duty:
Tow $500 $550
Recovery $550 $600
Storage
Light-duty:
Outside $40
Inside $65
Medium-duty:
Outside $90
Inside $250
Heavy-duty:
Outside $100
Inside $300
Trailer
§ 256-17 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 256-19
188:735
Tow/recovery Day
Night/Weekends/
Holidays
Outside $150
Inside $400
Cargo
Outside No charge (as per job)
Inside No charge (as per job)
Small clean-up $45
Yard charge/tow $65
Road service
Light-duty: $75 $100
§ 256-20. Complaints; violations; hearings.
A. All violations of this chapter and all complaints by the public or Borough
Police Department against any towing company shall be forwarded to
the Public Safety and Emergency Services Committee.
B. The Public Safety and Emergency Services Committee, in its discretion,
shall determine if any complaint or violation against a towing company
is of such a serious nature as to warrant a hearing and possible
disciplinary measures.
C. No adverse action may be taken against a towing company without a
public hearing.
D. If the Public Safety and Emergency Services Committee decides that a
hearing is required, it shall be upon proper notice to all interested
parties, and a hearing will be conducted at which time all parties may
present evidence. If, after a hearing, the Public Safety and Emergency
Services Committee finds that a towing company has violated any
provision of this chapter, it may, depending on the seriousness of the
offense:
(1) Fine the violating party not more than $1,000.
(2) Suspend the violating party from the towing list for not more than
three months for a first offense; not more than six months for a
second offense; not more than one year for a third offense.
(3) Permanently remove the violating party from the towing list for any
violation after its third offense.
§ 256-19 CHATHAM CODE § 256-20
188:736
Chapter 257
TREE PROTECTION AND PRESERVATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land development regulations — See Ch. 165 Shade Tree Commission legislation — See
Part IV
§ 257-1. Purpose.
The Borough recognizes that the preservation and protection of trees within
the Borough adds to the aesthetics and serves the health and general
welfare of the citizens of the Borough of Chatham. The purpose of this
chapter is to preserve trees within the Borough while recognizing the
right of property owners to use their property and the need to respond
to emergencies. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to Borough
trees, as that term is defined in and otherwise regulated by Chapter 314 of
the Shade Tree Legislation.
§ 257-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH FORESTER — The person appointed by the Mayor and Borough
Council to supervise and ensure the conservation, protection and care of
trees, shrubbery and soil within the Borough and having the duties and
authority provided for in this chapter.
BOROUGH TREE PLAN — A plan developed by an advisory committee
to be established by the Mayor and Borough Council, and approved by
the Borough Shade Tree Commission, for the planting and replanting of
trees within the Borough. The advisory committee shall consist of five
members appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the
Borough Council, and may consist of Borough employees as well as Borough
residents, property owners or business owners.
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH) — The measurement of the
diameter of a tree at 4.5 feet from the ground on the downhill side of such
tree. If a tree splits into multiple trunks below 4.5 feet from the ground on
the downhill side of such tree, then the trunk is measured at its most narrow
point below the split.
DRIPLINE — The circular area surrounding a tree, the radius of which area
shall be the distance from the trunk of the tree to the outermost branch of
the tree.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Director of the Department of Public
Works of the Borough of Chatham or his/her duly authorized representative.
§ 256-20 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 257-2
188:737
REMOVE or REMOVAL OF TREES — Any cutting, poisoning, adversely
pruning, topping, or any other action otherwise damaging or destroying a
tree. Routine pruning to maintain the health of a tree or pruning in response
to damage from adverse weather conditions shall not be considered removal
of a tree.
TREE — Any living woody perennial plant having a diameter at breast
height of six inches or greater.
TREE ESCROW FUND — A fund established by the Borough for the
administration and promotion of tree sustainability projects and practices
on public property within the Borough.
TREE REMOVAL PERMIT — A permit issued by the Enforcement Officer
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter authorizing a person to remove a
tree or trees.
TREE REPLANTING PLAN — A specific plan for the replanting of trees
removed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 257-3. Tree removal prohibited; exemptions.
§ 257-4. Application for tree removal permit; fees.
A person desiring to obtain a tree removal permit shall make application
with the Enforcement Officer on a form to be provided for that purpose. The
application submission shall include, at a minimum, the following:
A. No person may remove a tree without first having obtained a tree
removal permit as provided herein.
B. The following shall be exempt from regulation under this chapter:
(1) Trees removed that are less than six inches in diameter at breast
height.
(2) Trees removed in accordance with a forestry management plan
developed by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, Bureau of Forestry and filed with the Enforcement
Officer.
(3) Trees that are removed as a result of an immediate safety risk to
persons or property, provided that the property owner shall comply
with the provisions of § 257-10 herein.
(4) Borough trees removed or caused to be removed by the Borough.
(5) Trees removed or caused to be removed by the state, county or a
public utility.
A. The name and address of the applicant. If the applicant is different than
the property owner, the property owner must consent to the filing of the
application.
§ 257-2 CHATHAM CODE § 257-4
188:738
§ 257-5. Tree Escrow Fund.
§ 257-6. Permit procedures.
B. The lot and block of the property from which the tree(s) are to be
removed.
C. A survey or other drawing depicting the shape and dimensions of the
property, and including the location of all existing and proposed
structures and improvements as well as the location, diameter, type and
species of all trees to be removed on the property.
D. A statement as to the reason for the requested tree removal.
E. The name and address of the licensed tree contractor undertaking the
removal and their qualifications or license to perform such work, if
required, in accordance with § 257-8 herein.
F. A proposed tree replanting plan, if applicable, showing the location,
diameter, type and species of all trees to be provided. The tree
replanting plan shall be subject to the approval of the Enforcement
Officer.
G. Any other information reasonably deemed necessary by the
Enforcement Officer.
H. The application fee for a tree removal permit, as set by resolution of the
Borough Council.
A. A Tree Escrow Fund is hereby established and shall be maintained by
the Borough Chief Financial Officer to receive and disburse
contributions in accordance with this chapter. Appropriations from the
Tree Escrow Fund shall be approved by the Borough Council in
accordance with the Borough Tree Plan with consideration of the Shade
Tree Commission recommendation.
B. The primary purpose of the Tree Escrow Fund is to provide for the
planting, replanting, care and maintenance of trees and shrubs on
public property. The Tree Escrow Fund will also cover administrative
costs to implement the provisions of this chapter.
A. The Enforcement Officer shall review the application, which shall upon
filing be deemed to constitute consent from the property owner to the
Enforcement Officer, and/or such person or persons as he/she may in
writing designate, to enter upon the subject property for the purpose of
inspection. In reviewing any such application the Enforcement Officer
may in his/her discretion consult the Borough Forester and such other
persons as he/she may deem necessary or advisable.
B. The Enforcement Officer shall issue a permit or deny the application,
including the reasons for the decision, within 10 business days of filing
a complete application, unless such time period is extended an
§ 257-4 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 257-6
188:739
§ 257-7. Standards for tree removal.
The following standards shall govern the grant, conditional grant or denial
of a tree removal permit:
additional 10 business days by the Enforcement Officer with the
consent of the applicant. The Enforcement Officer may impose
reasonable conditions on the issuance of any tree removal permit.
If the Enforcement Officer fails to act on any tree removal permit
application, such failure shall be deemed a denial of the tree removal
permit application.
C. If an application for a tree removal permit is being requested in
conjunction with a development application under Chapter 165, the
decision of the board having jurisdiction over the application shall be
subject to the requirements of this chapter.
D. A copy of the Enforcement Officer's decision shall be mailed to the
applicant.
E. A tree removal permit shall be declared null and void if the tree removal
is not completed within six months after permit issuance; however, the
Enforcement Officer may, for good cause, extend such time for a
reasonable period of time not to exceed six months.
A. A tree removal permit shall be granted for cause and without any
compensatory replanting upon a finding by the Enforcement Officer
that one or more of the following conditions exist:
(1) The tree is dead, dying, critically diseased or severely damaged to
such an extent that the continued survival of the tree is unlikely.
(2) The tree, by virtue of its location or condition, is a hazard to public
safety.
(3) The tree is causing substantial damage to public property.
(4) The tree is deemed to be invasive in accordance with a list of
species to be published by the Borough Shade Tree Commission
upon consultation with the Borough Forester.
(5) The tree disrupts utility service (above or below ground) to a
structure on the property or to a structure on an adjoining lot.
(6) The tree creates stormwater drainage patterns which result in
flooding or excessive soil erosion on the property or an adjoining
lot.
(7) The tree interferes with the safe and convenient passage of
vehicles and pedestrians over driveways, walkways, and sidewalks
on the property or an adjoining lot.
§ 257-6 CHATHAM CODE § 257-7
188:740
§ 257-8. Licensed tree removal contractor.
No tree may be removed by any person other than a tree contractor licensed
in accordance with the New Jersey Tree Experts and Tree Care Operators
Licensing Act, N.J.S.A. 45:15C-11 et seq., except for tree removal completed
by the owner of an occupied single- or two-family detached dwelling.
§ 257-9. Inspection; certificate of completion.
§ 257-10. Emergency action.
Within three business days following the removal of a tree that presents
an immediate risk to persons or property, the property owner shall provide
written notice of said removal to the Enforcement Officer, supported by
sufficient evidence demonstrating in form and content, satisfactory to the
Enforcement Officer, that the tree posed an immediate risk to persons
or property. The property owner shall apply for a tree removal permit
and pay the fees required under this chapter and may not proceed with
nonemergency work without a tree removal permit.
§ 257-11. Compensatory replanting.
B. A tree removal permit may be granted for any other reason subject to
compensatory replanting in accordance with § 257-11 herein.
A. The permit must be posted in a location clearly visible from the street at
all times during the tree removal activity and for a period of 10 business
days following the tree removal.
B. Within 10 business days of notification of completion of tree removal
activities, the Enforcement Officer shall inspect the subject property for
compliance with all conditions of the permit.
C. When the tree removal, as well as any required compensatory
replanting or payment into the Tree Escrow Fund, as applicable, are
deemed complete, the Enforcement Officer shall issue a tree removal
certificate of completion.
D. If the tree removal, or tree replanting or payment into the Tree Escrow
Fund, as applicable, is deemed unacceptable, the Enforcement Officer
shall so notify the applicant. The notification shall include a list of all
conditions in violation of the terms of the permit and shall specify a time
for the correction of all items so listed.
E. The Borough shall not issue a building permit, certificate of occupancy,
or continuing certificate of occupancy for any property for which a
violation of this chapter has been served until said violation is resolved
to the reasonable satisfaction of the Enforcement Officer.
A. Any tree removed under a tree removal permit issued pursuant to
§ 257-7B shall be replaced at a one-to-one ratio, wherever practicable,
as determined by the Enforcement Officer. The number, size, species
§ 257-7 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 257-11
188:741
§ 257-12. Appeal.
§ 257-13. Tree protection.
and location of the compensatory trees shall be determined by the
Enforcement Officer by calculating the size, condition and species of
the tree proposed for removal in accordance with the Borough Tree
Plan.
B. Compensatory trees shall be guaranteed by the applicant for two years
after the date of planting and shall be verified by the applicant upon
request of the Enforcement Officer. If any compensatory trees die or
become diseased or damaged within the first two years of their
planting, the compensatory trees may be replanted off-site on Boroughowned
property or the applicant may make payment to the Tree Escrow
Fund in lieu of replanting in accordance with the Borough Tree Plan.
C. Compensatory trees shall be planted on the subject property; however,
if the subject property cannot accommodate the number of trees
because of unique conditions applicable to the property, including size,
shape, topography, soil conditions or the location of existing or
proposed buildings or structures, some or all of the compensatory trees
may be planted off-site on Borough-owned property or the applicant
may make payment to the Tree Escrow Fund in lieu of compensatory
replanting on the subject property in accordance with the Borough Tree
Plan.
A. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Enforcement Officer shall
have the right to appeal such decision to the Borough Administrator, or
his/her designee. Such appeal shall be by written notice stating the
reason(s) upon which the appeal is based, filed with the Borough Clerk
within 10 days of the decision of the Enforcement Officer.
B. The Borough Administrator, or his/her designee, shall decide the matter
based on the written submission within 15 business days after the filing
of the notice of appeal. The Borough Administrator, or his/her designee,
may reverse, modify or affirm the decision of the Enforcement Officer. If
the Borough Administrator or his/her designee does not act within 15
days after the filing of the notice of appeal, the decision being appealed
shall be deemed to have been affirmed. The decision of the Borough
Administrator, or his/her designee, shall be final.
A. No person shall: (1) operate, place or maintain within the dripline of
any tree any machinery, equipment, heavy object, stone, rocks, cement,
earth, soil, or other substance which may harm the tree by unduly
compressing the earth or otherwise impeding or preventing access of
water or air to the roots of such tree; or (2) excavate around or remove
earth or soil from, or cause any water to flow upon, the roots of any
tree.
§ 257-11 CHATHAM CODE § 257-13
188:742
§ 257-14. Applicability to tree removal companies.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any person removing trees on
behalf of any other person, including the property owner and all licensed
tree experts, licensed tree care operators, tree contractors, tree removal
companies, landscaping companies, or persons otherwise engaged in the
business of removing trees or construction.
§ 257-15. Rules and regulations.
The Borough Administrator shall have the authority to promulgate rules and
regulations to administer and enforce this chapter.
§ 257-16. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
B. Site protection during construction. During construction work
authorized by any Borough-issued permit or approval, the following
tree protection measures shall be implemented: (1) snow fencing or
other durable material shall be installed around the trees to be
protected, and the proper installation of said protection measures shall
be verified by the Zoning Officer or designee prior to soil disturbance;
(2) protective barriers shall not be supported by the plants or trees they
are protecting, but shall be self-supporting. Barriers shall be a
minimum of four feet high and shall not be removed until construction
is complete; (3) snow fencing used for tree protection shall be firmly
secured along the dripline area, but not less than six feet from the trunk
when the dripline is less than six feet; (4) the grade of the land located
within the dripline area shall not be raised, or lowered, more than six
inches, unless compensated by welling or retaining wall methods; and
in no event shall welling or retaining wall methods be located less than
six feet from the trunk of any tree; (5) no soil stockpiling, storage of
building materials, parking or driving of construction equipment or
vehicles shall be permitted within the dripline area or within six feet of
any remaining trees, whichever is greater; (6) any clearing within the
dripline area, or within six feet of the trunk of a remaining tree,
whichever distance is greater, shall be done by hand or nonmechanical
equipment; and (7) where a tree that has been designated for
preservation is severely damaged and unable to survive, replacement
trees shall be replanted as provided in this chapter. If provisions of this
subchapter create any undue hardship in the appropriate use and
enjoyment of property, the Enforcement Officer may waive such
provisions in whole or in part, but only to the extent absolutely
necessary to alleviate such undue hardship. Both the request for a
waiver of the provisions of this section, and the findings and
determination of the Enforcement Officer which either denies or grants
the waiver, must be set forth in writing.
A. The requirements of this chapter shall be enforced by the Enforcement
Officer, who shall seek such penalties as are provided in this chapter.
The Enforcement Officer may, in his/her discretion, consult with the
§ 257-13 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 257-16
188:743
Chapter 263
VEHICLES, MOTORIZED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 139.
§ 263-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOTORCYCLE — Any two-wheeled, motor-propelled apparatus licensed by
the State of New Jersey Department of Motor Vehicles for the operation
upon the public highways.
MOTORIZED BICYCLE — A pedal bicycle having a helper motor
characterized in that either the maximum piston displacement is less than
50 cc or said motor is rated at no more than 1.5 brake horsepower and said
bicycle is capable of a maximum speed of no more than 25 miles per hour
on a flat surface.
MOTORIZED SPORTBIKE —
Borough Forester, Borough Engineer, Construction Official, Shade Tree
Commission, or other Borough official or entity, as he/she may deem
necessary or advisable.
B. The Enforcement Officer may issue a stop-work order for any tree work
or other activity which he/she believes to be in violation of this chapter.
The order shall be issued in writing and a copy served upon the
property owner and any person engaged in such tree work or other
activity. Thereafter, any further activity shall comply with the terms and
conditions of any tree removal permit issued by the Enforcement
Officer and the provisions of this chapter.
C. Any person who commits a violation of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be required to retroactively obtain a tree removal
permit in accordance with this chapter and to pay any fees or
compensatory replanting costs as required by § 257-11 herein and shall
be subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-14. A violation as
to each tree located within the Borough shall constitute a separate
offense.
D. In addition to other remedies provided herein, the Enforcement Officer
may institute appropriate legal proceedings in Superior Court to
prevent a continuing violation of the provisions of this Chapter.
Any two- , three- or four-wheeled bicycle or similar apparatus motor
propelled or having a helper motor and commonly referred to among
A.
§ 257-16 CHATHAM CODE § 263-1
263:744
PRIVATE PROPERTY — All lands in the Borough of Chatham not defined as
public property or part of the road system as accepted hereinbefore.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Lands owned or leased by the Borough of Chatham,
the Board of Education of the Chathams, or any other equivalent public
body, but specifically excluding from any roadways being used for public
transportation and being part of the accepted road system of the Borough,
county, or the State of New Jersey.
UNLICENSED OPERATOR — The operator of any motor vehicle who does
not hold a special license issued by the State of New Jersey Department
of Motor Vehicles, permitting the operation of a motorcycle on the public
highways, or the operator of any motorized sportbike who is in violation of
§ 263-2 of this chapter.
§ 263-2. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful to:
other designations, as a "moped," "minibike," "go cart," "go-ped," "allterrain
vehicle," "trailbike," or the like, which by its nature is not
authorized to be licensed by the State of New Jersey Department of
Motor Vehicles for use upon the public highways, notwithstanding the
fact that licensing of the same in some instances may not be required
for the operation upon the public roadways.
A snowmobile and any similar sport vehicle which is motor-propelled
and traverses the terrain by means of treads, tracks, or the like, all as
contrasted to wheels.
B.
A. Operate a motor vehicle of any type, a motorized sportbike, motorcycle,
or motorized bicycle, as defined herein, upon public or private property,
with or without permission of the landowner, during the period of time
set forth in Chapter 184, Noise, of the Code of the Borough of Chatham.
B. Operate a motorized sportbike, motorcycle, and motorized bicycle as a
licensed or unlicensed operator on private property other than with the
written consent of all of the owners of the property. When such written
consent has been obtained, the operator shall keep the same on his
person for display to the authorities. The failure to disclose such written
consent shall constitute a violation hereunder.
C. Operate a motorized sportbike, motorcycle, and motorized bicycle on
public or private property other than in accordance with the general
regulation set forth in this chapter.
D. Operate a motorized sportbike, motorcycle, motorized bicycle on public
or private property without the same being in proper operating
condition which is hereby defined as the presence of all original
operating equipment specified therefor by the original manufacturer,
with the same in operating condition at least equal to the
manufacturer's requirements for the proper operation thereof or the
equivalent thereof.
§ 263-1 VEHICLES, MOTORIZED § 263-2
263:745
§ 263-3. Operational prohibitions.
The following regulations shall apply to the operation of a motorized
sportbike, motorcycle, or motorized bicycle operated on public or private
property, other than the property of the immediate family of which the
operator is a member:
§ 263-4. Impoundment of offending vehicles; period of
impoundment.
Any police officer may, at his discretion:
E. Operate a motorized sportbike, motorcycle, or motorized bicycle on
public or private property in a careless, reckless or negligent manner so
as to endanger the safety of any person or public or private property.
A. No person operating a motorized sportbike, motorcycle, or motorized
bicycle shall ride without maintaining full control of such motorized
sportbike, motorcycle, or motorized bicycle, or remove both hands from
the handlebar.
B. No person operating a motorized sportbike, motorcycle, or motorized
bicycle shall carry any other person, except in a place designated
therefor and equipped therefor as part of the original manufacturer for
the purpose, and in no event shall a rider be carried on the handlebars.
C. It shall not be unlawful for any public employee or other party with an
appropriate permit to operate motor vehicles, motorized sportbikes,
motorcycles, or motorized bicycles as defined herein, in the locations
for the purpose of maintaining, repairing, or doing work upon the lands
for the public good.
D. This chapter shall not be applicable to any recognized organization,
which has obtained permission from the Borough Administrator to use
the lands for the sole purpose of holding organized and supervised
rallies, races, or meets.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle equipped with
a muffler cutout, muffler bypass, or similar device.
A. Impound any motorized sportbike, motorcycle, or motorized bicycle on
public or private property alleged to be a violation of this chapter,
either by virtue of its operation and use contrary to the provisions of
this chapter or by virtue of its operation by an unlicensed operator.
B. Impound any motorized sportbike, motorcycle, or motorized bicycle
operating on the public roadway in violation of any then-applicable
state statute or any regulation validly promulgated by any state agency
having jurisdiction. The period of impoundment shall be from the date
of the alleged violation until the disposition of the alleged offense by
such court of competent jurisdiction as shall hear the same, and the
owner thereof shall pay the reasonable cost of the removal and storage
§ 263-2 CHATHAM CODE § 263-4
263:746
§ 263-5. Violations and penalties.
The penalty for violation of any provision of this chapter shall be as set forth
in Chapter 1, § 1-14.
Chapter 267
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 217.
constituting impoundment. The Chief of Police or his designee may
authorize early release. The expense of impoundment shall be in
addition to any other fine or penalty levied or collected under the terms
of this chapter.
§ 263-4 VEHICLES, MOTORIZED § 263-5
263:747

ARTICLE I
Water and Sewer Connections
[Adopted 11-12-1984 by Ord. No. 16-84 (Ch. A181 of the 1975
Code)]
§ 267-1. Application for water connection; fee. [Amended 2-13-1995
by Ord. No. 1-95]
No water connection shall be made except based on an application filed
at the Borough Hall. All applications must be accompanied by a fee in the
amount of $40.
§ 267-2. Charges for nonmetered water service. [Amended
2-13-1995 by Ord. No. 1-95; 9-13-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23]
Where nonmetered water service is authorized in connection with
construction work or otherwise, the same shall be billed at the following
rates:
§ 267-3. Fees for permanent water connections. [Amended
2-13-1995 by Ord. No. 1-95; 9-13-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23]
A. Residential: Application permit fee of $150 and monthly charge of $30.
B. Commercial or industrial: Application permit fee of $300 plus a monthly
charge of $100.
C. Swimming pool from hydrant: such use is prohibited.
D. All temporary services must be equipped with a backflow preventer.
A. Tapping fees for sizes between 3/4 inch and one inch.
(1) The fees payable for tapping onto the main waterline for permanent
connections, new construction, and any upgrades in size of service,
which includes materials and labor, for sizes between 3/4 inch and
one inch shall be as follows:
Service Size
(inches) Tap Fee
3/4 $1,300
1 $1,650
(2) Any upgrades to a water service will be charged as a new tap fee to
the resident. The resident receives a street opening permit,
excavates, and backfills.
B. Tapping fees for sizes between 1 1/2 inches and two inches.
§ 267-1 VEHICLES, MOTORIZED § 267-3
263:749
(1) The fees payable for tapping onto the main waterline for permanent
connections, new construction, and any upgrades in size of service
for sizes between 1 1/2 inches and two inches shall be as follows:
Service Size
(inches) Tap Fee
1 1/2 $1,400
2 $1,600
(2) The resident shall obtain necessary permits, furnish a water meter
as directed by the Chatham Water Department, excavate, and
backfill. The resident has the option of purchasing the water meter
from the Borough. The Borough is only supplying the tap, saddle,
and corporation. The Borough will not supply the copper line, curb
stop, and curb box.
C. Tapping fees for sizes between three inches and eight inches.
(1) The fees payable for tapping onto the main waterline for permanent
connections, new construction, and any upgrades in size of service
for sizes between three inches and eight inches shall be as follows:
Service Size
(inches) Tap Fee
3 $1,400
4 $1,600
6 $1,800
8 $2,000
(2) All work may be completed by the resident or a builder with
permits obtained from and necessary fees paid to the Borough. The
resident or builder supplies all material, including the water meter
as directed by the Chatham Water Department, and performs all
work, including excavation and backfilling. All work performed
shall be inspected by a Borough representative. See Subsections D
and E of this § 267-3 for fees related to the supervision and
inspection of all such work.
D. The fees payable to the Borough for the supervision of all main work,
whether such work is new work, repair work, or replacement work, and
pressure tests, shall be as follows: $400 per day or $50 per hour,
depending on the scope of the work.
E. The fees payable to the Borough for the inspection of all main and
service line construction, whether such work is new work, repair work,
or replacement work, shall be as follows: $400 per day; $50 per hour,
depending on the scope of the work.
§ 267-3 CHATHAM CODE § 267-4
263:750
§ 267-4. Inspection of sewer lateral required; fee. [Amended
2-13-1995 by Ord. No. 1-95]
After any sewer lateral has been laid in an open trench, it must be inspected
by an authorized agent before any attempt to close the trench, and the fee
for this inspection will be $35, payable before the inspection.
§ 267-5. Testing and replacement of water meters; right of entry;
charges for water meters.
A. The Borough reserves a right of entry upon reasonable notice to test
and replace all meters during normal business hours.
B. For testing a meter at a customer’s request for service size connections
of 3/4 inch and one inch, a fee of $25 shall be charged. The fee is subject
to refund if the meter is found to have an error in excess of 2%. All
service size connections of 1 1/2 inches and larger require that the
meter be tested by a private vendor, with such fees to be paid directly
from the customer to the private vendor. [Amended 9-13-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-23]
C. In replacing water meters which have become frozen or otherwise
damaged by other than normal wear and tear, the fee for this service
shall be $20, plus the lesser of the cost of the parts required or a new
meter.
D. The owner shall be responsible for providing reasonable access to the
meter, which shall include at least six inches of space at the top and
bottom, 10 inches on each side and 24 inches to the front.
E. Charges for water meters. [Added 9-13-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23]
(1) The following charges will be assessed for the cost of the water
meters installed for any permanent water connections of the
following service sizes:
(a) Three-fourths inch: $200;
(b) One inch: $275;
(c) One and one-half inches or larger: current going market price.
(2) If the meter is damaged by freezing or any other natural cause or
negligent act by the resident or other individual who is an invitee or
licensee of the resident, the full cost of the meter shall be paid to
the Borough. The full cost of the meter shall also be paid to the
Borough for any new construction or rebuilding of a home.
(3) The charges in this subsection are subject to modification by the
Mayor and Borough Council upon application by the Chatham
Water Department, which shall be based upon a reasonable
showing of going market rate price fluctuations.
§ 267-4 VEHICLES, MOTORIZED § 267-6
263:751
§ 267-6. Billing procedures. [Amended 7-8-2002 by Ord. No. 02-14]
§ 267-7. Temporary discontinuance; fee. [Amended 2-13-1995 by
Ord. No. 1-95; 9-13-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23]
Application for turning water on or off at any location shall be made at
the Borough Hall. Water service shall only be turned off by an authorized
Borough employee. No fee shall be charged for turning the water off, but
the fee for turning water service on again shall be as follows: $35 during
business hours; $70 after business hours.
§ 267-8. Permit to open state and county highways.
A. Water bills for water consumed shall be rendered to the owner of the
premises or his designee quarterly. In the event that a meter is
inaccessible for any reason, the consumer shall be responsible for
entering the meter reading upon a form provided by the Water Utility
and for returning this form to the Water Utility within five days. If the
form is not received by the Water Utility within five days and a reading
is not phoned to the Water Clerk, the consumer shall be billed using an
estimate based upon the average amount of water consumed during the
previous four quarters, plus 25%.
B. It is the consumer's responsibility to ensure that the Water Utility at
least once per year is granted access for actual reading. In the event
that the period between actual readings exceeds one year, the owner or
his designee will be notified that water service may be terminated until
arrangements are made for access to the water meter during normal
working hours. If the water is turned off, the consumer shall pay to the
Borough the sum(s) Council designates by resolution for such water
shutoff.
C. (1) All water bills shall be due and payable within 30 days of the billing
date. In the event that said payment is not made in full within the
thirty-day period, then the consumer shall pay to the Borough late
charges as Council designates by resolution.
(2) In the event that the consumer fails to pay within 60 days, then the
consumer shall be subject to the water shutoff program, the rules
and regulations for which Council shall designate by resolution.
D. The charges hereby imposed shall be payable to the Borough and shall
be a lien upon the property connected to the water supply until paid,
and the Borough shall have the same remedies for collection thereof,
with interest, costs and penalties, as it has by law for the collection of
taxes on real estate.
A. The state and county highways within the Borough of Chatham are as
follows: Main Street, Fairmount Avenue, Passaic Avenue and Watchung
Avenue.
§ 267-6 CHATHAM CODE § 267-8
263:752
§ 267-9. Policy and procedures manual. [Added 11-10-2003 by Ord.
No. 03-24; amended 5-22-2006 by Ord. No. 06-14104]
The Council of the Borough of Chatham shall annually adopt by resolution a
Policy and Procedures Manual for Water and Sewer Service.
§ 267-9.1. Exemption. [Added 2-8-2010 by Ord. No. 10-02]
No service charge shall be levied or collected hereunder for any water
consumed or used from those properties which are connected to any water
connection within the Borough in use by the Borough of Chatham
Emergency Squad.
B. A permit to open a state or county highway must be obtained from the
proper authorities by the applicant before any part of the work in
connection therewith is commenced by the Water Utility.
104. Editor's Note: This ordinance provided for the relocation of former § 267-9, Application
for sanitary sewer connections; fees, and § 267-10, Fees for permanent sewer connections,
to Ch. 217, Art. III, and the renumbering of subsequent sections, respectively.
§ 267-8 VEHICLES, MOTORIZED § 267-9.1
263:753

ARTICLE II
Water Rates
[Adopted 2-13-1995 by Ord. No. 1-95 (Ch. A182 of the 1975 Code);
amended in its entirety 5-22-2006 by Ord. No. 06-14]
§ 267-10. Uniform water rate effective date. [Amended 3-10-2008 by
Ord. No. 08-04; 2-8-2010 by Ord. No. 10-02; 3-12-2012 by Ord. No.
12-03; 2-10-2014 by Ord. No. 14-01]
The following water rate shall apply for services to be billed on or after
April 1, 2014: $4.28 per 100 cubic feet. The following regular water rate
shall apply for services billed on or after April 1, 2015: $4.41 per 100 cubic
feet. Any water rate established on or after April 1, 2015, shall be fixed by
resolution.
§ 267-11. Minimum charges; exception. [Amended 9-22-2008 by
Ord. No. 08-20]
A. The following minimum charges shall be payable per quarter:
Size of Meter
(inches)
Charge
per Quarter
R01 3/4 $ 18
R02 1 $ 45
R03 1 1/2 $ 90
R04 2 $135
R05 3 $225
R06 4 $315
B. Irrigation meters connected solely to outdoor irrigation systems are
excepted from charge under this Chapter 267, Water, Article II, Water
Rates § 267-11A.
§ 267-10 VEHICLES, MOTORIZED § 267-11
263:755

ARTICLE III
Water Emergencies
[Adopted 11-8-1999 by Ord. No. 11-99; amended in its entirety
5-22-2006 by Ord. No. 06-14]
§ 267-12. Annual water restrictions.
§ 267-13. Declaration of emergency.
In addition to the restrictions set forth in § 267-12 of this article, whenever
the Borough Council shall be satisfied and finds that a water emergency
exists in the Borough, it may adopt a resolution declaring that a water
emergency exists in the Borough. Such resolution shall be adopted by the
Borough Council at any regular, special, adjourned or emergency public
meeting of the Borough Council. Such resolution shall specify which of the
water use regulations contained in § 267-14 of this article is being imposed,
as well as any exemptions as may be authorized. Such resolution shall be
effective immediately upon publication according to law and shall continue
in effect for 90 days, unless extended or repealed as set forth in § 267-15 of
this article.
§ 267-14. Water use restrictions.
Upon adoption by the Borough Council of a resolution declaring that a
water emergency exists in the Borough in accordance with § 267-13 of this
article, all citizens shall be urged to observe voluntary indoor conservation
measures, and any of the water use restrictions set forth herein shall be
imposed and shall be applicable to all residents and tenants, except where
a bona fide health emergency exists, as follows:
A. Voluntary restrictions which govern indoor conservation measures.
B. Mandatory restrictions. All residents, tenants and businesses of the
Borough shall observe mandatory water use restrictions as follows:
(1) Outdoor use for lawn, garden, shrub, and any other vegetation
watering, car and any other mobile equipment washing, and
washing of driveways, sidewalks, buildings and equipment shall be
restricted to alternate days, with usage allowed on even-numbered
days for those residents or businesses whose dwelling, building or
box number are even and on odd-numbered days for those
residents or businesses whose dwelling, building or box number
are odd. There shall be no such outdoor water usage on the 31st
day of any month.
(2) Watering of lawns, gardens, shrubs and other vegetation shall be
restricted to the hours from 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and from 6:00
p.m. to 9:00 p.m.
A. Outdoor use for lawn, garden, shrub, and any other vegetation
watering, car and any other mobile equipment washing, and washing of
§ 267-12 VEHICLES, MOTORIZED § 267-14
263:757
§ 267-15. Duration of restrictions.
§ 267-16. Enforcement of restrictions.
driveways, sidewalks, buildings and equipment shall be restricted to
the hours from 6:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m.
B. Any other water use restriction specified by the Borough Council in the
resolution required by § 267-13 of this article which is reasonable under
the circumstances considering the nature and extent of the water
emergency.
A. The resolution of the Borough Council required by § 267-13 of this
article which declares a water emergency shall remain in effect for 90
days, as set forth in § 267-13, unless this period of time is extended or
repealed by the Borough Council by resolution, but which shall be no
longer than reasonably necessary to abate the water emergency as
determined by the nature and extent of the water emergency.
[Amended 3-10-2003 by Ord. No. 03-05]
B. At the expiration of the time period specified, the water use restriction
shall lapse and be inapplicable and unenforceable.
C. If the Borough Council shall be satisfied that the water emergency has
been abated prior to the expiration of the time period specified in the
resolution or by declaration of the Borough Administrator, it shall adopt
a resolution declaring the water emergency ended and the water use
restrictions inapplicable.
D. If, at the expiration of the time period specified, the Borough Council
shall be satisfied that the water emergency continues to exist, it may
adopt a resolution in accordance with the requirements of this article
continuing the water use restrictions.
A. The water use restrictions imposed pursuant to this article shall be
enforced by the Police Department of the Borough of Chatham.
B. Whenever the Chatham Police Department shall find a violation of the
water use restrictions, it shall give the violator a written warning and
explain the penalties for continued offenses as provided by § 267-17 of
this article.
C. The Chatham Police Department shall keep such records as may be
reasonable and necessary for the purpose of determining the persons
and businesses who have been warned upon a first offense. The
Chatham Police Department is hereby empowered to write summonses
for the violation of the water use restrictions imposed pursuant to this
article.
§ 267-14 CHATHAM CODE § 267-17
263:758
§ 267-17. Violations and penalties.
After a first offense in accordance with any of the provisions of this article,
any person who or business which thereafter violates the water use
restrictions imposed pursuant to this article shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, § 1-14.
§ 267-18. Fire hydrant use. [Added 9-13-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23]
The use of fire hydrants for obtaining water shall be restricted to permitted
uses approved by the Chatham Water Department or declaration of
emergencies and exceptions by the Borough Council pursuant to Article
III of Chapter 267, or as otherwise approved by the Borough Council. The
following fees shall be paid to the Borough for any permitted use: $350 per
use permit; $500 per eight-hour permit. All hydrant use should have an air
gap upon fill ups and be supervised by the Chatham Water Department.
Unless otherwise designated by the Borough Council, the only hydrant
allowed and available for such service is located at the Department of Public
Works complex.
§ 267-17 VEHICLES, MOTORIZED § 267-18
263:759
Part III: Board of Health Legislation
Chapter 274
GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH
§ 267-18 CHATHAM CODE § 267-18
274:760
ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code by Board of Health
[Adopted 6-9-2005 by Ord. No. BOH 05-01]
§ 274-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the Board of Health ordinances of the Borough
of Chatham of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Board of
Health of the Borough of Chatham, as revised, codified and consolidated
into chapters and sections by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting
of Chapters 274 through 307, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and
enacted as Part III of the "Code of the Borough of Chatham," hereinafter
known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 274-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede the 1975 Code and all general
and permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code,
except such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 274-3. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 274-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Borough Clerk and/or Board of Health Secretary and shall remain there
for use and examination by the public until final action is taken on this
ordinance; and, if this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be
certified to by the Secretary of the Board of Health of the Borough of
Chatham, as provided by law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in
the office of the Secretary of the Borough, to be made available to persons
desiring to examine the same during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 274-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to Part III of the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the Board
of Health to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into Part III of such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Borough
of Chatham" shall be understood and intended to include such additions
and amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements
to the Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as
provided hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 274-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 274-6
274:761
§ 274-6. Publication; filing.
of Chatham or the Secretary of the Board of Health, pursuant to law, shall
cause this Adopting Ordinance to be published, in the manner required,
in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. Sufficient copies
of the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk or Secretary
for inspection by the public at all times during regular office hours. The
enactment and publication of this Adopting Ordinance, coupled with
availability of copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be
deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all
provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 274-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk or Secretary or someone authorized and
directed by the Clerk or Secretary to keep up-to-date the certified copy of
the book containing the Code required to be filed in his or her office for
the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted
subsequent to the effective date of this codification which shall be adopted
specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included
therein by reference until such changes or new ordinances are printed as
supplements to said Code book, at which time such supplements shall be
inserted therein.
§ 274-8. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of a fee
to be set by the governing body. The Clerk may also arrange for procedures
for the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 274-9. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Borough of
Chatham to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not less than $5 nor
more than $500.
§ 274-10. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of Part III of the Code and every part of each section is an
independent section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or
a part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall
not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections
or parts thereof.
§ 274-6 CHATHAM CODE § 274-11
274:762
§ 274-11. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 274-12. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance which
are inconsistent with the any provision in the Code are hereby repealed to
the extent of such inconsistency as of the effective date of this Adopting
Ordinance.
§ 274-13. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 274-12 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 9-9-2004.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
the Borough's indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
§ 274-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 274-13
274:763
§ 274-14. General penalty.
Violation of any provision of Part III of the Code of the Borough of Chatham,
for which another penalty is not provided, shall be punishable by a fine
of not less than $5 nor more than $500 in the discretion of the Judge.
The continuation of such violation for each successive day shall constitute
a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or permitting the
continuance of the violation may be punished as provided above for each
separate offense.
§ 274-15. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges or the approval
of the municipal budget.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
L. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for Board of Health employees.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the Board of Health that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed
had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the changes, amendments or revisions as set forth below
are made herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this
ordinance. (Chapter and section number references are to the
ordinances as they have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)
(1) The following sections have been amended or added to refer to the
general penalty found in § 274-14 of the Code (general penalty):
280-6, 289-15, 294-4.
(2) In Chapter 280, Fees, Board of Health, § 280-5B is amended to
increase the fee from $6 to $10 per copy for certified copies and to
delete the four-dollar fee for noncertified copies.
§ 274-13 CHATHAM CODE § 274-15
274:764
ARTICLE II
Ordinances Adopted During Codification
[During the process of codification, certain complete new
ordinances were approved by the Board of Health for inclusion in
the Code of the Borough of Chatham. Such new ordinances are
noted in the histories of individual chapters as "Adopted ... during
codification (see Ch. 274, General Provisions, Board of Health, Art.
II)." In accordance with recognized codification procedures, these
new ordinances will be adopted separately and are presently
proposed before the Board of Health of the Borough of Chatham for
that purpose. Upon final adoption of such ordinances, a complete
enumeration of all chapters and articles in the Code included in
such ordinances will be printed in this article along with specific
dates of adoption.]
Chapter and Article Ord. No. Adoption Date
Ch. 289, Massage, Bodywork and
Somatic Therapy Establishments
BOH 05-02 6-9-2005
Ch. 303, Public Recreational Bathing BOH 05-03 6-9-2005
Ch. 307, Tanning Booth
Establishments
BOH 05-04 6-9-2005
GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 274-15
274:765
Chapter 280
FEES, BOARD OF HEALTH
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health — See Ch. 23. Public health nuisances — See Ch. 208.
§ 280-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Ordinance Revising Certain Fees
Administered by the Board of Health of the Borough of Chatham."
§ 280-2. Intent.
It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way
impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances,
except those specifically repealed by this chapter. Where this chapter sets a
fee different from existing provisions of law or ordinances or establishes a
new fee, the provisions of this chapter shall apply.
§ 280-3. Application required.
Every person required to procure a license under the provisions of any
ordinance or law of the Board of Health of the Borough of Chatham shall
submit an application for such license to the Secretary of the Board of
Health of the Borough of Chatham. The form of this application shall comply
with the applicable laws and ordinances of the Board of Health. The
application shall be accompanied by the full amount chargeable for such
license. License fees shall be in amounts established under § 280-5 of this
chapter. No refunds will be made once an application is made, regardless of
action taken.
§ 280-4. Issuance of licenses.
The Secretary of the Board of Health shall collect all license fees and
shall issue licenses in the name of the Board of Health of the Borough of
Chatham.
§ 280-5. License fees. [Amended 12-12-1985 by Ord. No. 3-85H;
2-13-1986 by Ord. No. 3-85H(a); 12-13-1990 by Ord. No. 1-90H;
12-11-1994 by Ord. No. 11-94; 11-23-1998 by Ord. No. 12-98;
3-11-2004 by Ord. No. 04-01; 6-9-2005 by Ord. No. BOH 05-01;
10-13-2005 by Ord. No. BOH 05-05]
A. Clinic and program fees.
(1) Fees and charges for various programs and clinics shall be paid by
participants at the time of registration.
§ 274-15 CHATHAM CODE § 280-5
280:766
§ 280-6. Violations and penalties. [Added 12-11-1975]
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided in Chapter
274, § 274-14. The continuation of such violation for each successive day
shall constitute a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or
permitting the continuance of the violation may be punished as provided
above for each separate offense.
Chapter 284
FOOD-HANDLING ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 284-1. Enforcement of state standards.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Health Officer in accordance with
N.J.S.A. Title 24, entitled "Food and Drugs," and the interpretations thereof
contained in the New Jersey State Sanitary Code (N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.1 et seq.).
The provisions of the New Jersey State Sanitary Code are hereby recognized
as being of full force and effect in the Borough of Chatham.
§ 284-2. Definitions.
§ 284-3. License required; application.
(2) Fees for programs and clinics may be established by resolution
adopted from time to time by the Board of Health.
(3) The fees charged are nonrefundable, unless the clinic or program is
cancelled by the Board of Health.
B. Certified and noncertified copies. Fees for copies of documents shall be
as follows:
(1) For noncertified copies: see Chapter 129.
(2) For certified copies: $10.
A. As used in this chapter, words and terms shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in Chapter 12 of the State Sanitary Code.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOBILE FOOD VENDOR — Includes a peddler or solicitor who
transports prepared food, foodstuffs to be prepared or cooked prior to
sale and beverages for sale in the Borough by vehicle or pushcart, such
food or beverage to be sold to individual patrons while said vehicle
is stopped or parked. Mobile vendors of frozen products only, such as
ice cream, frozen iced or frozen confectionery products are specifically
excluded from the definition of "mobile food vendor."
§ 280-5 FEES, BOARD OF HEALTH § 284-3
280:767
§ 284-4. Conditions and requirements.
§ 284-5. Fees. [Amended 4-14-2008 by Ord. No. 08-10; 3-14-2013 by
Ord. No. BOH 13-04]
A. No person shall at any time within the Borough of Chatham conduct,
maintain or operate a retail food establishment, either mobile,
temporary or at a fixed location, or otherwise engage in the handling of
food or drink, without first having obtained a license to do so from the
Board of Health of the Borough of Chatham.
B. Application for such a license shall be made to the Board of Health, on
forms approved by it, signed and executed by the applicant.
A. A separate license shall be obtained for each retail food establishment
operating at a fixed location, mobile retail food establishment,
temporary retail food establishment or other place or event at which
food or drink is sold, distributed, served or otherwise dispensed.
B. No license to conduct, maintain or operate a retail food establishment
of any type shall be granted if such conduct, maintenance or operation
will result in the violation of Chapter 165, Land Development
Regulations, the Building Code105 or any other ordinance of the
Borough of Chatham.
C. Either the manager, owner or operator of a retail food establishment
licensed by the Board of Health shall be required to attend the yearly
food handlers' training seminar provided by the Board and to obtain a
certificate of completion of said course, annually.
A. Every applicant for whom a license is granted as required by the
provisions of this chapter shall pay to the Board of Health of the
Borough of Chatham an annual license fee for the same as follows:
(1) For a retail food establishment (RFE) operating at a fixed location,
selling or dispensing food or drink, whether or not such food or
drink is consumed upon the premises where the same are sold or
dispensed, the fee shall be based upon the floor area of the
premises, including storage areas, calculated as follows:
Total Floor Area of
RFE
(square feet)
or Type Fee
Less than 2,000 $100
2,000 to 5,000 $150
5,000 to 10,000 $175
105. Editor's Note: See Ch. 111, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 284-3 CHATHAM CODE § 284-5
280:768
Total Floor Area of
RFE
(square feet)
or Type Fee
Greater than 10,000 $500
(2) Other food establishments shall pay a fee based upon type as
follows:
Establishment Fee
Pharmacy/package goods $60
Reinspection fee
First offense $75
Second and subsequent
offense
$125
Temporary $30
Mobile $125
Catering $125
Farmers' market $25
Plan review fee $175
Plan alterations review $125
Food handlers course $40 (per restaurant, per class, no limit
on staff attendance, paid directly to
Madison)
Pet shops/kennels $25
Greasetrap inspection fee $75 (paid directly to Madison)
Late fee (late payment for
RFE and other licenses)
$50
B. (Reserved)
C. No fee shall be charged for a license when the same is issued to any
organization, society or group, such as a hospital, a school not operated
for profit or a religious institution, when the license is requested for a
purpose from which no profit is planned.
D. Whenever resampling and microbiological analysis of hazardous foods
are necessitated by reason of unsatisfactory results, the owner(s) of the
retail food establishment shall be assessed and the Board reimbursed
for the costs of resampling and microbiological analysis of hazardous
foods at the rate of $100 per sample.
§ 284-5 FEES, BOARD OF HEALTH § 284-6
280:769
§ 284-6. Contents of license; transfer; display; removal of refuse
and garbage.
§ 284-7. Expiration of licenses and permits.
All licenses and permits granted under the provisions hereof shall expire on
December 31 of the year for which the same are granted, unless suspended
or revoked, or unless issued for a temporary or shorter specified period.
§ 284-8. Suspension or revocation of license.
§ 284-9. Handwashing and toilet facilities.
In addition to the minimum toilet and handwashing facilities established by
the State Sanitary Code for employees of food-handling establishments, any
food-handling establishments designed for on-premises consumption shall
provide at least the following minimum handwashing and toilet facilities for
use by patrons:
A. Each license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall bear the
actual date of issue thereof, the legal name of the person, firm,
corporation or other organization, society or group to whom issued and
the location of the premises or other place of operation for which the
license is requested.
B. No license shall be transferable.
C. All licenses shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the licensed
premises, machine or vehicle.
D. Every licensee shall be required to sign an agreement certifying that
the licensee has a contract for the collection or removal of all refuse,
garbage and trash from the food-service establishment, so as not to
create a health hazard.
E. Mobile food vendors must provide for the disposal of recycling cans
and/or bottles. Mobile food vendors are not to use public receptacles for
garbage attributable to that peddler's operation.
A. A license or permit may be suspended or revoked for any violation by
the holder thereof of any provision of this chapter or of Chapter 12 of
the State Sanitary Code by the Health Officer; provided, however, that
the holder shall be afforded an opportunity to appeal the suspension of
the license to the Board of Health and the Health Officer within 48
hours of the effective date of the suspension.
B. If any such license shall have been revoked, neither the holder thereof
nor any person acting for the holder directly or indirectly shall be
entitled to another license to carry on the same business within the
Borough unless the application for such license shall be approved by
the Board of Health.
§ 284-6 CHATHAM CODE § 284-9
280:770
Patron Seating Capacity Minimum Facilities for Each Sex1
1 to 49 1 toilet and 1 handwashing basin
50 to 99 2 toilets and 2 handwashing basins
100 to 150 3 toilets and 3 handwashing basins
Over 150 1 additional unit for each additional 50
patrons or fraction thereof
1NOTE: Toilet facilities for males may be reduced by 1/3 by substituting
urinals.
§ 284-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided in Chapter
274, § 274-14. The continuation of such violation for each successive day
shall constitute a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or
permitting the continuation of the violation may be punished as provided
above for each separate offense.
Chapter 286
FOWL AND BIRDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals and rabies control — See Ch. 79. Public health nuisances — See Ch. 208.
§ 286-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FOWL — Includes poultry or birds of any kind, edible or otherwise, wild or
domestic, including any winged or flying birds or animals except canaries,
parakeets and parrots.
§ 286-2. Keeping of live chickens and roosters prohibited;
exemptions.
A. No person shall keep or house within the Borough any chicken, rooster,
duck, goose or other fowl.
B. Exemptions to this article shall be as follows:
(1) Canaries, parakeets, parrots, macaws or other song birds.
(2) Temporary waivers may be granted to the Board of Education, not
to exceed six months for educational purposes.
§ 284-9 FEES, BOARD OF HEALTH § 286-2
280:771
§ 286-3. Permit required to sell live fowl to the public.
No person, firm or corporation shall raise, keep, harbor or have in any
manner whatsoever any live fowl for the purpose of selling to the public,
until and only as long as there has been granted and shall remain in force
and effect a permit to do so, issued by the Health Department.
§ 286-4. Sanitary enclosures; inspections.
All fowl allowed under any exemption shall be confined in a suitable
enclosure which shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. All such
enclosures shall be subject at all times to inspection by the inspectors of the
Health Department.
§ 286-5. Feeding of birds restricted.
The littering of private grounds for the purpose of feeding free and wild
birds or the placing or causing to be placed of any food designed or intended
for the purpose of feeding such birds in such a manner and in such quantity
so as to create a hazard of rodent infestation so as to create any health
hazard by so doing shall be prohibited.
§ 286-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000, by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days or by a period of community service for not
more than 90 days, or any combination thereof. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
Chapter 289
MASSAGE, BODYWORK AND SOMATIC THERAPY
ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Tanning booth establishments — See Ch. 307.
§ 289-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings described to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
MASSAGE, BODYWORK AND SOMATIC THERAPIES — Any systems of
activity of structured touch which include, but are not limited to, holding,
(3) Businesses which sell live fowl to the public.
§ 286-2 CHATHAM CODE § 289-1
289:772
applying pressure, positioning and mobilizing soft tissue of the body by
manual technique and use of visual, kinesthetic, auditory and palpating
skills to assess the body for purposes of applying therapeutic massage,
bodywork or somatic principles. Such applications may include, but are
not limited to, the use of therapies such as heliotherapy or hydrotherapy,
the use of moist hot and cold external applications, external application
of herbal or topical preparations not classified as prescription drugs,
movement and neuromyofacial education and education in self-care and
stress management. Massage, bodywork and somatic therapies do not
include the diagnosis or treatment of illness, disease, impairment or
disability.
MASSAGE, BODYWORK AND SOMATIC THERAPIST — Any person certified
pursuant to the provisions of the Massage, Bodywork and Somatic Therapist
Certification Act, N.J.S.A. 45:11-53 et seq. (P.L. 1999, c. 19).
MASSAGE, BODYWORK AND SOMATIC THERAPY ESTABLISHMENT —
Any establishment wherein massage, bodywork and/or somatic therapies
are administered or are permitted to be administered, when such therapies
are administered for any form of consideration.
§ 289-2. Permits required.
§ 289-3. Application for establishment permit.
Any person desiring a massage, bodywork and somatic therapy
establishment permit shall file a written application with the Board of
Health upon a form to be furnished by the Health Department. The
application form shall contain the following information:
A. Massage, bodywork and somatic therapy establishment permit
required. No person, firm or corporation shall operate any
establishment or utilize any premises in the Borough of Chatham as or
for a massage, bodywork and somatic therapy establishment unless or
until there has first been obtained a permit for such establishment or
premises from the Borough of Chatham in accordance with the terms
and provisions of this section.
B. Massage, bodywork and somatic therapist's permit required. No person
shall practice massage or related therapies as a massage, bodywork or
somatic therapist, employee or otherwise, unless he or she has a valid
and subsisting massage, bodywork and somatic therapist's permit
issued to him or her by the Borough of Chatham pursuant to the terms
and provisions of this section.
A. The type of ownership of the business, i.e., whether individual,
partnership, corporation or otherwise.
B. The name, style and designation under which the business is to be
conducted.
§ 289-1 MASSAGE, BODYWORK AND SOMATIC § 289-3
289:773
C. The business address and all telephone numbers, including facsimile,
where business is to be conducted.
D. A complete list of the names and residence addresses of all massage,
bodywork and somatic therapists and employees of the business and
the name and residence address of the manager or other person
principally in charge of the operation of the business.
E. A sworn statement indicating that all massage, bodywork and somatic
therapists employed or to be employed by the establishment or
otherwise permitted to work at the establishment have been certified
by the State of New Jersey pursuant to the Massage, Bodywork and
Somatic Therapist Certification Act, N.J.S.A. 45:11-53 et seq. (P.L. 1999,
c. 19).
F. The following personal information concerning the applicant, if an
individual; concerning each stockholder holding more than 10% of the
stock of the corporation, each officer and each director, if the applicant
is a corporation; concerning the partners, including limited partners, if
the applicant is a partnership; and concerning the manager or other
person principally in charge of the operation of the business shall be
provided:
(1) The name, complete residence address and residence telephone
number.
(2) The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present
address of the applicant.
(3) Written proof of age.
(4) Height, weight, sex, color of hair and eyes.
(5) Two front-face portrait photographs taken within 30 days of the
date of the application and at least two by two inches in size.
(6) The massage therapy or similar business history and experience,
including but not limited to whether or not such person has
previously operated in this or another municipality or state under a
license or permit or has had such license or permit denied, revoked
or suspended and the reason therefor and the business activities or
occupations subsequent to such action or denial, suspension or
revocation.
(7) All criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic violations,
fully disclosing the jurisdiction in which convicted and the offense
for which convicted and circumstances thereof. The applicant shall
execute a waiver and consent to allow a fingerprint and criminal
background check by the Borough Police Department. Failure to
execute such a waiver and consent shall result in a denial of a
permit. An establishment permit shall be denied to any person who
§ 289-3 CHATHAM CODE § 289-3
289:774
§ 289-4. Establishment permit fee.
Every applicant for a permit to maintain, operate or conduct a massage,
bodywork and somatic therapy establishment shall file an application with
the Department of Health upon a form to be furnished by said Department,
and pay an annual fee of $100, which permit fee shall become due on the
first day of January each year.
§ 289-5. Building requirements; inspections.
The Department of Health, upon receiving an application for a massage,
bodywork and somatic therapy establishment permit, shall refer the
application to the Building Department, Fire Department, Police
Department and Planning Department and shall inspect the premises
proposed to be operated as such an establishment and shall make written
recommendations to the Division of Licensing and Permits concerning
compliance with the codes that they administer. No massage, bodywork,
and somatic therapy establishment shall be issued a permit or be operated,
established or maintained in the Borough unless an inspection by the Health
Officer, Construction Code Official and Fire Inspector reveals that the
establishment complies with the minimum requirements of the Building
and Health Codes for business operating in the Borough of Chatham. In
addition, the establishment must comply with each of the following
minimum requirements:
§ 289-6. Application for therapist's permit.
has been convicted of any crime or disorderly persons offense,
other than traffic violations.
G. The names and addresses of three adult residents of the county who will
serve as character references. These references must be persons other
than relatives and business associates.
A. All massage tables, bathtubs, shower stalls, steam or bath areas and
floors shall have surfaces which may be readily disinfected, and shall be
maintained in a sanitary condition and regularly cleaned and
disinfected.
B. Adequate bathing, dressing and locker facilities shall be provided for
the patrons to be served at any given time.
C. The premises shall have adequate equipment for disinfecting and
sterilizing nondisposable instruments and materials used in
administrating massages. Such nondisposable instruments and
materials shall be disinfected after use on each patron.
D. Adequate handwashing facilities shall be provided at convenient
locations as necessary to maintain clean hands and arms of all
employees during hours of operation.
§ 289-3 MASSAGE, BODYWORK AND SOMATIC § 289-6
289:775
A. To be eligible for a permit as a massage, bodywork and somatic
therapist, an applicant shall submit satisfactory evidence of:
(1) Successful completion of a minimum of 500 hours, in-class study in
the field of massage, bodywork or somatic therapy; or
(2) Successful completion of the written examination offered by the
National Certification Board for Therapeutic Massage and
Bodywork.
B. For up to one year (365 days) after the date procedures are established
by this chapter for applying for a permit to conduct massage, bodywork
or somatic therapy in the Borough of Chatham, any person engaged in
the full-time practice of massage, bodywork or somatic therapy for two
years proceeding the enactment of this chapter, or any person engaged
in the part-time practice of massage, bodywork or somatic therapy for
five years preceding the enactment of this chapter, or any person who
has successfully completed 1,000 hours in the practice of massage,
bodywork or somatic therapy under the supervision of certified
therapist as defined in § 289-1 of this chapter and with the minimum
completion of a minimum of 200 hours of education or training in
massage preceding the enactment of this chapter, may acquire a permit
to practice without satisfying the requirements in items Subsection A(1)
and (2) above. One year after the enactment of this chapter, any person
wishing to be permitted as a massage, bodywork or somatic therapist in
the Borough of Chatham must fulfill the requirements in items
Subsection A(1) and (2) above.
C. The following information concerning the application will also be
required:
(1) The name, complete residence address and residence telephone
number.
(2) All previous addresses within the last five years prior to the present
address of the applicant.
(3) Written proof of age.
(4) Height, weight, sex and color of hair and eyes.
(5) Two front-face portrait photographs taken within 30 days of the
date of the application and at least two by two inches in size.
(6) The massage therapy or similar business history and experience,
including but not limited to whether or not such a person has
previously operated in this Borough or another city or state under a
license or permit denied, revoked or suspended and the reason
therefor and the business activities or occupations subsequent to
such action or denial, suspension or revocation.
(7) All criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic violations
fully disclosing the jurisdiction in which convicted and the offense
§ 289-6 CHATHAM CODE § 289-6
289:776
§ 289-7. Therapist permit fee.
The applicant for a massage, bodywork or somatic therapist's license shall
pay an annual permit fee of $25, which permit fee shall become due on the
first day of January each year.
§ 289-8. Investigating and fingerprinting of applicant.
§ 289-9. Suspension or revocation of permit.
for which convicted and circumstances thereof. The applicant shall
execute a waiver and consent to allow a fingerprint background
check by the Police Department.
(8) The names and addresses of three adult residents of the county
who will serve as character references. These references must be
persons other than relatives and business associates.
A. With the exception of massage, bodywork and somatic therapists who
are certified pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:11-53 et seq. (P.L. 1999 c. 19), all
applicants seeking a permit under this chapter shall be fingerprinted by
the Borough of Chatham Police Department. The Borough of Chatham
Police Department shall fingerprint such applicants on Monday through
Friday between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., or as otherwise
determined by the Borough of Chatham Police Department. The
applicant shall pay a fee of $10 to the Police Department for the cost of
fingerprinting.
B. When said application is properly filled out, signed by the applicant and
has been filed with the Borough Clerk with all accompanying
information, the application shall be referred by the Clerk to the
Borough Police Department. The Chief of Police or his or her designee
shall investigate the information available and approve or disapprove
the application within 90 days. Reasons for disapproval shall be set
forth in writing on the reverse side of the application. The application
shall be returned to the Borough Clerk who will either issue the permit
or notify the applicant of a denial.
A. Permits issued under this chapter may be revoked by the Health Officer,
after notice and a hearing, for any of the following causes:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement in the application for
the permit.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on the permitted business in the Borough.
(3) Any violation of this chapter.
(4) Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude, a felony, an offense
involving sexual misconduct, keeping or residing in a house of
prostitution, and any crime involving dishonesty.
§ 289-6 MASSAGE, BODYWORK AND SOMATIC § 289-9
289:777
§ 289-10. Display of permit.
Every massage, bodywork, and somatic therapy establishment shall comply
with the following:
(5) Conducting the permitted business in the Borough in an unlawful
manner or in such a manner as to constitute a menace to the
health, safety or general welfare of the public.
B. Notice of the hearing for the revocation of a permit shall be given in
writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the
time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be given personally or
mailed to the permittee at his/her last known address at least five days
prior to the date set for the hearing.
C. Such permit may, pending revocation proceedings, be suspended for
not more than 10 days by the Health Officer if, in his/her opinion, the
conduct of the permittee is detrimental to the health, safety and general
welfare of the Borough of Chatham.
D. The Health Officer shall serve as hearing officer for any hearing
pursuant to this section.
A. Every portion of the massage, bodywork and somatic therapy
establishment, including appliances and apparatus, shall be kept clean
and operated in a sanitary condition.
B. Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted in the reception
area in a location available to all prospective customers.
C. All employees, including massage, bodywork and somatic therapists,
shall be clean and wear clean, nontransparent outer garments.
Dressing rooms must be available on the premises. Doors to such
dressing rooms shall open inward and shall be self-closing.
D. All massage, bodywork and somatic therapy establishments shall be
provided with clean laundered sheets and towels in sufficient quantity
which shall be laundered after each use thereof and stored in a sanitary
manner.
E. The sexual or genital area of patrons must be covered by towels, cloths
or undergarments when in the presence of an employee or massage,
bodywork or somatic therapist.
F. It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly, in a massage, bodywork
and somatic therapy establishment, to place his or her hand upon or
touch with any part of his or her body, to fondle in any manner or to
massage a sexual or genital area of any other person. No massage,
bodywork and somatic therapist, employee or operator shall perform or
offer to perform any act which would require the touching of the
patron's sexual or genital area.
§ 289-9 CHATHAM CODE § 289-10
289:778
§ 289-11. Inspections.
The Department of Health, Police Department and/or the Building
Department shall, from time to time, at least twice a year, make an
inspection of each massage, bodywork and somatic therapy establishment
granted a permit under the provisions of this chapter for the purpose of
determining whether the provisions of this chapter are being complied with.
Such inspections shall be made at reasonable times and in a reasonable
manner. It shall be unlawful for any permittee to fail to allow such
inspection officer access to the premises or to hinder such officer in any
manner.
§ 289-12. Sleeping quarters.
No part of any quarters of any massage, bodywork and somatic therapy
establishment shall be used for or connected with any bedroom or sleeping
quarters nor shall any person sleep in such massage, bodywork and somatic
therapy establishment except for limited periods incidental to and directly
related to a massage, bodywork or somatic therapy treatment or bath. This
provision shall not preclude the location of massage, bodywork and somatic
therapy establishment in separate quarters of a building housing a hotel or
other separate businesses or clubs.
§ 289-13. Prohibited acts.
G. All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steamrooms and all
other physical facilities and surfaces shall be in good repair and
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat-rooms,
steam or vapor rooms or steam or vapor cabinets and shower
compartments and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day
the business is in operation. Bathtubs and showers shall be thoroughly
cleaned after each use. When carpeting is used on the floors it shall be
kept dry, clean and sanitary.
H. Oils, creams, lotions and other preparations used in administering
massage, body work and somatic therapies shall be kept in clean closed
containers or cabinets.
I. Animals, except for Seeing-Eye dogs, shall not be permitted in the
massage work area.
J. Each massage, bodywork and somatic therapist shall wash is or her
hands in hot running water, using a proper soap or disinfectant before
administering a massage, bodywork or somatic therapy to a patron.
A. No owner or manager of a massage, bodywork and somatic therapy
establishment shall tolerate in his or her establishment any activity or
behavior prohibited by the laws of the State of New Jersey, particularly,
but not limited to, laws proscribing prostitution, indecency and
obscenity, including the sale, uttering or exposing and public
communication of obscene material; laws which relate to the
§ 289-10 MASSAGE, BODYWORK AND SOMATIC § 289-13
289:779
§ 289-14. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to massage, bodywork or
somatic therapies given:
§ 289-15. Violations and penalties.
In addition to the revocation or suspension of the permit granted under this
chapter any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction hereof, be punished as provided in Chapter 274, § 274-14.
Chapter 291
NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering and handbills — See Ch. 173.
Noise — See Ch. 184.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 204.
Public nuisances — See Ch. 208.
General penalty — See Ch. 274, § 274-14.
commission of sodomy, adultery and proscribing fornication, nor shall
any owner or manager tolerate in his or her establishment any activity
or behavior which violates this chapter.
B. Any conviction of any employee of a massage, bodywork and somatic
therapy establishment of a violation of the aforementioned statutes and
codes shall devolve upon the owner or manager of such establishment,
it being specifically declared that following such conviction of an
employee, the owner or manager of the establishment shall be
prosecuted as an accessory to such violation, and the permits which
have been issued shall be automatically revoked.
A. In the office of licensed physician, chiropractor or physical therapist; or
B. By a regularly established medical center, hospital or sanatorium
having a staff which includes licensed physicians, chiropractors and/or
physical therapists; or
C. By any licensed physician, chiropractor or physical therapist in the
residence of his or her patient; or
D. By a licensed barber or cosmetologist/hairstylist limited to the areas of
the face, neck, scalp or upper part of the body as set forth in the
Cosmetology and Hairstyling Act of 1984, N.J.S.A. 45:5B-1 et seq.
§ 289-13 CHATHAM CODE § 291-1
289:780
§ 291-1. Adoption of standards.
There is hereby adopted a certain code defining and prohibiting certain
matters, things, conditions or acts, and each of them as a nuisance,
prohibiting certain noises or sounds, requiring the proper heating of
apartments, prohibiting the lease or rental of certain buildings, prohibiting
spitting in or upon public buildings, conveyances or sidewalks, authorizing
the inspection of premises by an enforcing official, providing for the removal
or abatement of certain nuisances and the recovery of expenses incurred by
the Board of Health in removing or abating such nuisances and prescribing
penalties for violations is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1
to 26:3-69.6. A copy of said code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof
without the inclusion of the text thereof herein.106
§ 291-2. Title.
The code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey
(1953)," as it may be amended and supplemented from time to time.
§ 291-3. Copies on file.
Three copies of the Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953) have
been placed on file in the offices of the Secretary of the Board of Health and
the Borough Clerk for the use by and examination of the public.
§ 291-4. Enforcement.
The Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953) shall be enforced by
the Health Officer of the Borough of Chatham.
§ 291-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this
chapter or code established herein or notice issued pursuant thereto shall,
upon conviction thereof, be liable to a penalty as provided in § 274-14, for
each violation.
Chapter 294
PAINTING
§ 294-1. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Health Officer, or his or her designee,
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
106. Editor's Note: A copy of said code is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 291-1 PAINTING § 294-2
294:781
§ 294-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, words and terms shall have the following meanings:
AIRBORNE PARTICULATE — Pertaining to or composed of dust or distinct
particles carried by or in the air.
CONFINED POWER SANDING FOR THE REMOVAL OF PAINT — The use
of electric or hydraulic powered sanding tools that have attachments that,
while sanding paint, simultaneously vacuum dust and chips into a HEPAfiltered
vacuum device or otherwise contain and control chips and dust from
leaving the immediate work area.
CONFINED SANDBLASTING FOR THE REMOVAL OF PAINT — The use of
a stream of abrasive particles, normally sand, for the removal of paint. The
abrasive particles are confined by an associated vacuum system and/or a
curtain surrounding the area being sand blasted to prevent dust as small as
0.3 microns in size and chips from getting away from the immediate work
area.
HEPA VACUUM — A high efficiency filter that filters out fine particles of
dust at 0.3 microns in size.
IMMEDIATE WORK AREA — The space defined by an envelope surrounding
the painted structure and no greater than 10 feet away horizontally and
entirely on the property of the structure being prepped.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, employee, company, association,
firm or partnership.
UNCONFINED POWER SANDING FOR THE REMOVAL OF PAINT — The
use of electric or hydraulic powered sanding tools that do not have
attachments, that while sanding paint, simultaneously vacuum dust and
chips into a HEPA-filtered vacuum device or otherwise contains and controls
chips and dust from leaving the immediate work area.
UNCONFINED SANDBLASTING FOR THE REMOVAL OF PAINT — Not
using a vacuum system or curtain surrounding the area being blasted or
other techniques to control paint chips and dust from leaving the immediate
work area.
§ 294-3. Prohibitions and requirements.
A. No person shall remove paint on the exterior surfaces of a house or
structure by the method of unconfined power sanding, unconfined
sandblasting or any other methods that generate and propel airborne
particulates or paint chips out of the immediate work area.
B. Prior to removal of exterior paint, windows, doors and vents (excludes
roof vents) shall be sealed with tape or other approved methods, to
prevent entry of airborne particulates or paint chips into the interior of
the structure, and tarpaulins, drop cloths or plastic ground cover shall
be utilized to prevent airborne particulates and paint chips from
contaminating soil.
§ 294-2 CHATHAM CODE § 294-3
294:782
§ 294-4. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 303
PUBLIC RECREATIONAL BATHING
§ 303-1. Enforcement of state standards.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Health Officer in accordance with
New Jersey statute, Title 26, entitled "Health and Vital Statistics" and the
interpretations thereof contained in the New Jersey Administrative Code
(N.J.A.C. 8:26-1.1 et seq.).
C. When exterior paint is removed by confined power sanding, confined
sandblasting or other methods such as scraping or manual sanding, the
airborne particulates and paint chips shall be contained in the
immediate work area.
D. At the completion of paint removal for the day, the responsible person
shall clean up of all particulates and paint chips. The cleanup includes
all surfaces, including but not limited to window surfaces, driveways,
sidewalks, vegetation and planting areas. Particulates and paint chips
shall not be dispersed by blowers or hose water.
E. Paint, particulates and paint chips collected from tarpaulins, drop
cloths or plastic ground cover and HEPA vacuum equipment shall be
placed in double plastic bags, and disposed of as household garbage.
F. The owner of the adjoining property must be notified by the person
engaged in paint removal activity or conduct as set forth in this section
in the event of migration of particulates and paint chips to adjoining
properties. Surface preparation must be halted until the affected areas
are thoroughly cleaned and adjustments to the preparation procedures
are instituted.
G. Failure to adhere to the prohibitions or follow the requirements of this
section shall constitute a violation of this chapter and subject the
person engaged in paint removal activity or conduct to the violations
and penalties provisions of § 294-4.
A. Any person who commits a violation of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to the penalties provided in Chapter 274, § 274-14.
Each day that the violations continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
B. In lieu of issuing a summons or complaint in Municipal Court, an order
to immediately cease unconfined power sanding or to clean and remove
paint particulates and paint chips within a reasonable time period may
be issued by the Enforcement Official.
§ 294-3 PUBLIC RECREATIONAL BATHING § 303-2
303:783
§ 303-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, words and terms shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in Title 8, Chapter 26, of the New Jersey
Administrative Code.
§ 303-3. License required; application.
§ 303-4. Fees.
Every applicant for whom a license is granted as required by the provisions
of this chapter shall pay to the Board of Health of the Borough of Chatham
an annual license fee for the same in the amount of $100.
§ 303-5. Expiration.
All licenses and permits granted under the provisions hereof expire on
December 31 of the year for which the same are granted, unless suspended
or revoked, or unless issued for a temporary or shorter specified period.
§ 303-6. Suspension or revocation of license.
§ 303-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person who commits a violation of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof be subject to the penalties provided in Chapter 274, § 274-14.
Chapter 307
A. No owner, operator, or person shall at any time within the Borough of
Chatham conduct, maintain or operate a public recreational bathing
facility without first having obtained a license to do so from the Board of
Health of the Borough of Chatham.
B. Application for such a license shall be made to the Board of Health, on
forms approved by it, signed and executed by the applicant.
A. A license or permit may be suspended or revoked for any violation by
the holder thereof of any provision of this chapter or of the rules and
regulations promulgated under N.J.A.C. 8:26-1.1 et seq. by the Health
Officer; provided, however, that the holder shall be afforded an
opportunity to appeal the suspension of the license to the Board of
Health and the Health Officer within 48 hours of the effective date of
the suspension.
B. If any such license shall have been revoked, neither the holder thereof
nor any person acting for the holder directly or indirectly shall be
entitled to another license to carry on the same business within the
Borough unless the application for such license be approved by the
Board of Health.
§ 303-2 CHATHAM CODE § 303-7
307:784
TANNING BOOTH ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Massage, bodywork and somatic therapy
establishments — See Ch. 289.
§ 307-1. Title.
This chapter may be cited as the "Tanning Booth Ordinance of the Borough
of Chatham."
§ 307-2. Findings.
Tanning booth establishments have enjoyed a recent, rapid growth in
popularity. The operation of tanning booths involves a serious potential
hazard to the public health, welfare and safety, through the exposure of
persons to concentrations of ultraviolet light in excess of those normally
occurring in the environment. It has been established that acute
overexposure to the ultraviolet light emitted by tanning booth lamps will
cause skin burns and eye damage. It has been established that chronic
exposure to ultraviolet light can result in increased incidences of skin
cancer. Therefore, it is the policy of the Borough of Chatham to protect
the health, welfare and safety of its citizens from the potential hazards
associated with the operation of tanning booth establishments by the
adoption of licensing procedures and standards to govern such facilities.
§ 307-3. Definitions.
Wherever used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
TANNING BOOTH — Any enclosed or semienclosed area or room,
containing one or more ultraviolet lamps, intended for irradiation of any
part of the human body to induce skin tanning.
TANNING BOOTH ESTABLISHMENT — Any commercial enterprise or
facility containing one or more tanning booths, provided that this definition
shall not include any hospital, clinic or other medical facility wherein
ultraviolet radiation is or may be used, under the supervision of a trained
medical staff, for the diagnosis or treatment of disease.
§ 307-4. License required; application.
A. No person shall, at any time within the Borough of Chatham, conduct,
maintain or operate a tanning booth establishment without first having
obtained a license to do so from the Board of Health of the Borough of
Chatham.
§ 303-7 TANNING BOOTH ESTABLISHMENTS § 307-4
307:785
§ 307-5. Conditions and requirements.
No license to conduct, maintain or operate a tanning booth establishment
shall be granted to any person until such person has demonstrated to
the satisfaction of the Board of Health that the following conditions and
requirements have been met:
B. Application for such a license shall be made to the Board of Health, on
forms approved by it, signed and executed by the applicant.
A. Each tanning booth shall have, prominently displayed on its door or
beside its entrance, a sign that states: "DANGER — Ultraviolet
Radiation. Follow instructions. As with natural sunlight, overexposure
can cause injury and sunburn; repeated exposure may cause premature
aging of skin and skin cancer. Exposure of eyes to ultraviolet light
without protective eyewear may cause serious injury to eyes.
Medications or cosmetics applied to the skin may increase
oversensitivity to ultraviolet light, as may a family history of skin
problems or allergy to sunlight. Consult a physician before using this
booth if you are taking any medication or if you believe yourself
sensitive to sunlight."
B. Each tanning booth shall be equipped with handrails, floor markings or
other suitable physical aids to assure that the user maintains the proper
exposure distance from the lamps.
C. Users shall, on each visit, be provided, free of charge, with sanitary
protective eyewear that protects the user's eyes from ultraviolet
radiation but permits sufficient vision to enable the user to maintain
balance, read necessary labels or instructions and effect a quick, safe
exit from the tanning booth.
D. Each timer used to control exposure duration, whether controlled by
the user from within the tanning booth or by the operator of the tanning
booth establishment, shall be accurate to within plus or minus 10% or
any selected timer interval.
E. The ambient air temperature in each tanning booth shall at no time
exceed 100° F. (38º C.).
F. Each tanning booth shall be sufficiently strong and rigid to resist
collapse due to the impact of a falling person. Tanning booth access
doors shall open outwardly, shall be free of locks or latches and shall, in
all other respects, be designed to facilitate safe and rapid entrance to
and exit from the booths. Tanning booth floors shall provide adequate
traction, even when wet, to allow such safe and rapid ingress and
egress.
G. Each tanning booth shall be equipped with heavy wire grids, ultraviolet
transmitting plastics or some similar physical barrier to protect users
from contact with ultraviolet lamps. Such barrier shall be sufficiently
strong and rigid to resist collapse due to the impact of a falling person.
§ 307-4 CHATHAM CODE § 307-5
307:786
§ 307-6. Fees.
Every applicant for whom a license is granted, as required by the provisions
of this chapter, shall pay to the Board of Health an annual license fee for the
same in the amount of $50.
§ 307-7. Contents of license; transferability; display.
§ 307-8. Expiration.
All licenses and permits granted under the provisions hereof shall expire on
December 31 of the year for which the same are granted, unless suspended
or revoked or unless issued for a temporary or shorter specified period.
§ 307-9. Suspensions and revocations.
A license or permit may be suspended or revoked for any violation by the
holder thereof of any provision of this chapter after an opportunity has been
afforded to said holder for a hearing before the Board of Health or the
Health Officer of the Borough of Chatham.
H. In addition to the foregoing, each tanning booth and tanning booth
establishment shall be constructed, operated and maintained in
compliance with the Chapter 165, Land Development Regulations, the
Building Code, electrical standards and every other ordinance of the
Borough of Chatham.
I. Each tanning booth establishment shall obtain and maintain on file with
the Board of Health of the Borough of Chatham a certification from a
dermatologist approved by the Board of Health stating that the
methods for exposure determination, both as to duration and distance,
utilized by the tanning booth establishment are safe and that such
methods comply with current medical standards.
J. Each tanning booth establishment and the equipment used therein shall
comply with the regulations promulgated by the United States Food and
Drug Administration and published in Volume 21 of the Code of Federal
Regulations at 1002.61(a)(4) and 1040.20.
A. Each license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall bear the
actual date of issue thereof, the legal name of the person, firm,
corporation or other organization, society or group to whom issued and
the location of the premises or other place of operation for which the
license is requested.
B. No license shall be transferable.
C. Each tanning booth establishment shall display its license in a
conspicuous place on the licensed premises.
§ 307-5 TANNING BOOTH ESTABLISHMENTS § 307-10
307:787
§ 307-10. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of a provision of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 274, § 274-14.
Part IV: Shade Tree Commission Legislation
Chapter 313
GENERAL PROVISIONS, SHADE TREE COMMISSION
§ 307-10 CHATHAM CODE § 307-10
313:788
ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code by Shade Tree Commission
[Adopted 6-21-2005 by Ord. No. STC 05-01]
§ 313-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the Shade Tree Commission ordinances of the
Borough of Chatham of a general and permanent nature adopted by the
Shade Tree Commission of the Borough of Chatham, as revised, codified and
consolidated into chapters and sections by General Code Publishers Corp.,
and consisting of Chapters 313 through 314, are hereby approved, adopted,
ordained and enacted as Part IV of the "Code of the Borough of Chatham,"
hereinafter known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 313-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede the 1975 Code and all general
and permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code,
except such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 313-3. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 313-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Borough Clerk and/or Shade Tree Commission and shall remain there for
use and examination by the public until final action is taken on this
ordinance; and, if this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be
certified to by the Shade Tree Commission of the Borough of Chatham, as
provided by law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of
the Borough Clerk and/or the Shade Tree Commission, to be made available
to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while said Code is
in effect.
§ 313-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to Part IV of the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the
Shade Tree Commission to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to
be incorporated into Part IV of such Code so that reference to the "Code
of the Borough of Chatham" shall be understood and intended to include
such additions and amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or
supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed
and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said
Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 313-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS, SHADE TREE § 313-6
313:789
§ 313-6. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Borough of Chatham or the Shade Tree Commission,
pursuant to law, shall cause this Adopting Ordinance to be published, in
the manner required, in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough.
Sufficient copies of the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk
or the Shade Tree Commission for inspection by the public at all times
during regular office hours. The enactment and publication of this Adopting
Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of the Code for inspection
by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal
publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 313-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk or the Shade Tree Commission or someone
authorized and directed either to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the
book containing the Code required to be filed in his or her office for the
use of the public. All changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted
subsequent to the effective date of this codification which shall be adopted
specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included
therein by reference until such changes or new ordinances are printed as
supplements to said Code book, at which time such supplements shall be
inserted therein.
§ 313-8. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of a fee
to be set by the governing body. The Clerk may also arrange for procedures
for the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 313-9. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Borough of
Chatham to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine as provided in Chapter
1, § 1-14 of the Code of the Borough of Chatham.
§ 313-10. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of Part IV of the Code and every part of each section is an
independent section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or
a part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall
not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections
or parts thereof.
§ 313-6 CHATHAM CODE § 313-11
313:790
§ 313-11. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 313-12. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance which
are inconsistent with the any provision in the Code are hereby repealed to
the extent of such inconsistency as of the effective date of this Adopting
Ordinance.
§ 313-13. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 314-12 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 3-28-1966.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
the Borough's indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
§ 313-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS, SHADE TREE § 313-13
313:791
§ 313-14. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges or the approval
of the municipal budget.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
L. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for Shade Tree Commission employees.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the Shade Tree Commission that all
such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so
changed had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the changes, amendments or revisions as set forth below, to
become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance. (Chapter
and section number references are to the ordinances as they have been
renumbered and appear in the Code.)107
107. Editor's Note: This reference is to Ch. 314, Trees, which was amended in its entirety by
adoption of this Ord. No. STC 05-01.
§ 313-13 CHATHAM CODE § 313-14
313:792
Chapter 314
TREES
§ 314-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH TREE — A tree located on land owned by the Borough, the
Board of Education, or other municipal or governmental body, or which is
located within a street, highway, or parkway or which is located in the rightof-
way of any street, highway or parkway.
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (HEREINAFTER REFERRED TO AS DBH)
— The measurement of the diameter of a tree at 4.5 feet from the ground
on the downhill side of such tree. If a tree splits into multiple trunks below
4.5 feet from the ground on the downhill side of such tree, then the trunk is
measured at its most narrow point below the split.
PERSON — Every person, firm, association, partnership and corporation.
PLANT CONSTRUCTION — As applied to public utility companies, includes
poles, wires, cables, subsurface conduits, pipes, manholes and appurtenant
facilities of such companies installed in a street.
PUBLIC UTILITY COMPANY — A public utility as defined in N.J.S.A. 48:2-13.
SHADE TREE COMMISSION — The Shade Tree Commission of the Borough
of Chatham.
STREET — Any public street designated by the governing body to be within
the jurisdiction of the Shade Tree Commission.
TREE — Any living woody perennial plant having a DBH of at least six
inches.
§ 314-2. Required permits for nonutility operations.
No person shall do any of the following acts to any tree on a street without
the prior permit of the Shade Tree Commission:
A. Cut, prune, climb with spikes, break, damage, remove or kill.
B. Cut, disturb or interfere in any way with any root.
C. Spray with any chemical.
D. Fasten any rope, wire, sign or other device. Nothing herein shall
prevent any governmental agency from affixing in a manner approved
by the Shade Tree Commission a public notice upon a tree in connection
with administering governmental affairs.
E. Remove or damage any guard or device placed to protect any tree or
shrub.
§ 313-14 TREES § 314-2
314:793
§ 314-3. Required permits for utility operations; exceptions.
§ 314-4. Utilities and transmission lines among trees.
§ 314-5. Damage by animals.
No person shall hitch or fasten an animal to any tree or shrub upon a street,
highway, public place or park, or to any guard or support provided for the
same, or shall permit any animal to bite or otherwise injure any such tree
or shrub.
F. Conduct razing, removal or renovation of any structure if deemed by
the Commission to be damaging to neighboring street trees.
G. Place or distribute chemicals, including but not limited to salt,
deleterious to tree health.
H. Maintain a stationary fire or device which vaporizes noxious fumes
deleterious to tree health.
I. Remove soil either for trenching or otherwise.
J. Construct new sidewalks and/or driveways with any material
whatsoever within five feet of a tree.
K. Plant a tree or shrub.
A. The Shade Tree Commission may grant to public utility companies a
blanket permit for tree pruning for line clearance and for the
installation and the maintenance of subsurface and aboveground plant
construction if there is interference with or endangerment to street
trees.
B. Public utility companies may, during periods of emergency, without
specific prior permit, install temporary attachments to trees and make
emergency subsurface repairs.
C. Each public utility company shall exercise reasonable diligence in the
maintenance of its plant construction so as to avoid damage to trees
under the jurisdiction of the Chatham Shade Tree Commission.
A. Every person or entity having control over any wire for the transmission
of any services along a street or highway shall at all times guard all
trees through which such wires pass against any injury from the wires
carried by them. The device or means used shall in every case be
subject to approval by the Shade Tree Commission.
B. Any utility company, cable television or any service provider utilizing
such lines or its agents may, with the prior written permission from the
Shade Tree Commission, prune and remove trees for line clearance of
utility wires.
§ 314-2 CHATHAM CODE § 314-6
314:794
§ 314-6. Damage from chemicals.
No person shall permit any brine, gas or injurious chemical to come in
contact with the stem or roots of any tree or shrub upon a street, highway,
public place or park.
§ 314-7. Clearance of branches.
Every person having control over any tree or shrub located on or near any
street or highway shall maintain such tree or shrub so that any branches
extending over the paved portion of the street or highway shall have a
minimum clearance of 15 feet.
§ 314-8. Costs of work assessed as lien; exception.
§ 314-9. Notice required for planting or removal of trees.
In every case where the property of an abutting owner will be chargeable
with the cost of the planting of any shade tree or trees, the Commission
shall give notice of the meeting at which it is proposed to consider said
planting by publishing the notice at least once, not less than 20 days before
the meeting, in a newspaper circulating in the municipality, or by personal
service of a copy of the notice upon the abutting owner at least 10 days
before the meeting. The notice shall specify the street, streets or portions
thereof on which such planting is proposed and require all persons who
may object thereto to present their objections in writing at the office of
the Commission at or before the meeting. Before the final action shall be
taken, all objections so filed shall be considered. The Commission shall give
reasonable notice of its intention to remove or cause the removal of a tree
or part of a tree dangerous to public safety, unless public safety requires
immediate removal, in which case no notice shall be necessary.
A. Except as hereinafter provided, the initial cost of all trees planted by
the Commission, the cost of planting the same, the cost of the posts and
boxes or guards used for the protection thereof and the cost of the
removal of any tree or part thereof dangerous to public safety shall, if
the Commission shall so determine, in accordance with uniform rules
and regulations promulgated for this purpose, be a charge upon the
real estate in front of which such tree or trees shall be planted or
removed as an improvement thereof. Such cost, if it is so determined
that it is to be paid by the owner, shall be certified by it to the Collector
of Taxes of the municipality, shall thereupon become and be a lien upon
said real estate, shall be included in the next tax bill rendered to the
owners or owner thereof and be collected in the same manner as other
taxes against that property.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a planting to replace a
tree or trees theretofore planted by the Commission nor a planting in
connection with Arbor Day exercises or other educational
demonstration.
§ 314-6 TREES § 314-10
314:795
§ 314-10. Protection of Borough trees.
§ 314-11. Interference with Shade Tree Commission.
No person shall prevent, delay or interfere with any lawful work undertaken
by the Shade Tree Commission or its authorized agent.
§ 314-12. Issuance of permits.
Requests for permits required by the provisions of this chapter for the
performance of work should be directed to the Shade Tree Commission,
Borough of Chatham, Morris County, New Jersey.
§ 314-13. Enforcement officer.
The Construction Official of the Borough of Chatham is hereby designated
as the enforcement officer for the purpose of enforcement of the provisions
of this chapter. All members of the Borough of Chatham Police Department
are hereby designated as assistant enforcement officers for the purpose of
the enforcement of this chapter.
§ 314-14. Violations and penalties.
A. No person shall: (1) operate, place or maintain within the dripline of
any Borough tree any machinery, equipment, heavy object, stone, rocks,
cement, earth, soil, or other substance which may harmfully affect such
tree by unduly compressing the earth or otherwise impeding or
preventing the access of water or air to the roots of such tree; or (2)
excavate around or remove earth or soil from, or cause any water to
flow upon, the roots of any tree, except that if provisions of this section
create any undue hardship in the appropriate use and enjoyment of
property, the Borough Enforcement Officer may waive such provisions
in whole or in part, but only to the extent absolutely necessary to
alleviate such undue hardship. Both the request for a waiver of the
provisions of this section and the findings and determination of the
Enforcement Officer which either denies or grants the waiver must be
set forth in writing.
B. No material, machinery or temporary soil deposits shall be placed
within six feet of any existing tree trunk, and a protective barrier
around each Borough tree in the proximity of the construction shall be
established to prevent damage to such tree during construction.
A. Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of these
regulations shall, upon conviction by a Judge officiating within the
Borough of Chatham, County of Morris, be fined, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:64-12, a sum not exceeding $1,500 for each offense. Each day any
violation of this chapter shall continue shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 314-10 CHATHAM CODE § 314-14
314:796
Appendix
Chapter A320
INCORPORATION OF BOROUGH
Chapter A321
MADISON-CHATHAM JOINT MEETING
B. Notwithstanding, the court may reduce the fines in the event the
violator shall agree as follows:
(1) To abate the violation by replanting at his sole expense the tree or
trees damaged or destroyed as shall be determined by the
Construction Official as provided below.
(2) To reimburse the Borough for all reasonable charges of the
enforcing authority, Construction Official and Borough Attorney.
C. In exercising the authority established hereby, the Construction Official
shall:
(1) Require, for each tree damaged or destroyed, that the violator shall
plant a tree or trees as specified by the Construction Official of no
less than four inches in diameter measured one foot above the
planting level. The number of replacement trees shall equal the
diameter of the damaged or destroyed tree measured three feet
above the ground, one replacement tree for each two inches of
diameter of damaged or destroyed tree, unless otherwise approved
by the Borough Administrator. If there is a multiple-stem tree then
each trunk's diameter shall be measured and added together to
determine the total diameter of the damaged or destroyed tree.
(2) Direct that replacement trees be planted near the location of
damaged or destroyed trees and otherwise throughout the
Borough, subject to the approval of the Shade Tree Commission.
(3) Require that the violator provide a guaranty with surety of the
survival and normal healthy development of replacement trees as
determined by the Construction Official for a period of three years
in an amount equal to 120% of the cost of replacement trees, the
guaranty and surety being acceptable to the Borough Attorney and
approved by the Shade Tree Commission.
§ 314-14 INCORPORATION OF BOROUGH § 314-14
A320:797

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ A321-1. Name.
This meeting, composed of the members of the governing bodies of the
municipalities of Madison and Chatham, located in the County of Morris,
in the State of New Jersey, shall be known as the "Madison-Chatham Joint
Meeting."
§ A321-2. Purpose.
The purpose of the Joint Meeting shall be to provide, maintain and operate
a sewerage system and disposal plant for the municipalities of Madison and
Chatham.
§ A321-3. Location of office.
The Joint Meeting's principal office shall be at the Administration Building
located at the Disposal Plant, North Passaic Avenue, Chatham, New Jersey.
§ A321-1 INCORPORATION OF BOROUGH § A321-3
A320:799

ARTICLE II
Meetings
§ A321-4. Meetings. [Added 10-24-2016 by Ord. No. 16-14108]
The Joint Meeting shall hold meetings in accordance with the Open Public
Meetings Act, P.L. 1975, Chapter 231 (N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.), and any
amendments thereto, and as authorized in the Joint Meeting bylaws.
§ A321-5. Standing Committees. [Added 10-24-2016 by Ord. No.
16-14]
The Joint Meeting may establish such Standing Committees as necessary to
provide for the effective and efficient governance of the Joint Meeting, and
to make recommendations to, and act on behalf of, the Joint Meeting to the
extent set forth in the Joint Meeting bylaws.
§ A321-6. Special Committees. [Added 10-24-2016 by Ord. No.
16-14]
The Joint Meeting Chair may appoint such other Special Committees at any
time as necessary to provide for the effective and efficient governance of
the Joint Meeting, and to make recommendations to, and act on behalf of,
the Joint Meeting to the extent set forth in the Joint Meeting bylaws.
§ A321-7. Bylaws. [Added 10-24-2016 by Ord. No. 16-14]
The Joint Meeting may adopt, and from time to time amend, bylaws and
other rules of operation.
108. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former §§ A321-4 through A321-31.
§ A321-4 INCORPORATION OF BOROUGH § A321-7
A320:801
Chapter A322
JOINT SEWER SYSTEM CONTRACT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 217. Madison-Chatham Joint Meeting — See Ch.
A321.
§ A322-1. Authorization and execution of contract. [Amended
9-12-1988 by Ord. No. 19-88]
The Borough of Chatham shall enter into a contract with the Borough of
Madison providing for additions to and modifications of the jointly owned
sewage treatment and disposal plant to be undertaken jointly with the
Borough of Madison, and the Mayor and Clerk of the Borough of Chatham
are hereby authorized and directed to execute a contract in substantially
the following form jointly with the proper officers of the Borough of Madison
and to deliver the same for and on behalf of the Borough of Chatham.
JOINT CONTRACT BETWEEN THE BOROUGH OF MADISON AND THE
BOROUGH OF CHATHAM, NEW JERSEY, PROVIDING FOR ADDITIONS
AND MODIFICATIONS TO THE EXISTING SEWAGE TREATMENT AND
DISPOSAL PLANT, AND FURTHER PROVIDING FOR THE MAINTENANCE
AND OPERATION OF THE EXISTING AND PROPOSED SEWAGE
TREATMENT AND DISPOSAL PLANT.
Contract made this 12th day of September 1988, between the Borough
of Madison, in the County of Morris, and the Borough of Chatham, in
the County of Morris, both of said Boroughs being municipal corporations
organized and existing under the laws of the State of New Jersey.
§ A321-7 CHATHAM CODE § A322-1
A322:802
RECITALS
Said Boroughs of Madison and Chatham (hereinafter referred to as
"municipalities") have heretofore by contract dated August 29, 1910,
provided for the joint construction, maintenance and operation of a trunk
sewer and sewage disposal plant pursuant to an act of the Legislature
of the State of New Jersey, entitled "An Act to authorize any two or
more municipalities in this State to jointly provide, maintain and operate
trunk or outlet sewers and sewage disposal plant or plants or a system of
sewerage and to otherwise act jointly concerning the collection, removal or
disposal of sewage and make contracts in relation thereto," approved April
8, 1910. By further contracts between said municipalities made January 2,
1929, July 10, 1950, and November 7, 1968, the parties hereto agreed to
construct, operate and maintain a sewage disposal plant of the activated
sludge type. In accordance with the provisions of said contracts, the parties
hereto have constructed a joint trunk sewer and sewage disposal plant and
have operated and maintained said sewer and plant in Joint Meeting to the
date of this contract.
Pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 63 of Title 40 of the Revised Statutes
of the State of New Jersey, particularly Article 2 thereof, and any other
laws applicable thereto, the parties desire to provide for the continued
maintenance and operation of the existing joint trunk sewer and sewage
treatment and disposal plant in Joint Meeting as authorized by the
aforementioned contracts, and, in order to provide for the better operation
of the system of sewers maintained singly and jointly by the parties hereto,
said parties further desire to provide for the construction of certain
additions to and modifications of the existing sewage treatment and
disposal plant jointly owned by them and located in the Borough of
Chatham, to the end that the system of sewers owned singly and jointly by
the parties hereto may provide necessary and adequate sewage facilities
for the use of and by the inhabitants of said municipalities.
The Borough Councils of said municipalities (being the governing bodies
or boards, authorized by law to have charge of sewer systems established
or to be established in such municipalities) have united and jointly caused
surveys, maps, plan, reports, specifications and estimates (hereinafter
called "plans") to be made by Elson T. Killam Associates, Inc., d/b/a Killam
Associates, for the additions to and modifications of the sewage treatment
and disposal plant. Said plans have been submitted to, considered and
approved by resolutions adopted by the governing bodies of said
municipalities and have been ordered filed, a certified copy of such
approving resolution of each municipality having been served upon the
Clerk of the other municipality. Each municipality has, by ordinance duly
passed and adopted and published as required by law, authorized the
making and entering into, by and on behalf of each municipality of this Joint
Contract.
§ A322-1 JOINT SEWER SYSTEM CONTRACT § A322-1
A322:803
CONTRACT
NOW, THEREFORE, THIS CONTRACT WITNESSETH:
That in consideration of the premises and the mutual covenants and
agreements herein contained, the parties hereto mutually covenant and
agree to and with each other as follows:
ARTICLE I
"Joint Meeting" — When used in this contract, shall mean the meeting
or assembly of the governing bodies of the municipalities parties to this
contract, being the governing bodies or boards having authority to enter
into contracts for the joint construction and operation of trunk sewers,
sewerage systems or disposal plants in such municipalities, as heretofore
organized pursuant to agreement between the municipalities dated August
29, 1910, supplemented by agreements dated January 2, 1929, July 10,
1950, and November 7, 1968, and herein contained.
"Existing Trunk Sewer" — When used in this contract, shall mean the
trunk sewer heretofore in existence and jointly constructed pursuant to
agreements between the municipalities parties hereto, dated August 29,
1910, and July 10, 1950.
"Sewage Treatment and Disposal Plant" — When used in this contract,
shall mean the sewage treatment and disposal plant located in the Borough
of Chatham at the Passaic River easterly of Passaic Avenue and jointly
constructed and operated pursuant to agreements heretofore entered into
between the municipalities dated August 29, 1910, January 2, 1929, July
10, 1950, and November 7, 1968.
"Debt Service Cost" — When used in this contract, shall mean the total
principal amount of all bonds and bond anticipation notes maturing and
payable by a municipality in any particular year, plus the total amount
of interest due and payable by a municipality in that year, whether with
reference to bonds and bond anticipation notes maturing in that year or in
subsequent years, and issued by a municipality for the purpose of financing
improvements authorized by this contract.
"Total Cost" — When used in this contract, shall include all costs of
construction and engineering; incidental, legal and advertising expenses;
costs of acquisition of land, rights in land, easements or rights-of-way; and
any and all other expenses which may be applicable to the enlargement of
the sewage treatment and disposal plant.
"Connection" — When used in this contract, shall mean a connection to a
sewer, and (a) to be counted as one connection per family unit in the case
of single- and multiple-dwelling buildings; and (b) an average daily flow
of 265 gallons or fraction thereof of water metered or measured to the
premises in the case of any building or portion thereof used for industrial,
commercial, educational or other than dwelling purposes. Said average
daily flow shall be computed for an annual period.
§ A322-1 CHATHAM CODE § A322-1
A322:804
ARTICLE II
Section 1. The Joint Meeting of the Borough of Madison and the Borough
of Chatham, being the meeting or assembly of the governing bodies of
said municipalities, organized pursuant to agreement between the
municipalities dated August 29, 1910, shall continue in existence without
reorganization, and said Boroughs of Madison and Chatham hereby agree
to continue the Joint Meeting of said municipalities for the purpose of the
continued maintenance and operation of the existing trunk sewer line and
the existing sewage treatment and disposal plant heretofore constructed,
maintained and operated in Joint Meeting pursuant to contracts between
said municipalities dated August 29, 1910, January 2, 1929, July 10, 1950,
and November 7, 1968. Said municipalities do further agree to jointly
construct, maintain and operate additions to and modifications of the
existing sewage treatment and disposal plant, as are more fully described
in Schedule A hereto attached and made a part of this contract.
Section 2. The construction of the additions to and modifications of the
sewage treatment and disposal plant shall be in accordance with the
plans and specifications heretofore prepared therefor by Elson T. Killam
Associates, Inc., d/b/a Killam Associates, entitled "Molitor Water Pollution
Control Facility Additions and Modifications," and approved by the
governing bodies of said municipalities, as the same may be altered from
time to time during the course of construction and so approved by
resolution of the governing bodies of said municipalities and by the State
Department of Health of the State of New Jersey. Such construction shall
begin as soon as may be practicable.
Section 3. The existing trunk sewer, the existing sewage treatment and
disposal plant and the same when so enlarged and modified pursuant to
this contract shall be owned by the Boroughs of Madison and Chatham, and
said Boroughs shall have an equal and undivided interest therein.
ARTICLE III
Section 1. Each of the parties hereto hereby concurs in and consents
to any and all action had or taken by the other party for all necessary
construction, and all such other work necessary and incidental to be done
within the territorial limits of the municipality so consenting for the proper
construction of the additions and modifications of said plant pursuant to
this contract; and all such work to be done in conformity with ordinances
and regulations of the municipality in which such work is to be done.
Section 2. The Joint Meeting of said municipalities, in addition to all powers
given by this contract, shall have all such powers and authorities as are set
forth in Article 2 of the Chapter 63 of Title 40 of the Revised Statutes of the
State of New Jersey, as the same shall be amended or supplemented, and
shall be governed thereby.
§ A322-1 JOINT SEWER SYSTEM CONTRACT § A322-1
A322:805
ARTICLE IV
Section 1. Except as provided in Section 4 of this Article IV, the total cost
of the additions to and modifications of the sewage treatment and disposal
plant as proposed by this contract, including all engineering and architect's
costs, legal and financing costs and all other expenses directly related
to such plant expansion, shall be allocated between the participating
municipalities as follows:
Borough of Madison
Borough of Chatham
63%
37%
Section 2. Upon execution of this contract, both municipalities agree that
contracts for the construction of the proposed additions and modifications
to the plant should be let as expeditiously as possible to the end that
the contemplated improvement can be completed as soon as reasonably
possible.
Section 3. To finance their respective portions of the total cost, each
municipality plans to issue bonds, and each municipality agrees to
forthwith proceed with such ordinances as may be required to provide its
proper share of the total cost of the expansion.
Section 4. It is the object of this contract that both the annual operating
costs of the sewage treatment and disposal plant and the total annual debt
service of each municipality relating to the financing of the plant expansion
as proposed in this contract be shared by both municipalities according to
the formula set forth in Article V, Section 1, hereof.
Section 5. To implement the foregoing objective as it relates to the annual
debt service, the Clerk of each municipality, not later than December 1 in
the year in which its bond or bond anticipation notes shall have been issued
to finance the plant expansion proposed by this contract and not later than
December 1 of each subsequent year until the entire principal amount of
and interest on any and all bonds issued by both municipalities for such
purpose shall have been paid, shall prepare a statement of the interest on
and principal amount of such bond and bond anticipation notes to be paid
by such municipality in the calendar year next beginning and forward the
same to the Clerk of the other municipality and to the Secretary of the Joint
Meeting.
Section 6. The obligation of each municipality with respect to the combined
annual debt service of both municipalities as so reported, according to the
provisions of Section 5 above, shall be equal to that percentage which the
number of all connections to the sewerage system within such municipality
bears to the combined total number of connections to the sewerage system
within both municipalities on December 31 of the preceding year.
§ A322-1 CHATHAM CODE § A322-1
A322:806
Section 7. If, after applying the foregoing formula, it develops that the
actual annual debt service charges of the contracting municipalities are in
excess of or less than the proper annual debt service charge as determined
by the application of the formula set forth in Section 6 above, then the
appropriate adjustment shall be included in the next resolution adopted by
the Joint Meeting pursuant to Section 3 of Article V hereof.
ARTICLE V
Section 1. The cost of maintaining and operating the sewage treatment and
disposal plant shall be developed each year by budget procedures jointly
acceptable to both municipalities. The obligation of each municipality with
respect to such annual operating budget shall be equal to that percentage
which the number of all connections to the sewerage system within such
municipality bears to the combined total number of connections to the
sewerage system within both municipalities on December 31 of the
preceding year.
Section 2. Not later than January 5 in each year, beginning in the year
1988, it shall be the duty of the Secretary of the Joint Meeting to make a
report showing the total number of all house connections to the sewerage
system in each municipality on the preceding December 31. Such report
shall be filed by the Secretary of the Joint Meeting with the Clerk of each
municipality within five days after its adoption by the Joint Meeting. To aid
in the preparation of such report, the Joint Meeting shall have power to
engage such experts and persons as it shall deem fit.
Section 3. As soon as may be practicable after January 1, 1988, and January
1 in each year thereafter, the total estimated cost of maintenance and
operation of the joint sewerage system for such year and the percentages
of the cost of maintenance and operation of the joint sewerage system
for which each municipality shall be charged for such year shall be
reapportioned as in this Article provided and, if required, adjusted as well
for debt service charges as provided in Section 7 of Article IV hereof,
and all of the same shall be set forth in a resolution adopted by the Joint
Meeting, certified copies of which shall be filed by the Secretary of the
Joint Meeting with the Clerks of each municipality within five days after
the adoption thereof. Such reapportionment shall be retroactive and shall
be effective as of January 1 of that particular year.
Section 4. Annual operating and maintenance costs shall be paid in
monthly installments to be due and payable on the 15th day of each month.
Section 5. All money so required to be paid by the municipalities under this
contract shall be paid to the Treasurer of the Joint Meeting.
§ A322-1 JOINT SEWER SYSTEM CONTRACT § A322-1
A322:807
Section 6. The obligations and percentage of any and all costs to be borne
in each year by a municipality pursuant to this contract shall be construed
and held to be a financial arrangement between the municipalities for their
mutual convenience and shall not be held in any way to affect or be deemed
or construed to so affect or lessen the liability of either municipality with
respect to, or impair the validity of, any bonds or other obligations issued
or to be issued by such municipality, as provided in this contract.
ARTICLE VI
Section 1. Sewer discharge permits. No waste, other than normal domestic
sewerage from toilets, baths, showers, wash-bowls, washing machines and
sinks, shall be discharged into the sewers or laterals connected in any
way with the joint sewerage system except pursuant to an appropriate
commercial or industrial sewer discharge permit issued by the Madison-
Chatham Joint Meeting.
Section 2. New commercial or industrial users. New commercial or
industrial users which desire to commence operations at a new facility
shall apply for and receive an appropriate commercial or industrial
discharge permit prior to commencement of operations at the new facility.
Section 3. Existing commercial and industrial users. All nondomestic users
discharging waste directly or indirectly into the joint sewerage system
prior to the effective date hereof, pursuant to and within the terms of
an application filed with and approved by the Madison-Chatham Joint
Meeting which contains no expiration date, are hereby granted authority
to continue to discharge those wastes until notified to the contrary by the
Madison-Chatham Joint Meeting, pursuant to Section 4 of this Article. All
such permittees, however, as well as all other nondomestic users, shall be
subject to all the provisions of this Article.
Section 4. Renewal of permits. If a permittee wishes to continue
discharging into the joint sewerage system, he shall request a renewal
of his sewerage discharge permit no later than six months prior to the
expiration date of the permit then in force. If a permittee holds a permit
which contains no expiration date, he shall request a renewal of his
sewerage discharge permit no later than 90 days following notification by
the Madison-Chatham Joint Meeting, as provided in the preceding Section
3 of this Article, unless a greater period is specified in such notice. Failure
to make a timely application may result in the suspension or revocation
of the permit. The request shall be contained in a form prepared by the
Madison-Chatham Joint Meeting. Renewal of the permit shall be contingent
upon the permittee having complied with the terms and conditions of the
expired permit.
Section 5. Duration of permits. Permits will expire as indicated in the
permit, except that users shall be allowed to continue to discharge into
the joint sewerage system until action is taken on renewal or denial by the
Madison-Chatham Joint Meeting.
§ A322-1 CHATHAM CODE § A322-1
A322:808
Section 6. Changes to permits. Any nondomestic user which proposes to
make any changes in its facility or processing that affects either the quality
or quantity of its discharge to the joint sewer system shall apply for an
amended permit, which must be approved prior to putting any changes into
operation.
Section 7. Transfer of permits. Sewer discharge permits shall be issued
to a specific nondomestic user for a specific operation. A permit shall not
be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner unless the permit so
provides. No permit shall be reassigned or transferred or sold for a new
or changed operation. Every permittee shall notify the Madison-Chatham
Joint Meeting within 14 days prior to any change in ownership or corporate
structure.
Section 8. Procedure for obtaining a sewer discharge permit.
(1) Persons requiring a permit to discharge shall complete an application
form prepared by the Madison-Chatham Joint Meeting and forward it
to the Madison-Chatham Joint Meeting. Upon receipt of all required
information, the application shall be processed, and, upon approval, a
permit shall be issued.
(2) An application shall be approved if the applicant has complied with all
applicable requirements of this Article, is not known to be in violation
of any other related law or regulation and has furnished to the
Madison-Chatham Joint Meeting all requested information and if the
Madison-Chatham Joint Meeting determines that there is adequate
capacity in the treatment plant to convey, treat and dispose of the
waste.
(3) An application submitted by a corporation shall be signed by a
corporate officer or other executive officer so designated. An
application submitted by a nondomestic user other than a corporation
shall be signed by the proprietor or general partner.
Section 9. Sewerage discharge permit conditions.
(1) Sewerage discharge permits issued may set forth any of the following
minimum conditions:
(a) Monitoring requirements, including installation of a flow or control
meter chamber.
(b) Prohibitions and limitations on industrial wastes discharged to the
sanitary sewer, including requirements for pretreatment and/or
flow equalization facilities.
(c) Compliance schedules.
(d) Reporting requirements.
(e) Management requirements and responsibilities.
(f) Compliance with United States Environmental Protection Agency
general pretreatment requirements and any applicable categorical
pretreatment requirements.
§ A322-1 JOINT SEWER SYSTEM CONTRACT § A322-1
A322:809
(g) Special conditions applicable to nondomestic users on a case-bycase
basis.
(2) The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification
and change by the Madison-Chatham Joint Meeting during the life of
the permit, as limitations or requirements as identified in Section 12 of
this Article are modified and changed. The nondomestic user shall be
informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least 30 days prior
to the effective date of the change. Any changes or new conditions in
the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance.
Section 10. Suspension of sewerage discharge permit.
(1) The Superintendent of the Madison-Chatham Joint Meeting may,
without formal notice, suspend a sewerage discharge permit for a
period not to exceed 45 days when such suspension is necessary in
order to stop a discharge which reasonably appears to present an
imminent or substantial hazard to public health, safety or welfare of
persons.
(2) The Superintendent of the Madison-Chatham Joint Meeting may, after
serving notice on the permittee and allowing the permittee 72 hours
to respond, suspend a sewerage discharge permit for a period not to
exceed 45 days when such suspension is necessary in order to stop
a discharge which presents or may present an endangerment to the
environment or which threatens to interfere with the operation of the
treatment plant.
(3) Any nondomestic user notified of a suspension of his sewer discharge
permit shall immediately cease and desist the discharge of all waste
regulated by the permit. In the event of the failure of the nondomestic
user to comply with the suspension order, the municipality in which
such discharge is taking place shall, after such determination by the
Superintendent of the Madison-Chatham Joint Meeting, prohibit and
prevent such discharge.
(4) Any suspended nondomestic user may file with the Madison-Chatham
Joint Meeting a request for a hearing. Such a request shall not stay
the suspension. In the event of such request, the Operating Committee
of the Madison-Chatham Joint Meeting shall, within 30 days of the
receipt of such request, hold a hearing on the suspension and shall
either confirm or revoke the action. Reasonable notice of the hearing
shall be given to the suspended user as provided in Section 11 of this
Article. At this hearing, the suspended user may appear personally or
through counsel, cross-examine witnesses and present evidence on his
own behalf.
(5) In the event the Operating Committee of the Madison-Chatham Joint
Meeting fails to conduct a hearing within the time set forth above or
fails to make a determination within five days after the close of the
hearing, the order of suspension shall be stayed until the determination
is made either confirming or revoking the action of the Superintendent
of the Madison-Chatham Joint Meeting.
§ A322-1 CHATHAM CODE § A322-1
A322:810
(6) The Superintendent of the Madison-Chatham Joint Meeting shall
reinstate the sewerage discharge permit upon proof of satisfactory
compliance with all discharge requirements.
Section 11. Revocation of a sewerage discharge permit.
(1) The Operating Committee of the Madison-Chatham Joint Meeting may
revoke a sewerage discharge permit if they find that the user has
demonstrated a refusal, inability or failure to take reasonable steps to
comply with any of the provisions of this Article. No revocation shall be
ordered until a hearing has been held by the Operating Committee of
the Madison-Chatham Joint Meeting where the user shall have the right
to be represented by counsel, cross-examine witnesses and present
evidence in his behalf. Notice of the hearing shall be given to the
user at least 15 days prior to the date of the hearing, except that a
hearing may be held on shorter notice if agreed upon by the Operating
Committee of the Madison-Chatham Joint Meeting and the user.
(2) Any nondomestic user whose sewer discharge permit has been revoked
shall immediately cease and desist all discharge of waste regulated
by the permit. The municipality in which such discharge is taking
place will disconnect or permanently block from the public sewer the
connection of any nondomestic user whose permit has been revoked
if such action is necessary to ensure compliance with the order of
revocation.
Section 12. Prohibited wastes.
(1) The sewage treatment and disposal plant is designed for treatment and
disposal of domestic sewage and is dependent largely upon biological
action for disposal of sewage and accordingly may be adversely
affected or rendered inoperative by industrial wastes or other
substances not present in normal domestic sewage.
(2) The right to discharge such industrial wastes will accordingly be
granted by the Madison-Chatham Joint Meeting only under the
following conditions:
(a) If, in the opinion of the Madison-Chatham Joint Meeting, the data
in the application indicates that the wastes can be handled without
difficulty by the sewage treatment works and are not prohibited or
restricted by this or any other applicable law or regulation.
(b) If the wastes, as discharged, continue to conform to the quantity
and quality set forth in the application.
(c) If the wastes as discharged are found in continued operation to
have no adverse effect upon plant operation and are not and do not
become prohibited or restricted by this or any other applicable law
or regulation.
(3) Under no circumstances shall substances within the following
classifications be discharged into any sewer or lateral of any user:
§ A322-1 JOINT SEWER SYSTEM CONTRACT § A322-1
A322:811
(a) Gasoline, naphtha, petroleum products or any substance which
may create an explosion hazard in the system.
(b) Oils, fats or grease (except as may result from household, hotel
or restaurant operation) or any substance which may solidify or
become viscous between 32º F. and 150º F.
(c) Surface or rain water from yards, areas, courts, cellar drains or
roofs.
(d) Rubbish, ashes, cinders or garbage, except such kitchen wastes as
have been properly ground by devices approved by the Madison-
Chatham Joint Meeting.
(e) Milk, brewery or distillery wastes in any form.
(f) Any pollutant of such volume or strength which may cause
interference with the sewerage treatment facility.
(g) Heat in any amount which may raise the influent temperature
above 40º C. or any liquid or vapor which has a temperature
greater than 65º C. at the point of discharge.
(h) Any pollutant which has a pH greater than 9.0 or less than 5.0.
(i) Any pollutant in amounts exceeding standards promulgated by
the United States Environmental Protection Agency or New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection.
(j) Any substance, in quality or quantity, hereafter prohibited or
restricted by this or any other applicable law or regulation.
Section 13. Adoption of rules and regulations. The Madison-Chatham Joint
Meeting is hereby authorized to adopt such reasonable rules and
regulations not inconsistent with this Article as it deems to be necessary
and proper to implement and enforce the provisions hereof and of any law,
rule, regulation or order imposed upon or affecting the operation of the
Madison-Chatham Meeting, its sewer works, licenses or permits and to
promote the public health, safety and welfare.
Section 14. Fees. The Madison-Chatham Joint Meeting is hereby authorized
to fix and collect fees from applicants and permittees to cover its
administrative, inspection and monitoring costs in carrying out the intent
and purpose of this Article.
Section 15. Inspections.
(1) Employees of the Madison-Chatham Joint Meeting or their designated
representative bearing proper credentials may enter upon the property
or premises occupied by any user for the purpose of:
(a) Copying any records required to be kept pursuant to the
regulations or any sewer discharge permit.
(b) Inspecting any user's plant facilities or monitoring equipment.
(c) Sampling any discharge of wastewater into the treatment system.
§ A322-1 CHATHAM CODE § A322-1
A322:812
(2) Authorized Madison-Chatham Joint Meeting personnel shall be
granted immediate access to all facilities directly or indirectly
connected to the Joint Meeting treatment plant during normal
working hours and at such other times as may be necessary under
emergency conditions as determined by the Superintendent. All
users shall provide easy access to the facilities to be inspected and
shall promptly remove any obstruction which may exist therein
upon the verbal or written request of the Superintendent.
Section 16. Enforcement.
(1) Whenever it is determined by the Madison-Chatham Joint Meeting that
the discharge of any waste into the sewers or laterals is injurious to
the joint sewerage system or adversely affects sewerage treatment, the
municipality in which such discharge is taking place shall, after such
determination by said Madison-Chatham Joint Meeting, prohibit and
prevent such discharge.
(2) In addition, in the event of violation of this Article or any regulation
adopted pursuant hereto, the Madison-Chatham Joint Meeting shall
have recourse to any and all remedies or causes of actions permitted
by law, including but not limited to the right to institute an action in the
Madison Borough Municipal Court or the Chatham Borough Municipal
Court, as the case may be, under their respective ordinances or any
other applicable law or regulation seeking the imposition of fines and
penalties and/or or an action in the Superior Court of New Jersey
seeking fines and penalties and/or an injunction or abatement of any
violation.
ARTICLE VII
Section 1. All sales, allocation or rendering of sewerage service outside of
the corporate limits of the municipalities, parties to this contract, shall be
done and performed only pursuant to a contract in writing duly authorized
by resolution of the parties to this contract and entered into after such
contract has been approved by resolution of the Joint Meeting.
Nothing herein contained shall affect any contract or arrangement for
rendering sewerage service outside of the corporate limits of either
municipality party hereto now in effect.
Section 2. The parties to this contract hereby further agree and provide
that no assessment for benefits upon the lands and real estate fronting
upon or benefited by any joint improvement or works constructed pursuant
to this contract shall be made upon application of the jointly contracting
municipalities in Joint Meeting or for the joint benefit of the contracting
municipalities.
§ A322-1 JOINT SEWER SYSTEM CONTRACT § A322-1
A322:813
ARTICLE VIII
Section 1. In the event of a disagreement between the municipalities in
Joint Meeting or otherwise as to matters arising under this contract, the
matter shall be referred to a Board of Arbitration consisting of three
members. The governing bodies of the municipalities shall select one
member each, and the third member shall be selected by the other two
members so chosen by the municipalities. Said Board of Arbitration shall
consider and arbitrate the matters in dispute, and the decision of a majority
of said Board shall be binding upon the municipalities. The cost of such
arbitration, if any, shall be borne equally by the parties hereto.
Section 2. This contract shall continue in force during the life of the sewage
treatment and disposal plant as enlarged, or as it may be enlarged in the
future pursuant to appropriate action by the Joint Meeting, and during
the life of the new trunk sewer, but in any event until December 31,
2008, unless abrogated by mutual consent as evidenced by ordinances duly
adopted by the governing bodies of the municipalities which are parties
hereto.
Section 3. A municipality which shall be in default in any payment or part
thereof required to be made pursuant to this contract shall pay interest on
the amount so in default at the rate of 6% per annum from the date when
such payment or part thereof shall have been due.
Section 4. Whenever it is necessary for the Secretary of the Joint Meeting
to file any papers with the Clerk of any municipality, the Secretary may
effect such filing by causing a copy of the papers to be mailed to the Clerk
of the municipality, but neither the failure of the Clerk of any municipality
to receive the same, nor the failure of the Secretary to so mail them, shall
relieve any municipality from its obligations thereunder.
Section 5. This contract shall be construed to supersede contracts
heretofore entered into by the parties hereto dated August 29, 1910,
January 2, 1929, July 10, 1950, and November 7, 1968, to the extent of
inconsistencies in said contracts.
Section 6. If any section or provision of this contract shall be declared
to be illegal or ineffective in whole or in part by any court of competent
jurisdiction, then, to the extent that it is not so adjudged illegal or is not
ineffective, it shall be valid and effective, and no other section or provision
of this contract shall on account thereof be deemed illegal or ineffective or
affect or prejudice in any way its applicability or validity in any instance or
under any circumstances.
§ A322-1 CHATHAM CODE § A322-1
A322:814
Section 7. The parties hereby agree to jointly maintain and operate said
trunk sewers and said sewage treatment and disposal plant for their joint
benefit in such a manner as will render the most efficient service to said
parties and to each of them and to that end to keep the said system of
sewage in good repair and effective operation and to make all necessary
alterations, additions, enlargements and improvements thereto and therein
as the needs of the said parties and each of them may from time to time
require.
The costs, expenses and other liabilities incurred in connection with or
resulting from any alterations, additions, enlargements or improvements
of plant or trunk sewers which may hereafter be made shall be divided
between and paid by the municipalities which are parties to this contract
in accordance with the estimated percentage of the cost of maintenance
and operation of the trunk sewers or sewage treatment and disposal plant
respectively to be borne by each municipality for the year in which the
improvement is made. If it shall be necessary for any municipality to issue
its bonds or notes for the purpose of financing its share of the cost of such
alteration, addition, enlargement or improvement, an adjustment of debt
service cost shall be made as provided in Article IV of this contract and
in the manner therein provided with reference to whether the alterations,
addition, enlargement or improvement shall have been made to the sewage
treatment and disposal plant or to the joint sewers until such time as all
bonds issued by both municipalities shall have been paid.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the municipalities have caused their respective
names to be signed hereto by their respective Mayors, and their respective
Corporate Seals to be hereunto affixed and to be attested by their
respective Clerks, on the day and year first above written on three
counterparts.
THE BOROUGH OF MADISON
(SEAL)
ATTEST: MAYOR
BOROUGH CLERK
THE BOROUGH OF CHATHAM
(SEAL)
ATTEST: MAYOR
BOROUGH CLERK
§ A322-1 JOINT SEWER SYSTEM CONTRACT § A322-2
A322:815
§ A322-2. Nonassessment for benefits.
This Borough Council, being the body or board having charge of the
finances of the Borough, hereby determines that any special benefits
conferred upon any property within the Borough by the construction of the
improvements authorized by this chapter and the contract and schedules
hereinabove set forth shall not be assessed upon the property specifically
benefited thereby.
Chapter A323
COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES FRANCHISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cable television franchise — See Ch. A324.
§ A323-1. Franchise granted.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:17-10, N.J.S.A. 48:17-11, and
N.J.S.A. 48:17-12, permission and consent is hereby granted to Verizon New
Jersey Inc., (the "company"), its successors and assigns, to install, operate,
inspect, maintain, repair, replace and remove its communications facilities
and other transmission or process equipment, including underground
facilities, such as conduits, manholes, cables, wires, and all other facilities
appurtenant thereto, and aboveground facilities, such as cables, wires,
antennas, poles, posts, supports, guys, pedestals, cable termination and
distribution cabinets and all other facilities appurtenant thereto, in,
through, upon, along, over, under, and across all of the various public
streets and ways, which include the roads, avenues, rights-of-way,
sidewalks, highways, bridges, waterways, and other public places, and parts
thereof, throughout their entire length, and to effect the necessary street
openings and lateral connections to curb poles, property lines and other
facilities in the Borough of Chatham (the "Borough") for said company's
local and through lines and other communications facilities in connection
with the transaction of its business. In the event that any public street
or way where the company has facilities is vacated by the Borough, the
Borough agrees to reserve unto said company the rights granted the
company by the present ordinance.
§ A323-2. Location of facilities with respect to curblines.
All poles, posts, pedestals, cabinets, or other facilities shall be located and
placed back of the curblines where shown on the Official Map(s) of the
Borough; the poles and posts, however, shall be located within 18 inches
of the face of such curbline or as may otherwise be mutually agreed by
both parties, or at the points or places now occupied by the poles, posts,
pedestals, cabinets, or other facilities of the company, its successors and
assigns, and where there are no curblines, at other convenient points or
§ A322-2 CHATHAM CODE § A323-2
A323:816
places in, upon, along, adjacent, or across the public streets and ways as
may be mutually agreed upon between the parties.
§ A323-3. Underground conduits and associated facilities.
The company may bury its local and through communications facilities such
as cables, conduit, manholes and associated equipment, fixtures, process
equipment and appurtenances within the right-of-way of the various public
streets and ways at such locations as shall be mutually agreed upon by
the parties for said company's local and through lines and communications
facilities. Underground conduits and associated facilities, as
aforementioned, shall be placed at least 18 inches below the surface of
said public streets and ways with the exception of lateral branches to curb
poles and property lines and other facilities, the same shall generally not be
constructed more than 10 feet from the curbline, unless obstructions make
it necessary to deviate from such course or unless the parties mutually
agree to another location. Manholes shall be located at such points along
the line of underground conduits as may be necessary or convenient for
placing, maintaining, and operating the facilities, as aforementioned, which
the company may from time to time use in connection with its underground
conduit system and shall be so constructed as to conform to the crosssectional
and longitudinal grade of the surface so as not to interfere with
the safety or convenience of persons or vehicles.
§ A323-4. Notice of intent to perform work; permits; restoration of
property.
Before proceeding with any new construction or relocation work in an
area covered by this ordinance, the company shall give prior notice in
writing thereof to the Borough, through its designated representative, of
its intention to perform such work. The company shall obtain such street
opening or excavation permits as may be lawfully required by any
applicable ordinances regulating to such openings or excavations. Any such
area affected by the company in constructing its facilities shall be restored
to as good condition as it was before the commencement of work thereon.
No public streets or ways shall be encumbered for a period longer than shall
be reasonable to execute the work.
§ A323-5. Indemnification; joint negligence.
The company agrees to indemnify and save harmless the Borough from and
against all claims and liabilities resulting from any injury or damage to the
person or property of any person, firm or corporation caused by or arising
out of road conditions resulting from any negligent or faulty excavations,
installation or maintenance connected with the work or equipment of said
company, and not attributable to the fault or negligence of the Borough,
except that if such injury or damage shall be caused by the joint or
concurring negligence or fault of the company and the Borough, the same
shall be borne by them to the extent of their respective fault or negligence.
§ A323-2 COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES FRANCHISE § A323-6
A323:817
§ A323-6. Changing location of aboveground facilities to
accommodate new curblines.
Whenever a curbline shall be established on streets where one does not now
exist or where an established curbline shall be relocated in order to widen
an existing street in conjunction with road construction being performed
by the Borough, the company shall change the location of its aboveground
facilities covered by this ordinance in accordance with applicable law, so
that the same shall be back of, and adjacent to, the new curbline so
long as the Borough has acted in accordance with applicable law and
with reasonable care in establishing the new curbline and providing notice
thereof.
§ A323-7. Joint use of company structures.
Any company or corporation having legal authority to place its facilities in
the public streets and ways of the Borough may jointly use the company's
poles, posts, pedestals or other structures for all lawful purposes, provided
that the company consents to such use, on terms and conditions acceptable
to the company and not inconsistent with the provisions of the present
ordinance.
§ A323-8. Space to be provided for exclusive use of Borough.
The company shall provide space, to the extent available, on its poles
so long as said poles are occupied by the company and space, to the
extent available, in its main conduits existing on the date of passage of
this ordinance, but not exceeding one duct of standard size, for the sole
benefit of the Borough during the pendancy of this ordinance. Such space
shall be provided for the exclusive use of the Borough which use shall be
limited to accommodating the wires or electrical conductors required for
one-way signal control in connection with municipal police patrol, fire alarm
signal control and traffic signal control systems only; but for no other uses
or purposes, either alone or in conjunction therewith; nor for circuits for
the supply of electrical energy for traffic or other signals; nor for wires,
conductors, cable or the equivalent which provide a means of transmitting
any signal to a private, commercial or residential location, and which is
normally provided by a nongovernmental supplier; provided, further, that
no such use or attachment by the Borough shall interfere with the plant
or facilities of or the use thereof by the company. All costs or expenses
incurred by the company in connection therewith shall be paid by the
Borough. It shall be the obligation of the Borough to attach its wires to
the poles or place its electric conductors in the conduits or manholes of
the company, provided that before proceeding with said work, either by
itself or by a person, firm or corporation engaged to perform such work,
the Borough shall give the company 30 days' prior notice in writing. All
such work shall be performed under the supervision of said company. The
Borough will indemnify and save harmless the company from and against all
claims, liabilities or demands arising in any manner in connection with the
Borough's wires or facilities or their installation, maintenance, operation
§ A323-6 CHATHAM CODE § A323-8
A323:818
or removal, or the Borough's use or enjoyment of the company's plant or
facilities provided under this § 323-8.
§ A323-9. Rights and privileges in case of take over of streets by
state or county.
If any or all of the said streets or ways are later taken over by the County
of Morris or the State of New Jersey, such county or state shall have such
rights and privileges and be subject to the same terms, conditions and
limitations of use as apply herein to the Borough, provided, however, that
satisfactory prior arrangements as may be necessary are made with the
Borough and the company for the full protection of the respective interest
of each.
§ A323-10. Construal of term.
The term "Borough" as used in this ordinance shall be held to apply to and
include any form of municipality or government into which the Borough or
any part thereof may at any time hereafter be changed, annexed, or merged.
§ A323-11. Applicability; supersession of prior consent ordinances.
The permission and consent hereby granted shall apply to and cover all
communications facilities of the company existing at any time, and related
structures, process equipment, and appurtenances heretofore or hereafter
erected, constructed, reconstructed, removed, located, relocated, replaced,
maintained, repaired, or operated by the company, its predecessors,
successors, or assigns within the Borough. This ordinance shall cancel
and supersede all prior consent ordinances between the Borough and the
company regarding the subject matter hereof.
§ A323-12. Provision of adequate service at reasonable rates.
The company shall maintain its property within the Borough and shall
comply with applicable law for the provision of safe, adequate, and proper
service at just and reasonable rates, and safeguard the public interest in
continuous and uninterrupted service within the Borough.
§ A323-13. Severability.
In the event that any provision herein shall for any reason be illegal or
unenforceable under applicable law, such illegality or unenforceability shall
not affect any other provisions of this ordinance, and this ordinance shall
be construed as if such illegal or unenforceable provision(s) had never been
contained herein.
§ A323-14. Payment of advertising cost for ordinance; approval by
Board of Public Utility Commissioners.
The company shall pay the expenses incurred for advertising required in
connection with the passage of this ordinance, after the date of its first
§ A323-8 COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES FRANCHISE § A323-14
A323:819
reading, within 30 days after the company has received a bill for said
advertising from the publisher. Following final passage of this ordinance,
the Borough Clerk shall provide the company with written notice thereof
by certified mail. As provided by applicable law, this ordinance, and any
subsequent amendments, shall not become effective until acceptance
thereof by the company and approval thereof by the Board of Public Utility
Commissioners.
Chapter A324
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
§ A324-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the terms defined above109 shall have the
meanings there indicated, and the following additional terms shall have the
following meanings:
ACT OR CABLE TELEVISION ACT — That statute of the State of New Jersey
relating to cable television, known as the "Cable Television Act," N.J.S.A.
48:5A-1 et seq., enacted as Chapter 186 of the General Laws of New Jersey,
1972, and subsequent amendments thereto.
APPLICATION — The application for renewal of municipal consent, which
application is on file in the Borough Clerk's office and is incorporated herein
by reference and made a part hereof, except as modified, changed, limited
or altered by the ordinance.
BOARD — The Board of Public Utilities of the State of New Jersey or its
successor agency.
BOROUGH — The governing body of the Borough of Chatham in the County
of Morris and the State of New Jersey.
CABLEVISION or COMPANY — CSC TKR, Inc., the grantee of rights under
this ordinance, and includes the successors and/or assigns of Cablevision or
Cablevision of Morris.
CABLE SYSTEM — A facility consisting of antennae, wire, co-axial cable,
amplifiers, towers, microwave links, wave guide laser beams, optical fibers,
optical transmitters and receivers, satellite receive/transmit antennae, and/
or equipment designed and constructed for the purpose of producing,
receiving, amplifying, storing, processing, or distributing audio, video,
digital or other forms of electronic, electromagnetic, optical or electrical
signals.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
109. Editor's Note: The “terms defined above” refers to the terms defined in the preamble to
the ordinance, which preamble is not printed in this chapter. The term defined in the
preamble was "CSC TKR, Inc. ('Cablevision') d/b/a Cablevision of Morris." See the
definition of “Cablevision” in § A324-1 of this chapter.
§ A323-14 CHATHAM CODE § A324-1
A323:820
FEDERAL ACT — That federal statute relating to cable communications
commonly known as the "Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984," 47
U.S.C. § 521 et seq. and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, or as those
statutes may be amended.
FEDERAL REGULATIONS — Those federal regulations relating to cable
television services, 47 CFR 76.1 et seq. (and, to the extent applicable, any
other federal rules and regulations relating to cable television, including but
not limited to those described in 47 CFR 76.3), or as such regulations may
be amended.
STATE REGULATIONS — Those regulations of the State of New Jersey
Board of Public Utilities relating to cable television, N.J.A.C. 14:17-1.1 et
seq. and N.J.A.C. 14:18-1.1 et seq., or as such regulations may be amended.
§ A324-2. Grant of authority.
The Borough hereby grants to Cablevision its nonexclusive consent to place
in, upon, along, across, over and under the highways, streets, alleys,
sidewalks, public ways, and public places in the Borough poles, wires,
cables and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation in the
Borough of a cable system. This renewal of the franchise is subject to the
terms and conditions of this ordinance and upon conditions that Cablevision
accepts the provisions of this ordinance and confirms in writing that it shall
comply therewith and with the commitments included in its application.
§ A324-3. Statement of findings.
A public hearing concerning the consent herein granted to Cablevision was
held after proper public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions of the
Act. Said hearing having been held and fully open to the public, and the
municipality having received all comments regarding the qualifications of
Cablevision to receive this consent, the Borough hereby finds Cablevision
possesses the necessary legal, technical, character, financial and other
qualifications to support municipal consent, and that Cablevision's
operating and construction arrangements are adequate and feasible.
§ A324-4. Duration of franchise.
This consent granted herein shall be nonexclusive and shall be for a term of
10 years commencing with the date of final passage of this ordinance.
§ A324-5. Expiration and subsequent renewal.
If Cablevision seeks successive consent, it shall, prior to the expiration of
this consent, apply for a municipal consent and certificate of approval in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-11 and N.J.S.A. 48:5A-16, and applicable
state and federal rules and regulations. Cablevision shall also petition the
Board for approval authorizing continued operation during the period
following expiration of the consent granted herein, and until such a time
§ A324-1 COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES FRANCHISE § A324-5
A323:821
that a decision is made by the Borough relative to the renewal of said
consent.
§ A324-6. Periodic review.
The Borough may undertake a review of Cablevision's performance of its
obligations under this franchise at any time as provided for in state law.
Upon the reasonable written request of the Borough, Cablevision and the
Borough's designee shall meet at least annually to review matters relating
to cable system services in the Borough.
§ A324-7. Franchise territory.
The consent granted under this ordinance to Cablevision shall apply to the
entirety of the Borough of Chatham and any property hereafter annexed.
§ A324-8. Service area.
Cablevision shall, subject to § A324-9 below, be required to proffer video
programming service along any public right-of-way to any person's
residence within the portion of the franchise territory, as described in
the application for municipal consent, at tariff rates for standard and
nonstandard installation.
§ A324-9. Extension of service.
Cablevision shall extend service along any public right of way outside its
existing service area to those residences within the franchise territory
which are located in areas that have a residential density of 25 homes per
mile or greater, or areas with less than 25 homes per mile where residents
agree to share the costs of such extension in accordance with the line
extension formula as provided by Cablevision in its application for municipal
consent.
§ A324-10. System requirements and standards.
A. Restoration. In the event that Cablevision or its agents shall disturb any
pavement, street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways or other surfaces in
the natural topography, Cablevision shall at its sole expense restore and
replace such places or things so disturbed in as good condition as
existed prior to the commencement of said work.
B. Relocation. If at any time during the period of this consent, the Borough
shall alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other way or place,
Cablevision upon reasonable notice by the Borough shall remove, re-lay
and relocate its equipment at the expense of Cablevision. Cablevision
shall temporarily move or relocate appropriate parts of its facilities to
allow moving of buildings, machinery or in other similar circumstances
with reasonable notice. Said notice shall not be less than 14 days before
commencement. The expense shall be borne by the party requesting
said service.
§ A324-5 CHATHAM CODE § A324-10
A323:822
§ A324-11. Franchise fee.
§ A324-12. Programming.
Although nothing herein shall require Cablevision to carry or transmit
any particular television stations or programming source, Cablevision shall
provide the subscribers in the Borough of Chatham with at least the same
C. Removal and trimming of trees. During the exercise of its rights and
privileges under this franchise, Cablevision shall have the authority to
trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks and public
places of the Borough, so as to prevent, but only to prevent, the
branches of such trees from coming into contact with the wires and
cables of Cablevision. Such trimmings shall be only to the extent
necessary to maintain proper clearance for Cablevision's facilities, and
except during an emergency no trees shall be removed or destroyed
without prior consent of the Borough.
D. Cablevision shall be governed by the applicable technical standards
established for the cable industry by the FCC and the Board.
E. Cablevision shall be governed by the customer service standards as
established for the cable industry by the FCC and the Board as may be
amended throughout the term of this ordinance. The customer service
practices as well as the consumer responsiveness, technical
performance, and financial and reporting requirements governing
Cablevision promulgated under N.J.A.C. 14:17 and 14:18 are
incorporated as if set forth herein at length.
F. Amendments to these standards by either the Board or the FCC will be
forwarded to the Borough within 30 days of receipt by Cablevision. With
regard to the customer service standards promulgated under N.J.A.C.
14:17 and 14:18, sufficient mutually agreed upon records will be
certified and maintained by Cablevision to demonstrate compliance.
These records will be maintained in such a form as to be available and
accessible upon the request of the Borough.
A. Cablevision shall pay as an annual franchise fee a sum equal to 2% of
the actual gross revenues received from all recurring charges in the
nature of subscription fees paid by subscribers for its cable television
reception services in the Borough of Chatham or any greater amount
mandated by the New Jersey Cable Television Act, or otherwise
required by law, immediately upon the effective date thereof. The fee
shall be paid on or before the 25th day of January of each year, and at
the same time Cablevision shall file with the Chief Financial Officer of
the Borough of Chatham a verified statement showing the gross
receipts upon which payment is based.
B. Cablevision shall further annually file the reports as required by N.J.S.A.
48:5A-30 and regulations as promulgated from time to time by the
Office of Cable Television.
§ A324-10 COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES FRANCHISE § A324-12
A323:823
broad categories of programming, in approximately the same or greater
quantity, as are now provided, and which appear in the application.
§ A324-13. Free service.
§ A324-14. Rates.
§ A324-15. Designation of Complaint Officer.
A. Cablevision shall provide, upon written request at no charge, basic
cable service to all state-accredited primary and secondary schools
within the Borough, the municipal public library, and to all municipal
public buildings set forth in Exhibit A,110 serviceable by a standard
cable installation.
B. Cablevision shall provide to the Borough, free of charge, one highspeed
modem and monthly Internet access service, including a
standard installation, to one municipal location designated by the
Borough, which designation shall be made in writing prior to
installation. The Borough shall be permitted, at its own cost, to network
up to three additional personal computer terminals in the designated
building (four computers in total) to the cable modem provided by
Cablevision.
C. Cablevision shall provide upon written request to all state-accredited
primary and secondary schools within the Borough, and the municipal
library, free of charge, one high-speed cable modem and monthly
Internet access service, including a standard installation.
A. The rates of Cablevision for cable television service shall be subject to
regulation to the extent permitted by federal and state law.
B. Cablevision has agreed to implement a senior citizen's discount in the
amount of 10% off the monthly basic service rate to any person 62 years
of age or older who subscribes to cable services and does not share the
cable television reception service subscription with more than one
person in the same household who is less than 62 years of age. Such
subscribers must meet the income and residence requirements of the
Pharmaceutical Assistance to Aged and Disabled (PAAD) pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 30:4D-21. The discount agreed to by Cablevision herein relates
only to the entry level basic rate and shall not apply to any additional
service, feature, or equipment offering subscribed to by a subscriber
eligible for the discount.
C. Cablevision shall provide for a credit or rebate for outages of cable
television service under N.J.S.A. 48:5A-11a and the rules and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
110. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ A324-12 CHATHAM CODE § A324-15
A323:824
§ A324-16. Liability insurance.
§ A324-17. Performance bond.
§ A324-18. Local office or agent.
A. The Office of Cable Television (OCTV) is hereby designated as the
complaint officer for the Borough pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
48:5A-26(b).
B. All complaints shall be reviewed and processed in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.5.
A. Cablevision agrees to maintain and keep in force and effect at its sole
cost and expense at all times during the term of this consent sufficient
liability insurance naming the Borough as an additional insured and
insuring against losses by any claim, suit, judgment execution or
demand in the minimum amounts of $3,000,000 for bodily injury or
death to any person, and $5,000,000 for bodily injury or death resulting
from any one accident or occurrence. Cablevision also agrees to
maintain during the term of this consent an excess liability or
"umbrella" policy, naming the Borough as an additional insured, in the
minimum amount of $10,000,000.
B. The insurance policy or policies maintained pursuant to this section
shall contain provisions to the effect that the insurer will not cancel,
refuse to renew, or substantially change the insurance without the
company first giving the Borough prior notice of such intention to
cancel, substantially change or not to renew.
A. Cablevision shall obtain and maintain, at its sole cost and expense,
during the entire term of this agreement, a bond to the municipality in
the amount of $25,000. Such bond shall be to insure the faithful
performance of its obligations as provided in this franchise.
B. The Borough reserves the right by resolution to require a reasonable
increase in the amount of said bond, subject to review by the OCTV and
approval of the Board.
A. Cablevision shall establish and maintain during the entire term of this
consent a local area business office or agent for the purpose of
receiving, investigating and resolving complaints regarding the quality
of service, equipment malfunctions and similar matters. Said office
shall be open daily during normal business hours, and in no event less
than 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, with the exception
of holidays.
B. Cablevision shall provide telephone response to subscriber complaints
in accordance with N.J.A.C. 14:18-3.6, and shall provide prompt
restoration of service in accordance with N.J.A.C. 14:18-3.13.
§ A324-15 COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES FRANCHISE § A324-18
A323:825
§ A324-19. Equitable terms.
§ A324-20. Public educational and governmental access.
C. Further in accordance with N.J.A.C. 14:18-3.6 Cablevision
representatives shall be available 24 hours a day to respond to outages
and other emergency situations. In addition, telephone response for
such purpose will be provided by Cablevision's personnel,
representative or agent, twenty-four hours a day.
A. In the event that another multichannel video program provider's
service within the Borough creates a significant competitive
disadvantage to Cablevision, Cablevision shall have the right to request
from the Borough lawful amendments to its franchise that relieve it of
burdens which create the unfair competitive situation. Should
Cablevision seek such amendments to its franchise, the parties agree to
negotiate in good faith appropriate changes to the franchise in order to
relieve Cablevision of such competitive disadvantages. If the parties
can reach an agreement on such terms, the Borough agrees to support
Cablevision's petition to the Board for modification of the consent in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47 and N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7.
B. If the parties are unable to reach an agreement on appropriate
amendments to the franchise, the Borough acknowledges that
Cablevision shall have the right to petition the Board directly for such
amendments in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47 and N.J.A.C.
14:17-6.7; provided, however, that the Borough shall be under no
obligation to support Cablevision's request for such relief from the
Board.
C. Cablevision represents and acknowledges that as of the date of its
acceptance of this municipal consent, competition within Chatham
Borough has not yet risen to the level of creating a significant
competitive disadvantage sufficient to enable Cablevision to seek relief
under this section.
A. Cablevision shall provide and maintain, without charge for its use, a
fully operational designated public, educational and governmental
(PEG) access channel for use solely by the residents and institutions of
the Borough. This channel may only be used for noncommercial
programming.
B. Cablevision shall be required to designate a second noncommercial,
composite public, educational and governmental access channel, for
the exclusive use of the Borough, anytime the existing designated PEG
access channel is in continuous use with the cablecasting of locally
produced original PEG programming during at least 75% of the time,
between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. during any consecutive
twelve-week period during the term of this consent. If the usage ratio of
the second PEG channel should at anytime fall below 50% based upon
the formula described herein, use of the second designated PEG access
§ A324-18 CHATHAM CODE § A324-20
A323:826
§ A324-21. Incorporation of application.
All of the commitments and statements contained in the application and
any amendment thereto submitted in writing to the municipality by the
Company, except as modified herein, are binding upon the company as
terms and conditions of this consent. The application and any other written
amendments thereto submitted by the Company shall be annexed hereto
and made a part hereof by reference as long as it does not conflict with state
or federal law.
§ A324-22. Consistency with applicable laws.
This franchise shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable
federal, state and local laws. The Borough reserves the right, subject to the
scope of authority granted by state law, to regulate Cablevision to the extent
permitted by federal law as amended from time to time, during the term
of this franchise, which shall be deemed amended in conformity to such
regulations upon their effective date.
channel shall revert back to Cablevision upon 60 days' advance written
notice to the Borough. For purposes of this section, "locally produced
original PEG programming" shall mean programming produced by the
Borough and its Cablevision subscribers, and the governmental
agencies, schools and/or school districts within the Borough, but
excluding programming consisting of character-generated messages
and/or repeated programming.
C. In consideration of the rights granted under this consent, and in order
to meet the cable-related needs of this community, Cablevision shall
provide a one-time grant of $20,000 to be used by the Borough for
cable-related purposes such as noncommercial PEG access within
Chatham Borough.
D. The Borough agrees that Cablevision shall retain the right to use the
PEG access channel(s), or portion thereof, for non-PEG access
programming, during times when the Borough is not utilizing the
channel for purposes of providing PEG access programming. In the
event that Cablevision uses said PEG access channel(s) for the
presentation of such other programming, the PEG programming shall
remain the priority use and Cablevision's rights with respect to using
the channel(s) for non-PEG programming shall be subordinate to the
Borough's provision of PEG access programming on such channel(s).
E. Upon reasonable written request of the Borough, but not more
frequently than twice each year, Cablevision shall offer at its studio,
seminars on the production of television programming for the training
of Borough residents who will assist in productions originated by the
Borough.
§ A324-20 COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES FRANCHISE § A324-23
A323:827
§ A324-23. Separability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct
and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portion thereof.
§ A324-24. Technical improvements.
Cablevision agrees that the capabilities of the system shall be maintained
as technologically current throughout the duration of the franchise, as
compared with other Cablevision systems of comparable size, measured by
the number of subscribers in the system, and to the extent economically
reasonable and commercially practicable. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
nothing herein shall obligate Cablevision to perform a rebuild of the system.
§ A324-25. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon issuance of a certificate of approval as
issued by the Board of Public Utilities.
Chapter A325
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RIGHTS-OF-WAY USE
AGREEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Communications facilities franchise — See
Ch. A323.
Cable television franchise — See Ch. A324.
§ A324-23 CHATHAM CODE § A324-25
A323:828
ARTICLE I
Agreement With Fiber Technologies Networks, LLC
§ A325-1. Authorization and execution of contract.
The Borough of Chatham hereby approves and shall enter into a rights-ofway
user agreement with Fiber Technologies Networks, LLC (hereinafter
"Fibertech") for the purpose of owning, constructing, installing, operating,
repairing, and maintaining a telecommunications system. The Borough of
Chatham hereby grants consent to Fibertech to occupy said public rights-ofway
within the Borough of Chatham for this purpose. The consent granted
by the Borough of Chatham is for the nonexclusive use by Fibertech of the
public rights-of-way within the Borough of Chatham for the purpose stated
in this section. The Mayor and Clerk of the Borough of Chatham are hereby
authorized and directed to execute a contract in substantially the following
form jointly with the proper representatives of Fibertech and to deliver the
same for and on behalf of the Borough of Chatham.
RIGHTS-OF-WAY USE AGREEMENT
THIS RIGHTS-OF-WAY USE AGREEMENT ("Use Agreement") is dated
___________, 2010 (the "Effective Date"), and entered into by and between
the Borough of Chatham ("Municipality"), a New Jersey municipal
corporation, having its address at 54 Fairmount Avenue, Chatham, New
Jersey 07928-2393, and Fiber Technologies Networks, LLC ("Fibertech"),
a New York limited liability company, with offices located at 300 Meridian
Centre, Rochester, New York.
RECITALS
WHEREAS, Fibertech has been approved by the New Jersey Board of
Public Utilities ("Board" or "BPU") to provide local exchange and
interexchange telecommunications services throughout the State of New
Jersey by Order of Approval in Docket No. TE05080683 dated September
14, 2005. Pursuant to such authority granted by the Board, Fibertech
may locate, place, attach, install, operate and maintain facilities within
municipal rights-of-way for purposes of providing telecommunications
services; and
WHEREAS, Fibertech proposes to place its telecommunications facilities
aerially on existing utility poles or in underground conduit in the public
rights-of-way within the Municipality for the purpose of owning,
constructing, installing, operating, repairing and maintaining a
telecommunications system; and
WHEREAS, it is in the best interests of the Municipality and its citizenry for
the Municipality to grant consent to Fibertech to occupy said public rightsof-
way within the Municipality for this purpose; and
§ A325-1 COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES FRANCHISE § A325-1
A323:829
WHEREAS, the consent granted herein is for the nonexclusive use of the
public rights-of-way within the Municipality for the purpose of owning,
constructing, installing, operating, and maintaining a telecommunications
system.
NOW THEREFORE, in consideration of the mutual covenants and
obligations hereinafter set forth, the Municipality and Fibertech hereby
agree to and with each other as follows:
Section 1: Definitions.
(a) "BPU" is the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities.
(b) "Fibertech" is the grantee of rights under this Rights-of-Use
Agreement and is known as Fiber Technologies Networks, LLC, its
successors and assigns.
(c) "Municipality" is the grantor of rights under this Rights-of-Use
Agreement and is known as the Borough of Chatham, County of
Morris, State of New Jersey.
(d) "Public Utility" means any public utility defined in N.J.S.A. 48:2-13.
(e) "Rights-of-Way" means the areas devoted to passing under, over, on
or through lands with public utility facilities.
(f) "Utility Pole" means, in addition to its commonly accepted meaning,
any wires or cable connected thereto and any replacement thereof
which is similar in construction and use.
Section 2: Grant of Consent.
The Municipality hereby grants Fibertech its municipal consent for the
nonexclusive use of the public rights-of-way within the Municipality for the
purpose of owning, constructing, installing, operating, and maintaining a
telecommunications system.
Section 3: Public Purpose.
It is deemed to be in the best interests of the Municipality and its citizenry,
particularly including commercial and industrial citizens, for the
Municipality to grant consent to Fibertech to occupy said public rights-ofway
within the Municipality for this purpose.
Section 4: Project Description.
Any construction to be undertaken for the purposes described herein
shall require prior notice by Fibertech to the Municipality. Fibertech shall
fully describe the construction to be undertaken and shall coordinate and
work with the appropriate Municipal department(s) before scheduling and
commencing any construction.
Section 5: Scope of Use Agreement.
§ A325-1 CHATHAM CODE § A325-1
A323:830
Any and all rights expressly granted to Fibertech under this Use
Agreement, which shall be exercised at Fibertech's sole cost and expense,
shall be subject to the prior and continuing right of the Municipality under
applicable laws to use any and all parts of the municipal rights-of-way
exclusively or concurrently with any other person or persons, and shall be
further subject to all deeds, easements, dedications, conditions, covenants,
restrictions, encumbrances, and claims of title of record which may affect
such municipal rights-of-way. Nothing in this Rights-of-Use Agreement
shall be deemed to grant, convey, create or vest in Fibertech a real
property interest in land, including any fee, leasehold interest, easement,
or any other form of interest or ownership.
Subject to obtaining the permission of the owner(s) of existing Utility Poles,
which shall be the sole responsibility of Fibertech to undertake and obtain,
the Municipality hereby authorizes and permits Fibertech to enter upon the
municipal rights-of-way and to attach, install, operate, maintain, remove,
reattach, reinstall, relocate and replace its telecommunications facilities in
or on Utility Poles or other structures owned by public utility companies or
to be constructed by Fibertech located within the municipal rights-of-way
as may be permitted by the public utility company or property owner, as
the case may be.
Section 6: Compliance with Ordinance.
Fibertech shall comply with all existing ordinances of the Municipality as
may be amended from time to time and with all future ordinances as may
be enacted.
Section 7: Municipal Costs.
Fibertech agrees to pay the reasonable costs incurred by the Municipality
by reason of Fibertech's telecommunications system, including, but not
limited to, the Municipality's attorneys' fees for the negotiation and
preparation of this Rights-of-Use Agreement and accompanying Resolution
authorizing its execution.
Section 8: Duration of Consent.
The nonexclusive municipal consent granted herein shall expire twenty-five
(25) years from the Effective Date of this Rights-of-Use Agreement. Upon
expiration of such consent, or at such earlier date that Fibertech ceases to
maintain its facilities, it shall remove the facilities at its cost and expense.
Section 9: Indemnification.
§ A325-1 COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES FRANCHISE § A325-1
A323:831
Fibertech, its successors, assigns, subcontractors, agents, servants,
officers, employees, designees, guests and invitees, hereby indemnify,
defend and hold harmless the Municipality, its successors and assigns,
elected officials, officers, employees, servants, contractors, designees and
invitees from and against any and all claims, demands, suits, actions at law
or equity or otherwise, judgments, arbitration determinations, damages,
liabilities, decrees of any person(s) or entities claiming to be or being
harmed as a result of Fibertech's actions under this Rights-of-Use
Agreement and costs in connection therewith. This indemnification shall
specifically include, but not be limited to, any and all costs, reasonable
attorneys' fees, court costs and any other expenses that may be incurred
by the Municipality in connection with any and all claims, demands, suits,
actions at law or equity or otherwise and/or arbitration proceedings which
may arise in connection with Fibertech's activities pursuant to the rights
granted in this Rights-of-Use Agreement.
Section 10: Notices.
All notices or other correspondence required or permitted to be given
in connection with this Rights-of-Use Agreement shall be in writing and
delivered personally, by telecopy, by overnight carrier service or by
registered or certified mail to the parties at the following addresses:
To Fibertech at: Fiber Technologies Networks, LLC
300 Meridian Centre
Rochester, New York 14618
Attn: General Counsel
With a copy to: Dennis C. Linken, Esq.
Stryker, Tams & Dill LLP
Two Penn Plaza East
Newark, New Jersey 07105
To the Borough of Chatham at: Borough of Chatham
54 Fairmount Avenue
Chatham, New Jersey 07928-2393
Attn: Municipal Clerk
Section 11: Liability Insurance.
Fibertech shall at all times maintain a comprehensive liability insurance
policy with a single amount of at least One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00)
covering liability for any death, personal injury, property damage or other
liability arising out of the construction and operation contemplated herein,
and an excess liability (or "umbrella") policy in the amount of Five Million
Dollars ($5,000,000.00).
§ A325-1 CHATHAM CODE § A325-1
A323:832
Prior to the commencement of any work pursuant to this Rights-of-Use
Agreement, Fibertech shall file with the Municipality Certificates of
Insurance with endorsements evidencing the coverage provided by said
liability and excess liability policies.
The Municipality shall notify Fibertech within fifteen (15) days after the
presentation of any claim or demand to the Municipality, either by suit or
otherwise, made against the Municipality on account of any of Fibertech's
or its subcontractors', agents', employees', officers', servants', designees',
guests' and invitees', activities pursuant to the rights granted in this
Rights-of-Use Agreement.
Section 12: Assignment.
Fibertech may not assign this Rights-of-Use Agreement without the written
consent of the Municipality, except that Fibertech shall have the right,
upon notice to the Municipality, to assign this Rights-of-Use Agreement
without the Municipality's consent, provided, however, that such
assignment is approved by the BPU.
Section 13: Successors and Assigns.
The terms and conditions herein contained shall be binding upon and inure
to the benefit of the successors and assigns of the parties hereto.
Section 14: Governing Law.
This Rights-of-Use Agreement shall be governed by, construed and
enforced in accordance with the laws of the State of New Jersey.
Section 15: Incorporation of Prior Agreements.
This Rights-of-Use Agreement contains the entire understanding of the
parties hereto with respect to the subject matter hereof, and no prior other
written or oral agreement or undertaking pertaining to any such matter
shall be effective for any purpose.
Section 16: Modification of Agreement.
This Rights-of-Use Agreement may not be amended or modified, nor may
any obligation hereunder be waived orally, and no such amendment,
modification or waiver shall be effective for any purpose unless it is in
writing and signed by the party against whom enforcement thereof is
sought.
Section 17: Invalidity.
If any provision hereof shall be declared invalid by any court or in any
administrative proceedings, then the provisions of this Rights-of-Use
Agreement shall be construed in such manner so as to preserve the validity
hereof and the substance of the transaction herein contemplated to the
extent possible. The headings are provided for purposes of convenience of
reference only and are not intended to limit, define the scope of or aid in
interpretation of any of the provisions hereof.
Section 18: Counterparts.
§ A325-1 COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES FRANCHISE § A325-1
A323:833
This Rights-of-Use Agreement may be executed and delivered in several
counterparts, each of which, when so executed and delivered, shall
constitute an original, fully enforceable counterpart for all purposes.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, this Rights-of-Use Agreement has been executed
as of the date set forth below.
FIBER TECHNOLOGIES NETWORKS, LLC
(AUTHORIZATION)
ATTEST:
DATED:
THE BOROUGH OF CHATHAM
(SEAL)
MAYOR:
ATTEST:
BOROUGH CLERK
DATED:
§ A325-2. Officially executed contract to be maintained by Borough
Clerk.
The officially executed contract in possession of the Borough of Chatham
shall be maintained at the Office of the Clerk of the Borough of Chatham
and shall be available for public inspection upon request.
§ A325-1 CHATHAM CODE § A325-2
A323:834
ARTICLE II
Agreement With United Federal Data, LLC
[Added 3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-02]
§ A325-3. Authorization and execution of rights-of-way agreement.
The Borough of Chatham hereby approves and shall enter into a rightsof-
way use agreement with United Federal Data, LLC ("UFD"), for the
purpose of owning, constructing, installing, operating and maintaining a
telecommunications system consisting solely of aerial telecommunications
fiber optic cable attached to existing utility poles at specific locations as set
forth herein. The Borough of Chatham hereby grants consent to UFD for the
nonexclusive use of the public rights-of-way within the Borough of Chatham
for this purpose. The Mayor and Borough Clerk of the Borough of Chatham
are authorized and directed to execute an agreement in substantially the
following form jointly with the proper representatives of UFD.
RIGHTS-OF-WAY USE AGREEMENT
THIS RIGHTS-OF WAY USE AGREEMENT ("Agreement") is dated March
11, 2013 (the "Effective Date"), and entered into by and between the
Borough of Chatham ("Municipality"), a New Jersey municipal corporation
with an address of 54 Fairmount Avenue, Chatham, New Jersey 07928 and
United Federal Data, LLC, ("UFD"), a limited liability corporation organized
and existing under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, with a
business address of 210 York Street, Suite 200, York, PA 17401.
WHEREAS, UFD was approved by the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities
to provide local exchange and interexchange telecommunications services
throughout the State of New Jersey by Order in Docket No. TE12070645
on September 13, 2012; and
WHEREAS, UFD intends to provide telecommunications services in
accordance with the Order and the rules and regulations of the Federal
Communications Commission and the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities;
and
WHEREAS, UFD proposes to place its telecommunication facilities aerially
on existing poles at specific locations in the Public Rights-of-Way, as that
term is defined hereinafter, within the Municipality for the purpose of
owning, constructing, installing, operating, repairing and maintaining a
Telecommunications System as hereinafter defined; and
WHEREAS, it is in the best interest of the Municipality and its citizenry
for the Municipality to grant consent to UFD to occupy said Public Rightsof-
Way within the Municipality for this purpose under the terms set forth
herein; and
§ A325-3 COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES FRANCHISE § A325-3
A323:835
WHEREAS, the consent granted herein to UFD is for the non-exclusive
use by UFD of the Public Rights-of-Way within the Municipality for the
purpose of owning, constructing, installing, operating and maintaining a
telecommunications system consisting solely of aerial telecommunications
fiber optic cable attached to existing utility poles at specific locations (the
"Telecommunication System").
NOW THEREFORE, in consideration of the mutual covenants and
obligations hereinafter set forth the Municipality and UFD hereby agree to
and with each other as follows:
1. Incorporation. The foregoing recitals, including definitions, are
hereby incorporated into this Agreement.
2. Definitions. The following terms shall have the meanings set forth
below unless the context requires otherwise:
a. "BPU." The New Jersey Board of Public Utilities.
b. "Public Utility." Shall carry the same meaning as set
forth in N.J.S.A. 48:2-13.
c. "Public Rights-of-Way." The space in, upon, along,
across, over, and through any public land, road, street
or highway of the Municipality, including lands with
public utility facilities as the same now or hereafter may
exist, that are under the jurisdiction of the Municipality.
This term shall not include state or federal rights-of-way,
property restricted by Green Acres regulation, property
owned, developed and/or occupied by the Municipality
(e.g. municipal parks, municipal administration
buildings), or any property owned by any person or
agency other than the Municipality, except as provided
by applicable laws or pursuant to an agreement
between the Municipality and any such property owner.
3. Grant of Consent. Subject to Paragraph 6 herein, the Municipality
hereby grants to UFD its municipal consent for the non-exclusive use
of the Public Rights-of-Way for the purpose of owning, constructing,
installing, operating and maintaining a Telecommunications System
at the specific locations identified on the Morris County/Chatham
Borough/New Jersey Project Galaxy Map prepared by RJE Telecom
LLC dated January 17, 2013, which map is attached hereto and made
a part hereof this Agreement.
4. Public Purpose. It is deemed to be in the best interest of the
Municipality and its citizenry, including commercial and industrial
citizens, for the Municipality to grant consent to UFD to occupy said
Public Rights-of-Way under the terms set forth herein.
§ A325-3 CHATHAM CODE § A325-3
A323:836
5. Scope of Agreement. Any and all rights granted to UFD under this
Agreement, which shall be exercised at UFD's sole cost and expense,
shall be subject to the prior and continuing right of the Municipality,
under applicable laws, to use any and all part of the Public Rights-of-
Way exclusively or concurrently with any other person or persons, and
shall be further subject to all deed, easements, dedications, conditions,
covenants, restrictions, encumbrances and claims of title of record
which may affect such Public Rights-of-Way. Nothing in this Agreement
shall be deemed to grant, convey, create or vest in UFD a real property
interest in the Public Rights-of-Way, including any fee, leasehold
interest, easement, or any other form of interest or ownership.
The Municipality hereby authorizes and permits UFD to enter upon
the Public Rights-of-Way solely to attach, install, and maintain aerial
telecommunication fiber optic cable on existing utility poles owned by
Public Utility at the specific locations companies, to the extent UFD
has the legal right to do so.
6. Fees. In consideration of the rights and privileges granted to UFD,
UFD agrees to reimburse the Municipality for its reasonable attorney
fees incurred in connection with the negotiation and preparation of
this Agreement and related Ordinance, as well as the accompanying
Resolution authorizing execution of this Agreement, prior to the
commencement of any work.
7. Compliance with Ordinance. This Agreement shall be codified in
the Borough Code of the Borough of Chatham. UFD shall comply with
the terms of this Ordinance as well as all other applicable statutes,
ordinances and regulations, now existing or hereinafter promulgated.
8. Duration of Consent. The non-exclusive municipal consent granted
herein shall expire ten (10) years from the Effective Date and shall
automatically renew for successive ten (10) year terms, up to fifty (50)
years, unless either party gives written notice of its intention not to
renew before expiration of the then current term.
§ A325-3 COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES FRANCHISE § A325-3
A323:837
9. Indemnification. UFD, its successors, assigns, subcontractors,
agents, servants, officers, employees, designees, guests and invitees,
hereby indemnify, defend and hold harmless the Municipality, its
successors and assigns, elected officials, officers, employees,
servants, contractors, designees and invitees from and against any
and all personal injury and property damage claims, demands, suits,
actions at law or equity or otherwise, judgments, arbitration
determinations, damages, liabilities, decrees of any person(s) or
entities claiming to be or being harmed as a result of UFD actions
under this Agreement and costs in connection therewith. This
indemnification shall specifically include, but not be limited to, any
and all costs, reasonable attorney's fees, court costs and any other
expense that may be incurred by the Municipality in connection with
any and all claims, demands, suits, action at law or equity or
otherwise and/or arbitration proceedings which may arise in
connection with UFD activities pursuant to the rights granted in this
Agreement.
10. Notices. All notices or other correspondence required or permitted
to be given in connection with this Agreement shall be in writing and
delivered personally, by electronic transmission, by overnight carrier
service or by registered or certified mail to the parties at the
following address, or other address as provided by the parties in
writing:
If to UFD: United Federal Data, LLC
Attn: Christopher Lodge
30 North Queen Street, 2nd & 3rd Floor
Lancaster, Pennsylvania 17603
With copy to: CGA Law Firm
Attn: Zachary E. Nahass, Esq.
135 North George Street
York, Pennsylvania 17401
If to
Municipality:
Robert J. Falzarano, Administrator
Borough Hall
54 Fairmount Avenue
Chatham, New Jersey 07928
With copy to: James L. Lott, Jr., Esq.
Riker Danzig Scherer Hyland & Perretti LLP
1 Speedwell Avenue
Morristown, New Jersey 07962
§ A325-3 CHATHAM CODE § A325-3
A323:838
11. Liability Insurance. UFD shall, at all times, maintain a
comprehensive liability insurance policy with a single amount of at
least One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00) covering liability for any
death, personal injury, property damage or other liability arising out
the construction and operating contemplated herein, and an excess
liability policy (or "umbrella") in the amount of Five Million Dollars
($5,000,000.00). The insurance required by this Section 11 shall be
evidenced by Certificate(s) of Insurance naming the Municipality as an
additional insured. Each Certificate of Insurance shall require that a
thirty day (30) notice shall be given to the Municipality by registered
mail, return receipt requested, if any policy or individual coverage is
altered or cancelled. All such notices shall be provided in accordance
with Section 10 hereof.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, if in the commercially reasonable
opinion of the Municipality, the foregoing insurance coverage limits
are inadequate to protect the interest of the Municipality, UFD shall
provide insurance with such increased limits as the Municipality shall
reasonably request.
Prior to the commencement of any work pursuant to this Agreement,
UFD shall file with the Municipality for review and approval
Certificates of Insurance with endorsements evidencing the coverage
provided by said liability and excess liability policies.
The Municipality shall notify UFD within fifteen (15) days after the
presentation of any claim or demand to the Municipality, either by suit
or otherwise, made against the Municipality on account of any work
performed by UFD, its subcontractors, agents, employees, officers,
servants, designees, guest and invitees, activities (or inaction)
pursuant to the rights granted in this Agreement.
12. Restoration. In the event that UFD shall, from time to time, disturb
any utility lines, fixtures, equipment, or other facilities, roads,
sidewalks, or trees or shrubs or other landscaping or surfaces in the
natural topography or any other matter whatsoever, UFD shall, at its
sole cost and expense, reasonably restore and replace such places
and things so disturbed to and in not less than as good condition
that existed prior to each disturbance. In doing so, UFD shall comply
with all applicable statutes, ordinances and regulations now existing
or hereinafter promulgated. All restorations shall be completed within
30 working days from the occurrence of the disturbance.
13. Permit Required. Prior to the commencement of any work pursuant
to this Agreement, UFD shall apply to the Municipal Engineer for a
street opening permit in accordance with Article IV of the Code of the
Borough of Chatham. The Municipal Engineer's grant of the permit
shall not be unreasonably withheld.
§ A325-3 COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES FRANCHISE § A325-3
A323:839
14. Deposit. In connection with the application for street opening permit
and in addition to other permit application requirements, UFD shall be
required to make a deposit with the Municipality for the purpose of
reimbursing the Municipality for the cost of any work and/or materials
furnished by the Municipality in connection with the work authorized
by the permit and to cover the cost of all necessary inspections,
replacements and repairs of said work in accordance with to § 244-46
of the Code of the Borough of Chatham.
15. Miscellaneous.
a. No Agency/Partnership. This Agreement neither makes nor
appoints UFD as an agent of the Municipality, nor does it create
a partnership or joint venture between the parties. Neither party
shall act or represent itself as an agent of the other or purport to
bind or obligate the other in any manner.
b. Severability. If any provision of this Agreement is declared invalid
under applicable law, the affected provision will be considered
omitted or modified to conform to applicable law, and all other
provisions will remain in full force and effect.
c. No Waiver. No failure or delay on the part of any party in
exercising any right, power, or remedy under this Agreement
will operate as a waiver thereof, nor will any single or partial
exercise of any such right, power, or remedy preclude any other
or further exercise thereof or the exercise of any other right,
power, or remedy hereunder. The rights and remedies provided
in this Agreement are cumulative and are not exclusive of any
other rights, powers, or remedies existing at law, in equity or
otherwise.
d. Execution. This Agreement may be executed in counterparts,
each of which will be deemed an original, but all of which will
constitute one and the same agreement. A signature affixed by
a party to a counterpart of this Agreement and delivered by
electronic transmission is valid, binding and enforceable against
such party.
e. Integration. This Agreement sets forth the entire agreement
between the parties hereto, and there are no covenants or
agreements to be implied against either party.
f. Amendments. This Agreement will not be amended, or modified
except in writing signed by the parties.
g. Assignment. UFD shall not assign or transfer any of its rights
under this Agreement without prior written consent from the
Municipality, which may not unreasonably withhold such
consent. This Agreement shall be binding upon and inure to the
benefit of the parties and their successors and assigns.
h. Governing Law. This Agreement shall be governed by and
construed in accordance with the laws of the State of New Jersey.
§ A325-3 CHATHAM CODE § A325-3
A323:840
i. Neutral Construction. In the event of any dispute concerning the
construction or interpretation of this Agreement, this Agreement
shall be construed neutrally and without regard to events of
authorship or negotiation, each party having been represented
by independent counsel of its own choosing.
j. Counterparts. This Rights-of-Way Use Agreement may be
executed and delivered in several counterparts, each of which,
when so executed and delivered, shall constitute an original, fully
enforceable counterpart for all purposes.
k. Official Copy. An official copy of this Agreement shall be on file in
the office of the Borough Clerk of the Borough of Chatham and
shall be available for public inspection upon request.
§ A325-3 COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES FRANCHISE § A325-3
A323:841

ARTICLE III
Agreement with Light Tower Fiber Long Island, LLC
[Added 10-27-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08]
§ A325-4. Authorization and execution of rights-of-way agreement.
The Borough of Chatham hereby approves and shall enter into a Rightsof-
Way Use Agreement with Light Tower Fiber Long Island, LLC d/b/a
Lightower Fiber Networks, 1, LLC ("Lightower") for the purpose of owning,
constructing, installing, operating and maintaining a telecommunications
system consisting solely of aerial telecommunications fiber optic cable
attached to existing utility poles at specific locations as set forth herein.
The Borough of Chatham hereby grants consent to Lightower for the
nonexclusive use of the public rights-of-way within the Borough of Chatham
for this purpose. The Mayor and Borough Clerk of the Borough of Chatham
are authorized and directed to execute an agreement in substantially the
following form jointly with the proper representatives of Lightower.
RIGHTS-OF-WAY USE AGREEMENT
THIS RIGHTS-OF-WAY USE AGREEMENT ("Agreement") is dated
________________, 2014 (the "Effective Date"), and entered into by and
between the Borough of Chatham ("Municipality"), a New Jersey municipal
corporation with an address of 54 Fairmount Avenue, Chatham, New Jersey
07928 and Light Tower Fiber Long Island, LLC d/b/a Lightower Fiber
Networks 1, LLC, ("Lightower"), a limited liability corporation organized
and existing under the laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, with a
business address located at 80 Central Street, Boxborough, Massachusetts
01719.
WHEREAS, Lightower was approved by the New Jersey Board of Public
Utilities to provide local exchange and interexchange telecommunications
services throughout the State of New Jersey by Order in Docket No.
TM08040212 on June 16, 2008; and
WHEREAS, Lightower intends to provide telecommunications services in
accordance with the Order and the rules and regulations of the Federal
Communications Commission and the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities;
and
WHEREAS, Lightower proposes to place its telecommunication facilities
aerially on existing poles at specific locations in the Public Rights-of-Way,
as that term is defined hereinafter, within the Municipality for the purpose
of owning, constructing, installing, operating, repairing and maintaining a
Telecommunications System as hereinafter defined; and
WHEREAS, it is in the best interest of the Municipality and its citizenry
for the Municipality to grant consent to Lightower to occupy said Public
Rights-of-Way within the Municipality for this purpose under the terms set
forth herein; and
§ A325-4 COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES FRANCHISE § A325-4
A323:843
WHEREAS, the consent granted herein to Lightower is for the nonexclusive
use by Lightower of the Public Rights-of-Way within the
Municipality for the purpose of owning, constructing, installing, operating
and maintaining a telecommunications system consisting solely of aerial
telecommunications fiber optic cable attached to existing utility poles at
specific locations (the "Telecommunications System").
BE IT RESOLVED, in consideration of the mutual covenants and
obligations hereinafter set forth the Municipality and Lightower hereby
agree to and with each other as follows:
1. Incorporation. The foregoing recitals, including definitions, are hereby
incorporated into this Agreement.
2. Definitions. The following terms shall have the meanings set forth
below unless the context requires otherwise.
a. "BPU." The New Jersey Board of Public Utilities.
b. "Public Utility." Shall carry the same meaning as set forth in N.J.S.A.
48:2-13.
c. "Public Rights-of-Way." The space in, upon, along, across, over,
and through any public land, road, street or highway of the
Municipality, including lands with Public Utility facilities as the
same now or hereafter may exist, that are under the jurisdiction of
the Municipality. This term shall not include state or federal rightsof-
way, property restricted by Green Acres regulation, property
owned, developed and/or occupied by the Municipality (e.g.,
municipal parks, municipal administration buildings), or any
property owned by any person or agency other than the
Municipality, except as provided by applicable laws of pursuant
to an agreement between the Municipality and any such property
owner.
3. Grant of Consent. Subject to Paragraph 6 herein, the Municipality
hereby grants to Lightower its municipal consent for the non-exclusive
use of the Public Rights-of-Way for the purpose of owning, constructing,
installing, operating and maintaining a Telecommunications System
at the specific locations identified on the Chatham Borough portion
(sheets 38 to 45) of a Fanwood to Florham Park map of Lightower's
fiber optic route ("Map") prepared by JoeMax Telecom LLC dated July
25, 2014, which map is attached hereto and made a part of this
Agreement.
4. Public Purpose. It is deemed to be in the best interest of the
Municipality and its citizenry, including commercial and industrial
citizens, for the Municipality to grant consent to Lightower to occupy
said Public Rights-of-Way under the terms set forth herein.
§ A325-4 CHATHAM CODE § A325-4
A323:844
5. Scope of Agreement. Any and all rights granted to Lightower under
this Agreement, which shall be exercised at Lightower's sole cost and
expense, shall be subject to the prior and continuing right of the
Municipality, under applicable laws, to use any and all part of the
Public Rights-of-Way exclusively or concurrently with any other person
or persons, and shall be further subject to all deed, easements,
dedications, conditions, covenants, restrictions, encumbrances and
claims of title of record which may affect such Public Rights-of-Way.
Nothing in this Agreement shall be deemed to grant, convey, create or
vest in Lightower a real property interest in the Public Rights-of-Way,
including any fee, leasehold interest, easement, or any other form of
interest or ownership.
The Municipality hereby authorizes and permits Lightower to enter
upon the Public Rights-of-Way solely to own, construct, install, operate
and maintain the Telecommunications System at the locations
identified on the attached map to the extent Lightower otherwise has
the legal right to do so.
6. Fees. In consideration of the rights and privileges granted to
Lightower, Lightower agrees to reimburse the Municipality for its
reasonable attorney fees incurred in connection with the negotiation
and preparation of this Agreement and related Ordinance, as well as
the accompanying Resolution authorizing execution of this Agreement,
prior to the commencement of any work.
7. Compliance with Ordinance. This Agreement shall be codified in the
Borough Code of the Borough of Chatham. Lightower shall comply with
the terms of this Ordinance as well as all other applicable statutes,
ordinances and regulations, now existing or hereinafter promulgated.
8. Duration of Consent. The non-exclusive municipal consent granted
herein shall expire ten (10) years from the Effective Date and shall
automatically renew for successive ten (10) year terms, up to fifty (50)
years, unless either party gives written notice of its intention not to
renew before expiration of the then current term.
§ A325-4 COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES FRANCHISE § A325-4
A323:845
9. Indemnification. Lightower, its successors, assigns, subcontractors,
agents, servants, officers, employees, designees, guests and invitees,
hereby indemnify, defend and hold harmless the Municipality, its
successors and assigns, elected officials, officers, employees, servants,
contractors, designees and invitees from and against any and all
personal injury and property damage claims, demands, suits, actions
at law or equity or otherwise, judgments, arbitration determinations,
damages, liabilities, decrees of any person(s) or entities claiming to
be or being harmed as a result of Lightower's actions under this
Agreement and costs in connection therewith. This indemnification
shall specifically include, but not be limited to, any and all costs,
reasonable attorney's fees, court costs and any other expense that may
be incurred by the Municipality in connection with any and all claims,
demands, suits, action at law or equity or otherwise and/or arbitration
proceedings which may arise in connection with Lightower activities
pursuant to the rights granted in this Agreement.
10. Notices. All notices or other correspondence required or permitted to
be given in connection with this Agreement shall be in writing and
delivered personally, by electronic transmission, by overnight carrier
service or by registered or certified mail to the parties at the following
address, or other address as provided by the parties in writing:
If to
Lightower:
Light Tower Fiber Long Island, LLC
d/b/a Lightower Fiber Networks 1, LLC
80 Central Street, Boxborough, Massachusetts 01719.
With copy
to:
If to
Municipality:
Robert J. Falzarano, Administrator, Borough Hall
54 Fairmount Avenue, Chatham, New Jersey 07928
With copy
to:
James L. Lott, Jr., Esq.
Riker Danzig Scherer Hyland & Perretti LLP
1 Speedwell Avenue Morristown, New Jersey 07962
§ A325-4 CHATHAM CODE § A325-4
A323:846
11. Liability Insurance. Lightower shall, at all times, maintain a
comprehensive liability insurance policy with a single amount of at
least One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00) covering liability for any
death, personal injury, property damage or other liability arising out
the construction, installation, operation or maintenance of the
Telecommunications System contemplated herein, and an excess
liability policy (or "umbrella") in the amount of Five Million Dollars
($5,000,000.00). The insurance required by this Section 11 shall be
evidenced by Certificate(s) of Insurance naming the Municipality as an
additional insured. Each Certificate of Insurance shall require that a
thirty day (30) notice shall be given to the Municipality by registered
mail, return receipt requested, if any policy or individual coverage is
altered or cancelled. All such notices shall be provided in accordance
with Section 10 hereof.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, if in the commercially reasonable
opinion of the Municipality, the foregoing insurance coverage limits are
inadequate to protect the interest of the Municipality, Lightower shall
provide insurance with such increased limits as the Municipality shall
reasonably request.
Prior to the commencement of any work pursuant to this Agreement,
Lightower shall file with the Municipality for review and approval
Certificates of Insurance with endorsements evidencing the coverage
provided by said liability and excess liability policies.
The Municipality shall notify Lightower within fifteen (15) days after
the presentation of any claim or demand to the Municipality, either
by suit or otherwise, made against the Municipality on account of any
work performed by Lightower, its subcontractors, agents, employees,
officers, servants, designees, guest and invitees, activities (or inaction)
pursuant to the rights granted in this Agreement.
12. Restoration. In the event that Lightower shall, from time to time,
disturb any utility lines, fixtures, equipment, or other facilities, roads,
sidewalks, or trees or shrubs or other landscaping or surfaces in the
natural topography or any other matter whatsoever, Lightower shall, at
its sole cost and expense, reasonably restore and replace such places
and things so disturbed to and in not less than as good condition that
existed prior to each disturbance. In doing so, Lightower shall comply
with all applicable statutes, ordinances and regulations now existing or
hereinafter promulgated. All restorations shall be completed within 30
working days from the occurrence of the disturbance.
13. Permit Required. Prior to the commencement of any work pursuant to
this Agreement, Lightower shall apply to the Municipal Engineer for
a street opening permit in accordance with Article IV of the Code of
the Borough of Chatham. The Municipal Engineer's grant of the permit
shall not be unreasonably withheld.
§ A325-4 COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES FRANCHISE § A325-4
A323:847
14. Deposit. In connection with the application for street opening permit
and in addition to other permit application requirements, Lightower
shall be required to make a deposit with the Municipality for the
purpose of reimbursing the Municipality for the cost of any work
and/or materials furnished by the Municipality in connection with the
work authorized by the permit and to cover the cost of all necessary
inspections, replacements and repairs of said work in accordance with
to § 244-46 of the Borough Code of the Borough of Chatham.
15. Miscellaneous.
a. No Agency/Partnership. This Agreement neither makes nor
appoints Lightower as an agent of the Municipality, nor does it
create a partnership or joint venture between the parties. Neither
party shall act or represent itself as an agent of the other or purport
to bind or obligate the other in any manner.
b. Severability. If any provision of this Agreement is declared invalid
under applicable law, the affected provision will be considered
omitted or modified to conform to applicable law, and all other
provisions will remain in full force and effect.
c. No Waiver. No failure or delay on the part of any party in exercising
any right, power, or remedy under this Agreement will operate
as a waiver thereof, nor will any single or partial exercise of any
such right, power, or remedy preclude any other or further exercise
thereof or the exercise of any other right, power, or remedy
hereunder. The rights and remedies provided in this Agreement are
cumulative and are not exclusive of any other rights, powers, or
remedies existing at law, in equity or otherwise.
d. Execution. This Agreement may be executed in counterparts, each
of which will be deemed an original, but all of which will constitute
one and the same agreement. A signature affixed by a party to
a counterpart of this Agreement and delivered by electronic
transmission is valid, binding and enforceable against such party.
e. Integration. This Agreement sets forth the entire agreement
between the parties hereto, and there are no covenants or
agreements to be implied against either party.
f. Amendments. This Agreement will not be amended, or modified
except in writing signed by the parties.
g. Assignment. Lightower shall not assign or transfer any of its rights
under this Agreement without prior written consent from the
Municipality, which may not unreasonably withhold such consent.
This Agreement shall be binding upon and inure to the benefit of
the parties and their successors and assigns.
h. Governing Law. This Agreement shall be governed by and
construed in accordance with the laws of the State of New Jersey.
§ A325-4 CHATHAM CODE § A325-4
A323:848
i. Neutral Construction. In the event of any dispute concerning the
construction or interpretation of this Agreement, this Agreement,
shall be construed neutrally and without regard to events of
authorship or negotiation, each party having been represented by
independent counsel of its own choosing.
j. Official Copy. An official copy of this Agreement shall be on file in
the office of the Borough Clerk of the Borough of Chatham and shall
be available for public inspection upon request.
§ A325-4 COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES FRANCHISE § A325-4
A323:849

ARTICLE IV
Agreement with PEG Bandwidth NJ, LLC
[Added 2-12-2018 by Ord. No. 18-01]
§ A325-5. Authorization and execution of rights-of-way agreement.
The Borough of Chatham hereby approves and shall enter into a Rights-of-
Way Use Agreement with PEG Bandwidth NJ, LLC ("PEG") for the purpose
of owning, constructing, installing, operating and maintaining a
telecommunications system consisting solely of aerial telecommunications
fiber optic cable attached to existing utility poles at specific locations as
set forth herein. The Borough hereby grants consent to PEG for the
nonexclusive use of the public rights-of-way within the Borough for this
purpose. The Mayor and Borough Clerk of the Borough of Chatham are
authorized and directed to execute an agreement in substantially the
following form jointly with the proper representatives of PEG.
RIGHTS-OF-WAY USE AGREEMENT
THIS RIGHTS-OF-WAY USE AGREEMENT ("Agreement") is dated
December #, 2017 (the "Effective Date"), and entered into by and
between the Borough of Chatham ("Municipality"), a New Jersey
municipal corporation with an address of 54 Fairmount Avenue, Chatham,
New Jersey 07928 and PEG, a limited liability company organized and
existing under the laws of Delaware with a business address located at
107 St. Francis Street, Suite 1800, Mobile Alabama 36602.
WHEREAS, PEG was approved by the New Jersey Board of Public
Utilities to provide local exchange and interexchange telecommunications
services throughout the State of New Jersey by Order in Docket No.
TE12040317 on TM08040212 on August 15, 2012; and
WHEREAS, PEG intends to provide telecommunications services in
accordance with the Order and the rules and regulations of the Federal
Communications Commission and the New Jersey Board of Public
Utilities; and
WHEREAS, PEG proposes to place its telecommunication facilities
aerially on existing poles at specific locations in the Public Rights-of-Way,
as that term is defined hereinafter, within the Municipality for the purpose
of owning, constructing, installing, operating, repairing and maintaining a
Telecommunications System as hereinafter defined; and
WHEREAS, it is in the best interest of the Municipality and its citizenry
for the Municipality to grant consent to PEG to occupy said Public Rightsof-
Way within the Municipality for this purpose under the terms set forth
herein; and
WHEREAS, the consent granted herein to PEG is for the non-exclusive
use by PEG of the Public Rights-of-Way within the Municipality for the
purpose of owning, constructing, installing, operating and maintaining a
telecommunications system consisting solely of aerial telecommunications
fiber optic cable attached to existing utility poles at specific locations (the
"Telecommunications System").
§ A325-5 COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES FRANCHISE § A325-5
A323:851
NOW THEREFORE, in consideration of the mutual covenants and
obligations hereinafter set forth the Municipality and PEG hereby agree to
and with each other as follows:
1. Incorporation. The foregoing recitals, including definitions, are
hereby incorporated into this Agreement.
2. Definitions. The following terms shall have the meanings set forth
below unless the context requires otherwise.
a. "BPU." The New Jersey Board of Public Utilities.
b. "Public Utility." Shall carry the same meaning as set forth in N.J.S.A.
48:2-13.
c. "Public Rights-of-Way." The space in, upon, along, across, over, and
through any public land, road, street or highway of the Municipality,
including lands with Public Utility facilities as the same now or
hereafter may exist, that are under the jurisdiction of the Municipality.
This term shall not include state or federal rights-of-way, property
restricted by Green Acres regulation, property owned, developed and/
or occupied by the Municipality (e.g., municipal parks, municipal
administration buildings), or any property owned by any person or
agency other than the Municipality, except as provided by applicable
laws pursuant to an agreement between the Municipality and any such
property owner.
3. Grant of Consent. Subject to Paragraph 6 herein, the Municipality
hereby grants to PEG its municipal consent for the non-exclusive use of
the Public Rights-of-Way for the purpose of owning, constructing,
installing, operating and maintaining a Telecommunications System at
the specific locations identified on the map entitled "PEG bandwith SITE:
PANJY151M1, Chatham NJ, Morris County" ("Map") prepared by Golden
Field Services, Inc. dated June 6, 2017, which map is attached hereto
and made a part of this Agreement.
4. Public Purpose. It is deemed to be in the best interest of the
Municipality and its citizenry, including commercial and industrial
citizens, for the Municipality to grant consent to PEG to occupy said
Public Rights-of-Way under the terms set forth herein.
5. Scope of Agreement. Any and all rights granted to PEG under this
Agreement, which shall be exercised at PEG's sole cost and expense,
shall be subject to the prior and continuing right of the Municipality,
under applicable laws, to use any and all part of the Public Rights-of-Way
exclusively or concurrently with any other person or persons, and shall
be further subject to all deed, easements, dedications, conditions,
covenants, restrictions, encumbrances and claims of title of record which
may affect such Public Rights-of-Way. Nothing in this Agreement shall be
deemed to grant, convey, create or vest in PEG a real property interest in
the Public Rights-of-Way, including any fee, leasehold interest, easement,
or any other form of interest or ownership.
§ A325-5 CHATHAM CODE § A325-5
A323:852
The Municipality hereby authorizes and permits PEG to enter upon the
Public Rights-of-Way solely to own, construct, install, operate and
maintain the Telecommunications System at the locations identified on
the attached map to the extent PEG otherwise has the legal right to do
so.
6. Fees. In consideration of the rights and privileges granted to PEG,
PEG agrees to reimburse the Municipality $2,500 for its reasonable
attorney fees incurred in connection with the negotiation and
preparation of this Agreement and related Ordinance, as well as the
accompanying Resolution authorizing execution of this Agreement, prior
to the commencement of any work.
7. Compliance with Ordinance. This Agreement shall be codified in the
Borough Code of the Borough of Chatham. PEG shall comply with the
terms of this Ordinance as well as all other applicable statutes, ordinances
and regulations, now existing or hereinafter promulgated.
8. Duration of Consent. The non-exclusive municipal consent granted
herein shall expire 10 years from the Effective Date and shall
automatically renew for successive ten-year terms, up to 50 years, not to
exceed five consecutive ten-year terms unless either party gives written
notice of its intention not to renew before expiration of the then current
term.
9. Indemnification. PEG, its successors, assigns, subcontractors,
agents, servants, officers, employees, designees, guests and invitees,
hereby indemnify, defend and hold harmless the Municipality, its
successors and assigns, elected officials, officers, employees, servants,
contractors, designees and invitees from and against any and all
personal injury and property damage claims, demands, suits, actions at
law or equity or otherwise, judgments, arbitration determinations,
damages, liabilities, decrees of any person(s) or entities claiming to be or
being harmed as a result of PEG's actions under this Agreement and
costs in connection therewith. This indemnification shall specifically
include, but not be limited to, any and all costs, reasonable attorney's
fees, court costs and any other expense that may be incurred by the
Municipality in connection with any and all claims, demands, suits,
action at law or equity or otherwise and/or arbitration proceedings
which may arise in connection with PEG activities pursuant to the rights
granted in this Agreement.
10. Notices. All notices or other correspondence required or permitted
to be given in connection with this Agreement shall be in writing and
delivered personally, by electronic transmission, by overnight carrier
service or by registered or certified mail to the parties at the following
address, or other address as provided by the parties in writing:
If to
PEG: Eric Daniels
Sr. Vice President of Operations
107 St. Francis St., Suite 1800
§ A325-5 COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES FRANCHISE § A325-5
A323:853
Mobile AL 36602
With copy to: Uniti Fiber LLC
ATTN: Legal Department
107 St. Francis St., Suite 1800
Mobile AL 36602
If to Municipality: Stephen Williams, Borough Administrator, Borough
Hall
54 Fairmount Avenue, Chatham, New Jersey 07928
With copy to: James L. Lott, Jr., Esq.
Riker Danzig Scherer Hyland & Perretti LLP
1 Speedwell Avenue Morristown, New Jersey 07962
11. Liability Insurance. PEG shall, at all times, maintain a
comprehensive liability insurance policy with a single amount of at least
$1,000,000 covering liability for any death, personal injury, property
damage or other liability arising out the construction, installation,
operation or maintenance of the Telecommunications System
contemplated herein, and an excess liability policy (or "umbrella") in the
amount of $5,000,000. The insurance required by this Section 11 shall
be evidenced by Certificate(s) of Insurance naming the Municipality as
an additional insured. Each Certificate of Insurance shall require that a
thirty-day notice shall be given to the Municipality by registered mail,
return receipt requested, if any policy or individual coverage is altered
or cancelled. All such notices shall be provided in accordance with
Section 10 hereof.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, if in the commercially reasonable opinion
of the Municipality, the foregoing insurance coverage limits are
inadequate to protect the interest of the Municipality, PEG shall provide
insurance with such increased limits as the Municipality shall reasonably
request.
Prior to the commencement of any work pursuant to this Agreement,
PEG shall file with the Municipality for review and approval Certificates
of Insurance with endorsements evidencing the coverage provided by
said liability and excess liability policies.
The Municipality shall notify PEG within 15 days after the presentation
of any claim or demand to the Municipality, either by suit or otherwise,
made against the Municipality on account of any work performed by
PEG, its subcontractors, agents, employees, officers, servants, designees,
guest and invitees, activities (or inaction) pursuant to the rights granted
in this Agreement.
§ A325-5 CHATHAM CODE § A325-5
A323:854
12. Restoration. In the event that PEG shall, from time to time, disturb
any utility lines, fixtures, equipment, or other facilities, roads, sidewalks,
or trees or shrubs or other landscaping or surfaces in the natural
topography or any other matter whatsoever, PEG shall, at its sole cost
and expense, reasonably restore and replace such places and things so
disturbed to and in not less than as good condition that existed prior to
each disturbance. In doing so, PEG shall comply with all applicable
statutes, ordinances and regulations now existing or hereinafter
promulgated. All restorations shall be completed within 30 working days
from the occurrence of the disturbance.
13. Permit Required. Prior to the commencement of any work pursuant
to this Agreement, PEG shall apply to the Municipal Engineer for a street
opening permit in accordance with Article IV of the Code of the Borough
of Chatham. The Municipal Engineer's grant of the permit shall not be
unreasonably withheld.
14. Deposit. In connection with the application for street opening
permit and in addition to other permit application requirements, PEG
shall be required to make a deposit in the amount of $250 with the
Municipality for the purpose of reimbursing the Municipality for the cost
of any work and/or materials furnished by the Municipality in connection
with the work authorized by the permit and to cover the cost of all
necessary inspections, replacements and repairs of said work in
accordance with § 244-46 of the Borough Code of the Borough of
Chatham. In the event the initial deposit is less than sufficient to pay all
costs incurred by the Borough, PEG shall, upon written notification, pay
to the Borough an amount equal to the deficiency in accordance with
§ 244-46 of the Borough Code.
15. Miscellaneous.
a. No Agency/Partnership. This Agreement neither makes nor appoints
PEG as an agent of the Municipality, nor does it create a partnership or
joint venture between the parties. Neither party shall act or represent
itself as an agent of the other or purport to bind or obligate the other in
any manner.
b. Severability. If any provision of this Agreement is declared invalid
under applicable law, the affected provision will be considered omitted
or modified to conform with applicable law, and all other provisions will
remain in full force and effect.
c. No Waiver. No failure or delay on the part of any party in exercising
any right, power, or remedy under this Agreement will operate as a
waiver thereof, nor will any single or partial exercise of any such right,
power, or remedy preclude any other or further exercise thereof or the
exercise of any other right, power, or remedy hereunder. The rights and
remedies provided in this Agreement are cumulative and are not
exclusive of any other rights, powers, or remedies existing at law, in
equity or otherwise.
§ A325-5 COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES FRANCHISE § A325-5
A323:855
d. Execution. This Agreement may be executed in counterparts, each of
which will be deemed an original, but all of which will constitute one
and the same agreement. A signature affixed by a party to a
counterpart of this Agreement and delivered by electronic transmission
is valid, binding and enforceable against such party.
e. Integration. This Agreement sets forth the entire agreement between
the parties hereto, and there are no covenants or agreements to be
implied against either party.
f. Amendments. This Agreement will not be amended, or modified
except in writing signed by the parties.
g. Assignment. PEG shall not assign or transfer any of its rights under
this Agreement without prior written consent from the Municipality,
which may not unreasonably withhold such consent. This Agreement
shall be binding upon and inure to the benefit of the parties and their
successors and assigns.
h. Governing Law. This Agreement shall be governed by and construed
in accordance with the laws of the State of New Jersey.
i. Neutral Construction. In the event of any dispute concerning the
construction or interpretation of this Agreement, this Agreement shall
be construed neutrally and without regard to events of authorship or
negotiation, each party having been represented by independent
counsel of its own choosing.
j. Official Copy. An official copy of this Agreement shall be on file in the
office of the Borough Clerk of the Borough of Chatham and shall be
available for public inspection upon request.
§ A325-5 CHATHAM CODE § A325-5
A323:856
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
05-01 3-14-2005 Water rates amendment Ch. 267, Art. II
05-02 3-14-2005 Sewer service charge
amendment
Ch. 217, Art. II
05-03 3-14-2005 Appropriation NCM
05-04 3-28-2005 Affordable housing fees
amendment
Ch. 129, Art. I
05-05 3-28-2005 Appropriation NCM
05-06 4-25-2005 Bond NCM
05-07 4-25-2005 Bond NCM
05-08 4-25-2005 Cap ordinance NCM
05-09 4-25-2005 Adoption of Code by Mayor
and Council
Ch. 1, Art. I
05-10 4-25-2005 Appropriation NCM
05-11 4-25-2005 Appropriation NCM
05-12 4-25-2005 Public records and
documents
Ch. 129, Art. III
05-13 4-25-2005 Sidewalk Trust Fund Ch. 19, Art. I
05-14 4-25-2005 Public Health Nuisance
Code
Repealed by
Ord. No. BOH
13-02 and Ord.
No. 13-06
05-15 4-25-2005 Motorized vehicles Ch. 263
05-16 4-25-2005 Municipal Engineer Ch. 39, Art. VII
05-17 4-25-2005 Municipal Attorney Ch. 39, Art. VI
05-18 5-23-2005 Land development
regulations
Ch. 165
05-19 5-23-2005 Land development
regulations
Ch. 165
BOH 05-01 6-9-2005 Adoption of Code by Board
of Health
Ch. 274, Art. I
§ A325-5 COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES FRANCHISE § DL-1
A323:857
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
BOH 05-02 6-9-2005 Massage, bodywork and
somatic therapy
establishments
Ch. 289
BOH 05-03 6-9-2005 Public recreational bathing Ch. 303
BOH 05-04 6-9-2005 Tanning booth
establishments
Ch. 307
05-20 6-13-2005 Sewer systems amendment Ch. 217, Art. I
05-21 6-13-2005 Handbills amendment;
litter amendment
Ch. 173, Arts. I
and II
05-22 6-13-2005 Parks, playgrounds and
recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 195
05-23 6-13-2005 Yard waste Ch. 233, Art. II
05-24 6-13-2005 Storm sewer system Ch. 237
05-25 7-11-2005 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 48
05-26 9-12-2005 Bond NCM
05-27 9-26-2005 Joint Recreation Advisory
Committee
Ch. 195, Art. I
05-28 10-11-2005 Land development
regulations amendment
Ch. 165
BOH 05-05 10-13-2005 Board of Health fees
amendment
Ch. 280
05-29 10-24-2005 Animals and rabies control
amendment
Ch. 79
05-30 11-14-2005 Salaries and compensation See Ch. 56
06-01 Noise Defeated
06-02 2-13-2006 Nuisance prohibited –
noise; hours of
construction, power
equipment use
Ch. 208, Arts. II
and III
06-03 2-13-2006 Sewer service charge
amendment
Ch. 217, Art. II
06-04 3-27-2006 Adoption of Code by Mayor
and Council amendment
Ch. 1, Art. I
06-05 Capital ordinance NCM
06-06 3-27-2006 Land development
regulations amendment
Ch. 165
§ DL-1 CHATHAM CODE § DL-1
A323:858
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
06-07 General capital
improvement fund
NCM
06-08 Water capital improvement
fund
NCM
06-09 Bond NCM
06-10 Bond NCM
06-11 Water capital improvement
fund
NCM
06-12 5-8-2006 Noise amendment Ch. 184
06-13 5-22-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 139
06-14 5-22-2006 Sewer connection fees
amendment
Ch. 217, Art. III;
Ch. 267
06-15 7-10-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 139
06-16 7-10-2006 Sewers amendment Ch. 217
06-17 Salaries and compensation See Ch. 56
06-18 9-25-2006 Municipal Housing Liaison Ch. 39, Art. VIII
06-19 9-25-2006 Street vacation NCM
06-20 Capital ordinance NCM
06-21 Bond NCM
06-22 Bond NCM
06-23 Salaries and compensation See Ch. 56
06-24 11-13-2006 Streets and sidewalks
amendment (vacation of
municipal streets and
alleys)
Ch. 244
06-25 11-13-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 139
07-01 3-12-2007 Land development
regulations amendment
Ch. 165
07-02 Rescinded
07-03 Rescinded
07-04 Rescinded
07-05 Rescinded
07-06 Capital improvement NCM
07-07 General capital NCM
§ DL-1 COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES FRANCHISE § DL-1
A323:859
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
07-08 2-26-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 139
07-09 2-26-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 139
07-10 2-26-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 139
07-11 2-26-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 139
07-11 2-26-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 139
07-12 2-26-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 139
07-13 2-26-2007 Land development
regulations amendment
Ch. 165
07-14
07-15 3-26-2007 Animals and rabies control
amendment
Ch. 79
07-16 3-26-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 139
07-17 3-26-2007 Land development
regulations amendment
Ch. 165
07-18 7-9-2007 Land development
regulations amendment
Ch. 165
07-19 5-29-2007 Alarm systems amendment Ch. 71
07-20 5-29-2007 Uniform Fire Code
amendment
Ch. 136
07-21 Not adopted
07-22 Not adopted
07-23 6-11-2007 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 48
07-24 Capital ordinance NCM
07-25 Capital ordinance NCM
07-26 Not adopted
07-27 9-10-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 139
07-28 9-24-2007 Land development
amendment
Ch. 165
§ DL-1 CHATHAM CODE § DL-1
A323:860
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
07-29 11-12-2007 Animals and rabies control
amendment
Ch. 79
07-30 Salaries and compensation See Ch. 56
07-31 12-10-2007 Parks, playgrounds and
recreation areas: criminal
background checks for
volunteers and employees
in joint recreation
programs
Ch. 195, Art. III
08-01 2-11-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 139
08-02 2-25-2008 Appointed positions
registry
Ch. 3
08-03 Capital ordinance NCM
08-04 3-10-2008 Water rates amendment Ch. 267, Art. II
08-05 Improvements;
appropriation
NCM
08-06 3-24-2008 Improvements;
appropriation
NCM
08-07 Bond NCM
08-08 Bond NCM
08-09 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
08-10 4-14-2008 Food-handling
establishments amendment
Ch. 284
08-11 4-28-2008 Authorizing Mutual Aid
Agreement
NCM
08-12 4-28-2008 Authorizing 9-11 Memorial NCM
08-13 5-12-2008 Renaming Milton Pond to
Kelley's Pond
NCM
08-14 7-14-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 139
08-15 7-14-2008 Solid waste: recycling;
collection and disposal;
service charges
amendment; yard waste
amendment
Ch. 253, Arts. I
and II
08-16 8-11-2008 Land development
regulations amendment
Ch. 165
§ DL-1 COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES FRANCHISE § DL-1
A323:861
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
08-17 9-8-2008 Defined Contribution
Retirement Program
Ch. 8
08-18 9-8-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 139
08-19 9-22-2008 Appropriation NCM
08-20 9-22-2008 Water rates amendment Ch. 267, Art. II
BOH 08-01 12-11-2008 Fowl and birds Ch. 286
08-21 Appropriation NCM
08-22 11-24-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Repealed by
Ord. No. 09-14
08-23 Salaries and compensation See Ch. 56
08-24 11-24-2008 Affordable housing fees
amendment
Ch. 129, Art. I
09-01 Tabled
09-02 2-23-2009 Street vacation NCM
09-03 Appropriation NCM
09-04 Appropriation NCM
09-05 Appropriation NCM
09-06 Bond NCM
09-07 Bond NCM
09-08 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
09-09 Appropriation NCM
09-10 Bond NCM
09-11 Land development
regulations amendment
Not adopted
09-12 9-28-2009 Filming Ch. 131
09-13 9-14-2009 Street vacation NCM
09-14 9-14-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 139
09-15 9-14-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 139
09-16 9-28-2009 Fertilizer Ch. 130
09-17 Bond NCM
09-18 11-9-2009 Snow and ice removal
amendment
Repealed by
Ord. No. 13-16
09-19 Salaries and compensation See Ch. 56
§ DL-1 CHATHAM CODE § DL-1
A323:862
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
09-20 11-23-2009 Utility easement NCM
09-21 11-23-2009 Sewer systems amendment Ch. 217, Art. I
09-22 12-14-2009 Street vacation NCM
10-01 2-8-2010 Sewer service charge
amendment
Ch. 217, Art. II
10-02 2-8-2010 Water and sewer
connections amendment;
water rates amendment
Ch. 267, Arts. I
and II
10-03 Not adopted
10-04 4-26-2010 Sewer service charge
amendment
Ch. 217, Art. II
10-05 3-8-2010 Salaries and compensation See Ch. 56
10-06 3-8-2010 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 48
10-07 3-8-2010 Community Garden
Recreation Trust Fund
Ch. 19, Art. II
10-08 3-22-2010 Exceed municipal budget;
establish cap bank
NCM
10-09 4-26-2010 Land development
regulations amendment
Ch. 165
10-10 7-12-2010 Land development
regulations amendment
Ch. 165
10-11 3-22-2010 Taxicabs and liveries
amendment
Ch. 250
10-12 4-12-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 139
10-13 5-10-2010 Bond NCM
10-14 5-10-2010 Bond NCM
10-15 5-24-2010 Bond NCM
10-16 Bond NCM
10-17 Sign ordinance Tabled
10-18 6-28-2010 Fees: public records and
documents amendment
Ch. 129, Art. III
10-19 6-28-2010 Fiber technologies
networks rights-of-way use
agreement
Ch. A325
§ DL-1 COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES FRANCHISE § DL-1
A323:863
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
10-20 8-9-2010 Land development
regulations amendment;
peddlers, solicitors and
canvassers amendment
Chs. 165; 199
10-21 9-13-2010 Storm sewer system
amendment
Ch. 237
10-22 9-13-2010 Fees: public records and
documents amendment
Ch. 129, Art. III
10-23 9-13-2010 Water and sewer
connections amendment;
water emergencies
amendment
Ch. 267, Arts. I,
III
10-24 Bond NCM
10-25 9-13-2010 Uniform construction codes
amendment
Ch. 111
10-26 9-27-2010 Payroll account amendment Ch. 43
10-27 9-27-2010 Development fees Ch. 119
10-28 9-27-2010 Purchasing and claims
approval amendment
Ch. 52
10-29 10-12-2010 Parks, playgrounds and
recreation areas: general
provisions amendment
Ch. 195, Art. II
BOH 10-01 11-8-2010 Parks, playgrounds and
recreation areas: smoking
Ch. 195, Art. IV
10-30 11-22-2010 Land development
regulations amendment
Ch. 165
10-31 Salaries and compensation See Ch. 56
11-10 Bond NCM
11-02 3-14-2011 Property maintenance
amendment
Repealed by
Ord. No. 12-17
11-03 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
11-04 4-11-2011 Sewer systems
amendment; sewer service
charge amendment
Ch. 217, Arts. I
and II
11-05 4-11-2011 Parks, playgrounds and
recreation areas: criminal
background checks for
volunteers and employees
in joint recreation
programs amendment
Ch. 195, Art. III
§ DL-1 CHATHAM CODE § DL-1
A323:864
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
11-06 Bond NCM
11-07 4-25-2011 Land development
regulations amendment
Ch. 165
11-08 5-9-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 139
11-09 Capital ordinance NCM
11-10 6-13-2011 Towing Ch. 256
11-11 5-23-2011 Uniform construction codes Ch. 111
11-12 Bond NCM
11-13 Bond NCM
11-14 8-8-2011 Land development
regulations amendment
Ch. 165
11-15 Capital ordinance NCM
11-16 9-26-2011 Land development
regulations amendment
Ch. 165
11-17 9-26-2011 Snow and ice removal
amendment
Repealed by
Ord. No. 13-16
11-18 10-24-2011 Land development
regulations amendment
Ch. 165
11-19 Capital ordinance NCM
11-20 Capital ordinance NCM
11-21 Appropriation NCM
11-22 12-12-2011 Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 15
11-23 Salaries and compensation See Ch. 56
12-01 2-27-2012 Sale of property NCM
12-02 2-27-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 139
12-03 3-12-2012 Water rates amendment Ch. 267, Art. II
12-04 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
12-05 4-9-2012 Court; Municipal
Prosecutor repealer; Public
Defender repealer
Chs. 6; 39, Arts.
III, footnote only,
and V, footnote
only
12-06 Bond NCM
12-07 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES FRANCHISE § DL-1
A323:865
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
12-08 4-23-2012 Solid waste: construction
and demolition debris
Ch. 233, Art. III
12-09 Salaries and compensation See Ch. 56
12-10 6-11-2012 Purchasing and claims
approval amendment
Ch. 52
12-11 7-9-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 139
12-12 7-9-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 139
12-13 9-10-2012 Land development
regulations amendment
Ch. 165
12-14 Tabled
12-15 Salaries and compensation See Ch. 56
12-16 Salaries and compensation See Ch. 56
12-17 12-10-2012 Building safety and
habitability repealer; land
development regulations
amendment; property
maintenance
Chs. 94,
reference only;
165; 204
12-18 12-10-2012 Parks, playgrounds and
recreation areas: general
provisions amendment
Ch. 195, Art. II
13-01 1-28-2013 Appointed positions
registry amendment
Ch. 3
13-02 3-11-2013 Telecommunications rightsof-
way use agreement
amendment
Ch. A325
13-03 3-11-2013 Land development
regulations amendment
Ch. 165
13-04 3-11-2013 Land development
regulations amendment
Ch. 165
BOH 13-01 Fowl Tabled
BOH 13-02 3-14-2013 Public Health Nuisance
Code repealer
Ch. 208, Art. I,
footnote only
BOH 13-03 3-14-2013 Public health nuisances Ch. 291
BOH 13-04 3-14-2013 Food-handling
establishments amendment
Ch. 284
13-05 3-25-2013 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
§ DL-1 CHATHAM CODE § DL-1
A323:866
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
13-06 3-25-2013 Public Health Nuisance
Code repealer
Ch. 208, Art. I,
footnote only
13-07 3-25-2013 Bond NCM
13-08 3-25-2013 Bond NCM
13-09 3-25-2013 Bond NCM
13-10 Parking Tabled
13-11 5-28-2013 Street vacation NCM
13-12 6-10-2013 Affordable housing; land
development regulations
amendment
Chs. 69; 165
13-13 6-10-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 139
13-14 6-10-2013 Fire zones amendment Ch. 148
13-15 6-24-2013 Miscellaneous Borough
fees amendment
Ch. 129, Art. II
13-16 7-8-2013 Sidewalks; snow and ice
removal repealer; street
and sidewalk
encumbrances repealer;
streets and sidewalks
amendment
Chs. 221; 228,
reference only;
240, reference
only; 244
13-17 9-9-2013 Mutual aid Ch. 35
13-18 10-15-2013 Hazardous substances:
reimbursement for cleanup
costs
Ch. 157, Art. I
13-19 10-15-2013 Drainage easement NCM
13-20 11-11-2013 Court amendment Ch. 6
13-21 11-25-2013 Land development
regulations amendment
Ch. 165
13-22 11-25-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 139
13-23 12-9-2013 Salaries and compensation See Ch. 56
14-01 2-10-2014 Water rates amendment Ch. 267, Art. II
14-02 2-24-2014 Sale of property NCM
14-03 3-10-2014 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
14-04 4-28-2014 Bond NCM
14-05 4-28-2014 Bond NCM
14-06 5-27-2014 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES FRANCHISE § DL-1
A323:867
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
14-07 10-14-2014 Street vacation NCM
14-08 10-27-2014 Telecommunications rightsof-
way use agreements
amendment
Ch. A325
14-09 11-24-2014 Land development
regulations amendment
Ch. 165
14-10 11-24-2014 Bond NCM
14-11 11-24-2014 Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 15
14-12 11-24-2014 Salaries and compensation See Ch. 56
14-13 12-8-2014 Street acceptance NCM
15-01 2-23-2015 Lease agreement
amendment
NCM
15-02 2-23-2015 Adoption of Code by Mayor
and Council amendment;
vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 1, Art. I; Ch.
139
15-03 3-23-2015 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
15-04 4-13-2015 Land development
regulations amendment
Ch. 165
15-05 4-27-2015 Bond NCM
15-06 4-27-2015 Bond NCM
15-07 6-22-2015 Land development
regulations amendment
Ch. 165
15-08 6-22-2015 Land development
regulations amendment
Ch. 165
15-09 6-22-2015 Land development
regulations amendment
Ch. 165
15-10 9-14-2015 Bond NCM
15-11 Tabled
15-12 9-28-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 139
15-13 9-28-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 139
15-14 9-28-2015 Land development
regulations amendment
Ch. 165
16-01 2-22-2016 Street vacation NCM
16-02 4-25-2016 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 CHATHAM CODE § DL-1
A323:868
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
16-03 4-25-2016 Bond NCM
16-04 4-25-2016 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
16-05 5-23-2016 Appropriation NCM
16-06 8-8-2016 Land development
regulations amendment
Ch. 165
16-07 8-8-2016 Street vacation NCM
16-08 9-12-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 139
16-09 9-26-2016 Disclaim of interest in real
property
NCM
16-10 9-26-2016 Appropriation NCM
16-11 10-24-2016 Land development
regulations amendment
Ch. 165
16-12 10-24-2016 Affordable housing Ch. 69
16-13 10-11-2016 Bond NCM
16-14 10-24-2016 Madison-Chatham joint
meeting amendment
Ch. A321
16-15 11-14-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 139
16-16 11-28-2016 Salaries and compensation See Ch. 56
17-01 2-13-2017 Bond NCM
17-02 2-13-2017 Bond NCM
17-03 2-13-2017 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 75
17-04 4-24-2017 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
17-05 4-11-2017 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 204
17-06 6-12-2017 Administrative code;
Environmental Commission
amendment; officers and
employees repealer; Shade
Tree Commission
amendment
Ch. 2; Ch. 11;
Ch. 39,
reference only;
Ch. 63
17-07 6-12-2017 Appointed positions
registry amendment
Ch. 3
17-08 8-14-2017 Land development
regulations amendment
Ch. 165
§ DL-1 COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES FRANCHISE § DL-1
A323:869
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
17-09 8-14-2017 Land development
regulations amendment; oil
and hazardous substance
pipelines
Ch. 165; Ch. 189
17-10 11-27-2017 Salaries and compensation See Ch. 56
17-11 11-27-2017 Bond NCM
17-12 12-11-2017 Land development
regulations amendment
Ch. 165
18-01 2-12-2018 Telecommunications
Rights-Of-Way Use
Agreements Amendment
Ch. A325
18-02 3-12-2018 Bond NCM
18-03 3-12-2018 Bond NCM
18-04 3-12-2018 Length of Service Awards
Program Amendment
Ch. 33
18-05 4-23-2018 Exceed Budget; Cap Bank NCM
18-06 5-29-2018 Land Development
Regulations Amendment;
Tree Protection and
Preservation
Ch. 165; Ch. 257
18-07 5-29-2018 Street Vacation NCM
18-08 6-11-2018 Lease Agreement NCM
18-09 7-9-2018 Peddlers, Solicitors and
Canvassers Amendment
Ch. 199
18-10 9-11-2018 Animals and Rabies Control
Amendment
Ch. 79
18-11 11-26-2018 Salaries NCM
18-12 12-10-2018 Bond NCM
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
19-01 2-11-2019 Land
Development
Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 165 30
19-02 2-11-2019 Salaries NCM 30
19-03 2-25-2019 Police
Department
Amendment
Ch. 48 30
§ DL-1 CHATHAM CODE § DL-1
A323:870
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
19-04 2-25-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 139 30
19-05 2-25-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 139 30
19-06 3-11-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 139 30
19-07 4-22-2019 Exceed
Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM 30
19-08 4-22-2019 Appropriation NCM 30
19-09 4-22-2019 Bond NCM 30
19-10 4-22-2019 Redevelopment
Plan for Post
Office Plaza
Redevelopment
Area
NCM 30
19-11 6-10-2019 Redevelopment
Plan for River
Road North
Redevelopment
Area
NCM 30
19-12 7-8-2019 Alcoholic
Beverages
Amendment
Ch. 75 30
19-13 9-23-2019 Salaries NCM 30
19-14 10-15-2019 Single-Use
Bags at Retail
Establishments
Ch. 224 30
19-15 11-11-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 139 30
19-16 11-25-2019 Salaries NCM 30
19-17 12-19-2019 Bond NCM 30
19-18 12-19-2019 Appropriation NCM 30
Res. No.
20-66
1-6-2020 Towing
Amendment
Ch. 256 30
§ DL-1 COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES FRANCHISE § DL-1
A323:871