Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Revision and codification of ordinances — See
N.J.S.A. 40:49-4.
1:1

ARTICLE I
Definitions and Word Usage
[Adopted as Ch. 1, Secs. 1-2 and 1-3, of the former Revised
Ordinances]
§ 1-1. Use of words and phrases.
§ 1-2. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly provided or unless there is something in the
subject or context repugnant to such construction or unless inconsistent
with the manifest intent of the Council, the following words and phrases
when used in the Code of the Township of Cedar Grove, or in any other
ordinances of the Township, shall have the meanings herein given:
AND; OR — "And" may be construed as meaning "or," and "or" as "and," if
the sense requires it.
CODE — The Code of the Township of Cedar Grove.
COUNCIL or MUNICIPAL COUNCIL or TOWNSHIP COUNCIL — The
governing body of the Township of Cedar Grove.
COUNTY — The County of Essex.
GOVERNING BODY — The Municipal or Township Council of the Township
of Cedar Grove, duly elected as provided by law, or such other duly
authorized legislative body as shall be charged with governing the
Township.
MONTH — A calendar month.
MUNICIPAL COUNCIL — See "Council."
A. In the construction of the Code of the Township of Cedar Grove and of
all other ordinances of the Township, words and phrases shall be read
and construed with their context and shall, unless inconsistent with the
manifest intent of the Municipal Council or unless another or different
meaning is expressly indicated, be given their generally accepted
meaning according to the approved usage of the language. Technical
words and phrases and words and phrases having a special or accepted
meaning in the law shall be construed in accordance with such
technical or special and accepted meaning.
B. Gender. Words importing the masculine gender shall apply to females
as well as to males and to firms, associations, bodies corporate and
other artificial persons.
C. Number. Words used in the singular number include the plural, and
words used in the plural include the singular number.
D. "Officer" or "official" or the title of an officer or official or of an official
body shall be construed as if the words "of the Township of Cedar
Grove" followed it.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:3
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Cedar Grove in the County of Essex.
MUNICIPAL MANAGER or TOWNSHIP MANAGER — The person appointed
by the Municipal Council of the Township of Cedar Grove to hold the office
of Municipal or Township Manager.
OATH — Includes "affirmation"; and "swear" and "sworn" include "affirm"
and "affirmed."
OCCUPANT — See "tenant."
OR — See "and."
OWNER — Includes sole owner and any part owner, joint owner, tenant in
common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the
whole or of a part of a building or land, and personal property.
PERSON — Includes corporations, companies, societies, firms,
partnerships, associations, organizations and any other group or entity
acting as a unit, as well as an individual.
PERSONAL PROPERTY — Includes goods and chattels, rights and credits,
moneys and effects, evidences of debt, choses in action and all written
instruments by which any right to, interest in or lien or encumbrance
upon property or any debt or financial obligation is created, acknowledged,
evidenced, transferred, discharged or defeated, in whole or in part, and
everything, except real property as herein defined, which may be the
subject of ownership.
PRECEDING; FOLLOWING — Next before and next after, respectively.
PROPERTY — Includes real and personal property.
PUBLIC GROUND, PUBLIC SQUARE or PUBLIC PLACE — Severally, any
and every public ground, public square, public park or other public place
within the Township which is within the jurisdiction and control of the
Township and which is or may be in general use by all citizens and in which
all have an equal right of passage and repassage at will.
REAL PROPERTY — Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments, all rights
thereto and interests therein.
SIDEWALK — Any portion of a street or highway between the curbline or
the lateral line of a shoulder or, if none, the lateral line of the roadway, and
the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians.
STATE — The State of New Jersey.
STREET — Includes highways, roads, avenues, boulevards, courts, public
lanes, alleys, sidewalks, foot paths and all other public highways for
vehicular or pedestrian travel.
TENANT or OCCUPANT — Applied to a building or land, shall include any
person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, whether
alone or with others.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Cedar Grove in the County of Essex.
TOWNSHIP COUNCIL — See "Council."
§ 1-2 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 1-2
1:4
TOWNSHIP MANAGER — See "Municipal Manager."
WEEK — Seven days.
WRITING — Except as to signatures, "writing" and "written" include
printing and any other mode of representing words, letters and figures.
YEAR — A calendar year.
§ 1-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:5

ARTICLE II
Penalties
[Adopted by 12-17-1962, Ch. 1, Sec. 1-10, of the former Revised
Ordinances]
§ 1-3. Violations and penalties.
A. Whenever no specific penalty is provided in the Code or in any other
ordinance of the Township for the punishment of an act which is
prohibited or which is declared to be unlawful or an offense, or for the
nonperformance of an act which is required to be done, the violation of
any such provision shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000 or
by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both; provided,
however, that when the maximum penalty fixed by an applicable state
statute is less than any penalty fixed in the Code, then the limitations of
such state statute shall be applicable. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues. [Amended 7-30-1984 by Ord. No. 84-222; 10-23-2006
by Ord. No. 06-656]
B. The maximum penalty specified in Subsection A of this section shall not
be deemed to be in lieu of any provision in the Code or in any other
ordinance of the Township for revocation or suspension of any license
or permit issued thereunder.
§ 1-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-3
1:7

ARTICLE III
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 77-64]
§ 1-4. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Township of Cedar Grove
of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Council as revised,
codified and consolidated into chapters and sections by General Code
Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters 1 through 268, are hereby
approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Township of
Cedar Grove," hereinafter known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-5. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1-6. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-7. Inclusion of ordinance in Code.
This ordinance shall, upon adoption, be included in the Code as Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article III, Adoption of Code.
§ 1-8. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Township Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the
public until final action is taken on this ordinance, and, if this ordinance
shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the Township
of Cedar Grove by impressing thereon the Seal of the Township, as provided
by law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk
of the Township, to be made available to persons desiring to examine the
same during all times while the said Code is in effect.
§ 1-9. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Township of Cedar Grove, pursuant to law, shall cause to
be published, in the manner required, a copy of this adopting ordinance
in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township. Sufficient copies
of the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection
by the public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
publication of this adopting ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of
the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered
to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-10
1:9
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the Township
Council to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the Code of the Township of Cedar
Grove shall be understood and intended to include such additions and
amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the
Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code, as
amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent to
the date given in § 1-17A and prior to the effective date of this ordinance
given in § 1-6 are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon
being printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such legislation
shall be temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are
included.
§ 1-12. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk, or someone authorized and directed by
him, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the Code
required to be filed in his office for the use of the public. All changes in said
Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective date of this
codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the Code shall,
when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until such changes
or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code book, at which
time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-13. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code book containing the Code may be purchased from the
Clerk upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the Council,
which may also arrange, by resolution, for procedures for the periodic
supplementation thereof.
§ 1-14. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
[Amended 7-30-1984 by Ord. No. 84-222; 10-23-2006 by L.L. No.
06-656]
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code, or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Township of
Cedar Grove to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of
this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not more than
$2,000 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both, in the discretion
of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-10 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 1-15
1:10
§ 1-15. Severability.
§ 1-16. Repeal of ordinances.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature,
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in the Code, are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
adopting ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-17. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-16 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Severability of Code provisions. Each section of the Code and every part
of each section is an independent section or part of a section, and the
holding of any section or a part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or
ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or
constitutionality of any other sections or parts thereof.
B. Severability of ordinance provisions. Each section of this ordinance is
an independent section, and the holding of any section or part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be
deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or
parts thereof.
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to Ordinance No. 77-51, adopted
June 20, 1977.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending,
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provisions.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place, or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-17
1:11
§ 1-18. Statutory definitions to apply.
Any word or terms used in the Code which are not defined within the Code
but are defined in the New Jersey statutes shall be deemed to have the
meanings as set forth in said statutes.
§ 1-19. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
§ 1-20. (Reserved)2
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
the Township's indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. Any ordinance pertaining to the salaries or compensation of Township
officers and employees.
L. Any ordinance granting a franchise for a cable antenna television
system, specifically Ordinance No. 74-7 adopted 5-6-1974 and all
amendments thereto.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the Council that all such changes be
adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed had been
previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the following changes, amendments or revisions are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance.
Chapter and section number references are to the ordinances as they
have been renumbered and appear in the Code.1
1. Editor's Note: Pursuant to § 1-19B, the following Code sections were added or amended. A
complete description of these revisions is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§§ 3-1A, 3-15, 14-3, 14-4, 14-5, 14-6, 14-9, 14-11, 14-12, 38-23, 42-1A, 52-4, 52-5, 52-7D,
52-10, 52-11, 52-12, 52-13, 52-14, 52-15A, 52-18A(2), 52-19, 52-23A, 52-23B, 52-25,
52-26A, 52-26B, 52-26D, 52-28B, 52-29A, 52-29E, 52-31, 52-33B, 52-34B, 52-34C, 52-35A,
52-35B, 52-35C, 52-35D, 52-38, 52-39A, 52-39C, 52-42, 52-44, 52-50, 52-56I, 52-57A,
83-13, 86-7, 86-17, 100-4, 100-5, 100-6, 100-8, 153-8, 188-9, 188-10, 188-11, 188-12,
188-13, 188-14, 188-15, 190-1, 190-2, 190-7, 190-14, 190-18, 213-1, 213-2, 213-9, 217-15,
221-11, 226-9, 230-35C, 239-2, 239-3, 239-4, 239-8A, 239-9, 254-7.
2. Editor's Note: Former Section 1-20, Delinquent taxes to be paid prior to permit or license
issuance, as amended 5-6-1991 by Ord. No. 91-383, was repealed by Ord. No. 93-433.
§ 1-17 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 1-20
1:12
Chapter 3
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Assessments — See Ch. 6.
Claims — See Ch. 10.
Court — See Ch. 14.
Defense Council — See Ch. 17.
Fire Department — See Ch. 23.
Advisory Health Council — See Ch. 31.
Heritage Advisory Committee — See Ch. 33.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 38.
Length of Service Awards Program — See Ch.
39.
Public Library Board — See Ch. 40.
Local Assistance Board — See Ch. 42.
Environmental Commission — See Ch. 47.
Personnel — See Ch. 52.
Police Department — See Ch. 55.
Political activities on public property — See
Ch. 56, Art. I.
Advisory Recreation Board — See Ch. 59.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 61.
Shade Tree Committee — See Ch. 67.
Fees for public records — See Ch. 133.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Administrative organization generally — See
N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 et seq.
Council-Manager Plan B — See N.J.S.A.
40:69A-99 et seq. and 40:69A-208.2.
Appointment of Manager and Clerk — See
N.J.S.A. 40:69A-89.
Manager generally — See N.J.S.A. 40:69A-92
et seq.
Appointment of Attorney — See N.J.S.A.
40:69A-89.
Appointment of Constables — See N.J.S.A.
40A:9-120.
Appointment of all other boards, departments
and officials — See N.J.S.A. 40:69A-89 and
40:69A-90.
§ 1-20 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 1-20
3:13

ARTICLE I
General Organization
§ 3-1. Offices, departments, boards and bodies. [Amended
10-7-1963]
The Township government under Council-Manager Plan B of the Optional
Municipal Charter Law, P.L. 1950, c. 210, as amended (N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 et
seq.), shall, in addition to the Municipal Council, consist of the following
offices, departments, boards and bodies:
A. Offices. [Amended 1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 77-64]
(1) Office of Township Manager, as provided for in Article II of this
chapter.
(2) Office of Township Clerk, as provided for in Article III of this
chapter.
(3) Office of Township Attorney, as provided for in Article IV of this
chapter.
(4) Office of Township Prosecutor, as provided for in Article V of this
chapter.
(5) Office of Municipal Disaster Control Director, as provided for in
Article VII of this chapter.
(6) Office of Municipal Judge, as provided for in Chapter 14, Court.
B. Departments.
(1) Department of Assessments, as provided for in Article VIII of this
chapter.
(2) Department of Building Safety,3 as provided for in Article IX of this
chapter.
(3) Department of Finance, as provided for in Article X of this chapter.
(4) Department of Health, as provided for in Article XI of this chapter.
(5) Department of Public Works, as provided for in Article XII of this
chapter.
(6) Department of Recreation, as provided for in Article XIII of this
chapter.
(7) Department of Revenue, as provided for in Article XIV of this
chapter.
(8) Department of Police, as provided for in Chapter 55, Police
Department.
3. Editor's Note: Now Department of Community Development.
§ 3-1 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 3-1
3:15
(9) Department of Fire, as provided for in Chapter 23, Fire
Department.
C. Boards and bodies.
(1) Planning Board, as provided for in Chapter 38, Land Use
Procedures.
(2) Zoning Board of Adjustment, as provided for in Chapter 38, Land
Use Procedures.
(3) Board of Assessments for Local Improvements, as provided for in
Chapter 6, Assessments, Board of.
(4) Local Assistance Board, as provided for in Chapter 42, Local
Assistance Board.
(5) Public Library Board, as provided for in Chapter 40, Library Board,
Public.
(6) Advisory Health Council, as provided for in Chapter 31, Health
Council, Advisory.
(7) Advisory Board of Recreation, as provided for in Chapter 59,
Recreation Board, Advisory.
(8) Advisory Shade Tree Committee, as provided for in Chapter 67,
Shade Tree Committee.
(9) Local Defense Council, as provided for in Chapter 17, Defense
Council.
§ 3-1 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 3-1
3:16
ARTICLE II
Township Manager
§ 3-2. Appointment. [Amended 4-7-1958]
The Township Manager shall be appointed by a majority vote of the whole
Council.
§ 3-3. Term; procedure for removal. [Added 4-7-1958]
The Township Manager shall hold office for an indefinite term and may be
removed by a majority vote of the Council in accordance with the following
procedure:
§ 3-4. Suspension pending final resolution of removal. [Added
4-7-1958]
In and by the preliminary resolution described in § 3-3A, the Council may
suspend the Township Manager from duty, but shall in any case cause to be
paid him forthwith any unpaid balance of his salary and his salary for the
next three months following the adoption of the preliminary resolution.
§ 3-5. Powers and duties. [Amended 4-7-1958]
The Township Manager shall be vested with and possess all the powers and
perform all the duties prescribed in the Optional Municipal Charter Law,4
and by ordinance and resolution of the Council not inconsistent with said
Optional Municipal Charter Law.
A. At least 30 days prior to the adoption of a final resolution of removal of
the Township Manager, the Council shall by majority vote of its
members adopt a preliminary resolution stating the reasons for his
removal.
B. The Township Manager may reply, in writing, to the reasons stated in
said preliminary resolution and may request a public hearing before the
Council.
C. The public hearing requested by the Township Manager shall be held
before the Council not earlier than 20 days nor later than 30 days after
the filing of said request.
D. After such public hearing, if so requested, and after full consideration,
the Council by majority vote of its members may adopt a final resolution
of removal.
4. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 et seq.
§ 3-2 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 3-6
3:17
§ 3-6. Appointment and promotion of officers and employees.
[Amended 9-3-1963]
All employees, officers and department heads of the Township shall be
appointed and promoted by the Township Manager, except where the power
to appoint rests with the Township Council or other Township board or
bodies as provided for in Chapter 52, Personnel, or by the Optional
Municipal Charter Law, general law or ordinance.
§ 3-7. Supervision and control of operations.
§ 3-8. Designation of replacement when absent or disabled.
The Township Manager may designate a qualified administrative officer
of the Township to perform his duties during his temporary absence or
disability. In the event of his failure to make such designation, the Council
may, by resolution, appoint an officer of the Township to perform the duties
of the Manager during such absence or disability until he shall return or his
disability shall cease.
A. All employees, officers and department heads appointed by the
Township Manager shall be subject to the supervision and control of the
said Manager and shall comply with his instructions and directions as to
the organization of their work and the completion of their assigned
duties. Complete authority for the method, manner and time of
performing Township work is vested in the Township Manager, to the
end that the maximum administrative control provided for in the
Optional Municipal Charter Law5 shall be vested in the Township
Manager.
B. The Township Manager may designate a qualified member of the
department to act in the absence or disability of the head of such
department.
5. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 et seq.
§ 3-6 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 3-8
3:18
ARTICLE III
Township Clerk
§ 3-9. Appointment; powers and duties.
§ 3-9.1. Deputy Municipal Clerk. [Added 10-16-1978 by Ord. No.
630-5]
The Deputy Municipal Clerk, to be known as the Deputy Township Clerk,
is to be appointed by a majority of the Township Council for a term of one
year, commencing January 1 of the year of his appointment. During the
absence or periods of disability of the Township Clerk, the Deputy Township
Clerk shall have all the power of the Township Clerk and shall perform the
functions and duties of such office.
§ 3-10. Custodian of Township Seal.7
The Township Clerk shall have custody of and safely keep the Seal of
the Township. The Township Clerk shall cause the Seal to be affixed to
instruments, documents and writings when authorized by any ordinance or
resolution of the Council or when necessary to exemplify any document or
record in his office or to certify any action or paper which, from the records
in his office, shall appear to have been a public action of the Township or
a public document. He shall, when authorized by resolution of the Council,
cause the Seal to be affixed to proper documents to which the Township is
a party and shall attest the signature of the Mayor or other proper officials
thereon. He shall not affix the Seal or cause or permit it to be affixed to any
instrument or writing or other paper except as hereinabove provided in this
section, unless required by the Optional Municipal Charter Law8 or general
law or other ordinance of the Township.
A. There shall be a Municipal Clerk, to be known as the "Township Clerk,"
appointed by majority vote of the whole Council for a term of one year
commencing on January 1 of the year of his appointment.
B. The Township Clerk shall have all the powers and perform all the duties
vested in or required of the office of the Township Clerk by the Optional
Municipal Charter Law,6 general law or ordinances of the Township and
shall perform such other duties as the Council may from time to time by
ordinance or resolution require.
6. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 et seq.
7. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 64, Seal, Township.
8. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 et seq.
§ 3-9 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 3-10
3:19

ARTICLE IV
Township Attorney
[Amended 10-7-1963; 2-3-1964]
§ 3-11. Appointment; term; qualifications; compensation.
§ 3-12. Duties.
The duties of the Township Attorney shall be such as are prescribed by the
Optional Municipal Charter Law,9 applicable general law and ordinance and
shall include attendance at public meetings of the Council and at such staff
meetings as required. In addition he shall render, when requested, legal
opinions to the governing body of the Township, the Township Manager,
department heads and all boards in the administration of municipal affairs.
A. There shall be a Township Attorney appointed by the Council for the
term of one year commencing on January 1 of the year of his
appointment and continuing until his successor is appointed. The
Township Attorney need not be a resident of the Township, but he shall
be an attorney-at-law of New Jersey.
B. The Attorney shall receive such retainer, compensation and fees as shall
be deemed reasonable by the Council.
9. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 et seq.
§ 3-11 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 3-12
3:21

ARTICLE V
Township Prosecutor
[Added 2-3-1964]
§ 3-13. Appointment; term; qualifications; compensation.
§ 3-14. Duties.
The duties of the Township Prosecutor shall include attendance at all
hearings in the Municipal Court of the Township, at which hearings the said
Township Prosecutor shall serve on behalf of the Township as prosecutor
and shall represent the Township in any matter within the jurisdiction of
said Municipal Court.
A. There shall be a Township Prosecutor appointed for a term of one year
commencing on January 1 of the year of his appointment and continuing
until his successor is appointed. The Township Prosecutor need not be a
resident of the Township, but shall be an attorney-at-law of New Jersey.
B. The Township Prosecutor shall receive such retainer, compensation and
fee as shall be deemed reasonable by the Council.
§ 3-13 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 3-14
3:23

ARTICLE VI
Township Constables
[Added 11-1-1971 by Ord. No. 71-13]
§ 3-15. Appointment; eligibility. [Added 1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 77-64]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-120, the Township Council may appoint not fewer
than two nor more than 50 Constables. In order to be eligible for such an
appointment, a person must have been a resident and qualified voter of the
Township for at least three years prior to the appointment.
§ 3-16. Term of office.
The term of office for said Constable shall be for one year initially, and, upon
reappointment, the term shall be for three years.
§ 3-17. Annual charge.
There shall be an annual charge of $50 for all appointees for said position
of Constable due on the initial appointment and on each subsequent
anniversary date.
§ 3-18. Date charges are due.
The term of office referred to above shall not affect any present Constable
who has been duly appointed; however, the license fee of $50 shall be due
and payable for all persons presently holding the position of Constable. The
fee shall be payable commencing January 1, 1972.
§ 3-15 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 3-18
3:25

ARTICLE VII
Municipal Disaster Control Director
[Added 10-7-1963]
§ 3-19. Office created; appointment of Director and Deputy Director.
A. The office of Municipal Disaster Control Director is hereby created.
B. The Director shall be a resident of the Township. He shall be appointed
by and serve at the pleasure of the Township Manager.
C. The Director shall appoint a Deputy Municipal Disaster Control
Director, with the approval of the Township Manager. Wherever
possible, the Deputy shall be appointed from among the salaried
officers or employees of the Township.
§ 3-19 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 3-19
3:27

ARTICLE VIII
Department of Assessments
[Amended 10-7-1963]
§ 3-20. Department established; powers and duties of Director.
A. There shall be a Department of Assessments, the head of which shall be
known as the "Director of the Department of Assessments." The
Director shall also occupy the position of Township Assessor of Taxes.
He shall be appointed by the Township Manager and shall be subject to
his jurisdiction and control.
B. The Director of the Department of Assessments shall perform and
exercise all the powers, duties and functions now or hereafter vested in
or conferred upon the Township Assessor of Taxes by the Optional
Municipal Charter Law,10 applicable general law or other ordinances of
the Township.
10.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 et seq.
§ 3-20 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 3-20
3:29

ARTICLE IX
Department of Community Development
[Amended 10-7-1963; 3-5-1990 by Ord. No. 90-358]
§ 3-21. Organization of Department; powers and duties.
There shall be a Department of Community Development, the head of
which shall be known as the "Director of the Department of Community
Development." Under the direction and supervision of the Director, the
Department shall:
§ 3-21.1. Construction Agency.
Within the Department, there shall be the Cedar Grove Construction
Agency, the head of which shall be the Construction Official, who shall serve
as the chief administrator of the enforcing agency. Under the supervision
and direction of the Director of Community Development, the Construction
Official shall:
A. Administer and enforce Chapter 268, Zoning and other codes of the
Township of Cedar Grove.
B. Review all applications for consideration by the Zoning and Planning
Boards and make recommendations to such Boards.
C. (Reserved)11
D. (Reserved)12
E. Study the operation and effect of land use controls and their
administration within the municipality and report thereon to the
Township Manager.
F. Advise and assist the Township Manager and Township Council in
regard to the physical planning and public improvement aspects of any
matters related to the development of the municipality.
G. Oversee site plan and subdivision construction projects to ensure
compliance with municipal and other codes and appropriate municipal
approvals.
A. Administer the State Uniform Construction Code in accordance with
Chapter 119 of the Code of the Township of Cedar Grove and applicable
general law.
B. Coordinate the activities of the Building Subcode Official, Plumbing
Subcode Official, Electrical Subcode Official, Fire Protection Subcode
11.Editor's Note: Former § 3-21C, regarding preparation of plans, etc., for implementing the
Comprehensive Plan, was repealed 10-16-2000 by Ord. No. 00-543. See now § 3-29.
12.Editor's Note: Former § 3-21C, regarding provision of staff assistance to the Planning
Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment, was repealed 10-16-2000 by Ord. No. 00-543. See
now § 3-29.
§ 3-21 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 3-21.1
3:31
§ 3-21.2. Director of Community Development; appointment.
The Director of the Department of Community Development shall also
occupy the office of Township Zoning Officer and the Administrative Officer
under the Municipal Land Use Law.13 He shall be appointed by the Township
Manager and shall be subject to his jurisdiction and control.
§ 3-21.3. Powers and duties of Director.
The Director of Community Development shall perform and exercise all
the powers, duties and functions now or hereinafter vested in or conferred
upon the Zoning Officer and Administrative Officer by statute or ordinance,
together with any other duties established by ordinance or the Township
Manager.
Official and other subcode officials for such other subcodes as the
Commissioner of the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs
shall hereafter adopt as part of the State Uniform Construction Code.
C. Administer and supervise a central permit office in accordance with the
requirements of the Uniform Construction Code to receive applications
for construction permits and plan review, issue construction permits
and certificates of occupancy, collect fees, penalties, fines and issue
notices and orders.
D. Maintain a central file system by block and lot for each property in the
municipality for which a permit has been issued or requested or for
which an action has been taken by the municipal enforcing agency.
E. Supervise the maintenance and repair of such municipally owned
buildings and properties as may be assigned to him from time to time by
the Township Manager and supervise the custodial and janitorial
services therefor.
13.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 3-21.1 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 3-21.3
3:32
ARTICLE X
Department of Finance
[Amended 10-7-1963; 12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 89-352; 3-5-1990 by
Ord. No. 90-358]
§ 3-22. Organization of Department.
There shall be a Department of Finance, the head of which shall be known
as the "Director of the Department of Finance." The Department, under the
direction and supervision of the Director, shall:
A. Develop, maintain and enforce a uniform system of accounts, including
forms, standards and procedures for all municipal departments and
offices.
B. Maintain and operate the municipality's central bookkeeping and
accounting records according to sound accounting principles and in
accordance with the requirements of the Director of the State Division
of Local Government Services.
C. Audit all receipts and disbursements of the municipal government and
each of its departments and offices, preaudit all bills, claims and
demands against the municipality, including payrolls, and require each
department head to certify that materials, supplies or equipment have
been received and accepted as specified and that services have been
duly rendered.
D. Control all expenditures to assure that budget appropriations are not
exceeded, and maintain such books and records as may be required for
the proper exercise of such budgetary control, including an
encumbrance system of budget operation.
E. Install, operate and maintain a central payroll system and all social
security, pensions and insurance records for personnel of all the
departments and offices.
F. Operate and maintain the central computerized financial management
system for appropriation and payroll data, cash receipts and
disbursements, general ledger, purchasing systems, cash management
and utility billings.
G. Make disbursements of municipal funds upon warrant of the controller
by an individual warrant check for each bill, claim, wage and salary
payment.
H. Have custody of all investments and invested funds of the municipality
or in its possession in a fiduciary capacity, except as otherwise provided
by law, and keep such funds and municipal moneys not required for
current operations safely invested or deposited in interest bearing
accounts as may be approved by the Director and authorized by the
governing body by resolution.
§ 3-22 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 3-22
3:33
§ 3-22.1. Director of Finance; appointment.
The Director of the Department of Finance shall be the Chief Financial
Officer of the Township of Cedar Grove. The Director shall also occupy the
office of Township Treasurer and Township Controller. The Director shall be
appointed by the Township Manager and shall be subject to his jurisdiction
and control.
§ 3-22.2. Tax Collector; appointment.
Within the Department of Finance, there shall be a Township Tax Collector
who shall be appointed by the Township Manager in accordance with
applicable general law and shall be subject to his jurisdiction and control.
Nothing herein shall prohibit the appointment of the Director of the
Department of Finance to the position of Township Tax Collector.
§ 3-23. Powers and duties of Director.
The Director shall have and perform all the powers, duties and functions
now or hereinafter vested in or conferred upon the Township Treasurer,
Township Controller and Chief Financial Officer by the Optional Municipal
Charter Law,14 applicable general law and other ordinances of the
Township.
§ 3-23.1. Powers and duties of Tax Collector.
Under the supervision of the Director of Finance, the Township Tax
Collector shall perform the functions of a collector of taxes under general
law including, but without limitation thereto, the following:
I. Have the safekeeping of all bonds and notes of the municipality and the
receipt and delivery of municipal bonds and notes for transfer,
registration or exchange.
J. Assist in the review and analysis of budget requests from the various
municipal departments and offices and prepare the budget document in
accordance with the requirements of the Director of the State Division
of Local Government Services.
A. Perform the preparation and mailing of tax bills, enforcement of tax
collections by tax sales and otherwise, and the maintenance of tax
accounting records in such manner as may be prescribed or approved
pursuant to general law.
B. Receive and collect all current and delinquent real and personal
property taxes, and charge and receive penalties and interest pursuant
to law.
C. Make or cause to be made and certify searches for tax and other liens
on real property as may be authorized by law, and charge and collect for
14.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 et seq.
§ 3-22 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 3-23.1
3:34
the use of the municipality the fee required pursuant to law for any
such search. The governing body may appoint or designate one of the
municipal employees within the Department as official tax searcher to
perform these functions without additional compensation.
D. Bill, receive and collect water and sewer accounts as determined from
water meter readings or flat rate pursuant to ordinance.
E. Receive funds entrusted to it or under the control of any municipal
department or office, and deposit all funds received by it in depositories
authorized by the governing body by resolution.
§ 3-23.1 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 3-23.1
3:35

ARTICLE XI
Department of Health
[Added 8-19-1963]
§ 3-24. Department established; appointment of Director and other
personnel.
There shall be a Department of Health under the direction and control of
a licensed health officer, who shall also be known as the "Director of the
Department of Health." He shall be appointed by the Township Manager
in consultation with the Township Advisory Health Council, hereinafter
referred to in this article as the "Advisory Health Council." All employees,
including the Plumbing Inspector and Registrar of Vital Statistics, shall be
appointed by the Township Manager in consultation with the Health Officer
and the Advisory Health Council.
§ 3-25. Powers and duties of Health Officer.
A. The Township Health Officer shall have and perform all the powers and
duties prescribed by applicable general law and ordinances of the
Township. He shall be responsible for the enforcement of all state
health statutes, regulations of the State Sanitary Code and health
ordinances of the Township.
B. In addition to his other duties and powers, the Township Health Officer
shall have the following duties and powers:
(1) He shall be in charge of all health programs and activities of the
Township. He shall be responsible for the efficient upkeep and
maintenance of all Health Department equipment and facilities.
(2) He may assign employees of the Department of Health to any work
or position therein, consistent with such employees' qualifications
and licenses, as provided by law. He shall report to the Township
Manager, at such times as he may require, any information
concerning the Department and its work as the Township Manager
deems pertinent. He shall, annually, on a date fixed by the
Township Manager, render him a full report of the activities and
operations of the Department for the preceding year. Subject to the
authority of the Township Manager, the Township Health Officer
may prescribe such rules and regulations as be deems necessary or
expedient for the proper conduct of the Health Department and for
the operation and use of said Department's equipment and
facilities. When health emergencies develop, he shall take such
emergency steps as circumstances may warrant, consistent with
law, ordinances and administrative regulations.
(3) He shall be responsible to the Township Manager for the proper
custody and preservation of books, papers, records and property
under his control. He shall be answerable to the Township Manager
for the faithful performance of his duties.
§ 3-24 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 3-25
3:37
(4) He shall administer the work of the Department of Health in
accordance with the policies established or approved by the
Township Council following recommendation of the Advisory
Health Council and shall create and supervise an efficient
administrative organization for the Department.
(5) He may conduct studies of local conditions and needs affecting
health for the purpose of developing immediate and long range
plans to meet these needs and prepare potential programs for the
consideration of the Advisory Health Council and the Township
Council. He shall also keep informed of the recent developments in
the health field through reading public health journals and other
publications and through attendance at appropriate meetings,
conferences and educational sessions.
(6) He may promote the health program through the use of volunteers
and staff workers and may establish and promote cooperative
planning and working relationships with other community and local
agencies.
(7) He may expend departmental funds in accordance with budget
appropriations and ordinances and Township accounting
procedures.
(8) He shall prepare budget estimates in conjunction with the Advisory
Health Council.
(9) He shall attend all regular meetings of the Advisory Health Council.
He shall submit a monthly report to the Advisory Health Council
advising it as to the conduct and progress of Health Department
activities and facilities in the Township.
§ 3-25 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 3-25
3:38
ARTICLE XII
Department of Public Works
[Amended 10-7-1963]
§ 3-26. Department established; powers and duties of Director.
A. There shall be a Department of Public Works, the head of which shall be
known as the "Director of Public Works." He shall be appointed by the
Township Manager and shall be subject to his jurisdiction and control.
[Amended 3-21-2005 by Ord. No. 05-627]
B. The Director of the Department of Public Works shall perform and
exercise all the powers, duties and functions now or hereafter vested in
or conferred upon the Township Engineer by the Optional Municipal
Charter Law,15 applicable general law or other ordinances of the
Township.
15.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 et seq.
§ 3-26 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 3-26
3:39

ARTICLE XIII
Department of Recreation
[Added 7-1-1963]
§ 3-27. Department established; appointment of Director and other
personnel.
There shall be a Department of Recreation under the direction and control
of a Director of Recreation. The Director shall be appointed by the Township
Manager and shall be subject to his jurisdiction and control. All employees
of the Department shall be appointed by the Township Manager in
consultation with the Director.
§ 3-28. Powers and duties of Director.
A. The Director of Recreation shall have and perform all the powers and
duties prescribed by applicable general law and ordinances of the
Township.
B. In addition to his other duties and powers, the Director shall have the
following duties and powers:
(1) The Director shall be in charge of all recreational program
activities of the Township. He shall be responsible for the efficient
upkeep and maintenance of all Township recreational playgrounds,
playfields, facilities and recreational equipment.
(2) The Director may assign any employee of the Department to any
work or position therein. He shall report to the Township Manager,
at such times as he may require, any information concerning the
Department and its work as the Manager deems pertinent. The
Director shall, annually, on a date fixed by the Township Manager,
render to him a full report of the activities and operations of the
Department for the preceding year. The Director, subject to the
approval of the Manager, may prescribe such rules and regulations
as he deems necessary or expedient for the proper conduct of the
Department and for the operations and use of Township
recreational playgrounds, playfields, facilities and equipment.
(3) The Director shall be responsible to the Manager and the Council
for the proper custody and preservation of the books, papers,
records and property under his control. He shall be answerable to
the Manager for the faithful performance of his duties.
(4) The Director shall administer the work of the Department in
accordance with the policies established or approved by the
Council following recommendations of the Advisory Board of
Recreation and shall create and supervise an efficient
administrative organization for the Department.
§ 3-27 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 3-28
3:41
(5) The Director may conduct studies of local conditions and needs
affecting recreation for the purpose of developing immediate and
long range plans to meet these needs. He shall also keep informed
as to developments in the field of recreation.
(6) He may promote the recreational program through the use of
volunteers and staff workers and may establish and promote
cooperative planning and working relationships with other local
community agencies.
(7) He may incur the expenditure of departmental funds in accordance
with budget appropriations and ordinances.
(8) He shall prepare budget estimates in conjunction with the Advisory
Board of Recreation.
(9) The Director shall attend all regular meetings of the Advisory
Board of Recreation. He shall submit a monthly report to the Board
advising it as to the conduct and progress of recreational activities
and facilities in the Township.
§ 3-28 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 3-28
3:42
ARTICLE XIV
Township Planner16
[Added 10-16-2000 by Ord. No. 00-544]
§ 3-29. Organization of Department; powers and duties.
There shall be a Department of Planning, the head of which shall be known
as the "Township Planner." Under the direction and supervision of the
Township Planner, the Department shall:
§ 3-30. Appointment.
The Township Planner shall be appointed by the Township Manager and
shall be subject to jurisdiction and control of the Township Manager.
A. Review all applications for use variances to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
B. Prepare such plans, studies, analysis, surveys and reports which may,
from time to time, be necessary to implement municipality's
comprehensive Master Plan or to guide governmental policy for the
assurance of the orderly and coordinate development.
C. Provide staff assistance to the Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
D. Study the operation and effect of land use controls and their
administration within the municipality and report thereon to the
Township Manager.
E. Advise and assist the Township Manager and Township Council
regarding the physical planning and public improvement aspects of any
matters related to the development of the municipality.
F. Prepare and review the Township Master Plan and housing element,
COAH reports and submissions, all regulatory and outside agency
interaction, all grant writing, all census reporting, any right to no
reporting and recycling tonnage grant applications.
G. Advise and assist the Township Manager and Township Council
regarding the revitalization of the downtown business area.
H. Oversee the Community Forestry Program, Tree City USA, Open Space
Community issues, Community Development Block Grant
responsibilities, Cross-Acceptance, Public Arbor Celebration and
upkeep of all statistical data pertaining to the Township.
16.Editor's Note: Former Article XIV, Department of Revenue, amended 10-7-1963, was
repealed 3-5-1990 by Ord. No. 90-358.
§ 3-29 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 3-30
3:43
Chapter 6
ASSESSMENTS, BOARD OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 3.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Making of assessments — See N.J.S.A.
40:56-21.
Creation of Board — See N.J.S.A. 40:69A-90.
§ 6-1. Board established; membership; terms of members; filling of
vacancies.
§ 6-2. Powers, duties and compensation.
Chapter 8
CABLE TELEVISION COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cable television — See Ch. 110.
A. There shall be a Board of Assessments for Local Improvements
consisting of three members appointed by the Township Manager in
consultation with the Township Council.
B. The terms of the initially appointed three members shall commence
upon the day of their appointment and shall be and continue for the
periods of one, two and three years respectively, beginning on January 1
next succeeding such appointment. All subsequent appointments shall
be for the full term of three years, to take effect on January 1.
C. Vacancies resulting from the unexpired term of any member of the said
Board shall be filled for the unexpired term only.
A. The members of the Board of Assessments for Local Improvements shall
have all the powers and duties of the making of all assessments
accruing from local improvements in accordance with and subject to
general law and ordinances not inconsistent therewith.
B. The Board of Assessments for Local Improvements shall be paid as
compensation for its services a sum equal to 1% of the total assessment
made in each case, which sum shall be added to and become a part of
the said assessment and which sum shall be divided equally among the
members of the said Board.
§ 3-30 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 6-2
6:44
§ 8-1. Establishment; membership. [Amended 6-19-2000 by Ord.
No. 00-533]
There is hereby established the Cedar Grove Cable Television Committee.
The membership of the Committee shall consist of seven members: one
member of the governing body; one member appointed by the Board of
Education; and five residents of the Township of Cedar Grove appointed by
the governing body.
§ 8-2. Appointments; terms.
The appointment and terms of the members of the Committee shall be as
follows:
§ 8-3. Vacancies.
In the event of the resignation of any member of the Committee or in the
event of death or inability to serve or in the event of the member's absence
from 50% or more of the regularly scheduled meetings of the Committee in
any twelve-month period, in which latter event removal shall automatically
occur, the Township Council shall fill said vacancy for the remainder of the
unexpired term.
§ 8-4. Officers.
A. The one representative of the governing body shall be appointed by and
serve at the pleasure of the Township Council.
B. The one representative appointed by the Board of Education shall serve
at the pleasure of the Board of Education.
C. The balance of the Committee shall be appointed by the Township
Council and shall serve for a period of three years, except that the
respective terms of office of the originally appointed members shall be
as follows: [Amended 6-19-2000 by Ord. No. 00-533]
(1) Two members shall serve for terms of three years.
(2) Two members shall serve for terms of two years.
(3) One member shall serve for a term of one year.
D. The term of each member, except for the initial term, shall begin on the
first day of January, and each member shall continue in office until his
or her successor shall be appointed.
A. The Cable Television Committee shall elect a Chairman, Vice Chairman
and Secretary at its organizational meeting in January, which officers
shall serve for terms of one year and shall remain in office until their
successors are appointed.
§ 6-2 CABLE TELEVISION COMMITTEE § 8-4
8:45
§ 8-5. Meetings.
The Cable Television Committee shall hold regular monthly meetings at the
same time and day of each month in the Township Municipal Building as
set in its organizational meeting, which meeting shall be open to the public
unless closed to the public by the Committee pursuant to an exception
authorized under the Open Public Meetings Act.17 Special meetings may
be called by the Chairman on three days' notice to each member of the
Committee. The Committee may make and amend rules and regulations
concerning the conduct of its meetings.
§ 8-6. Powers and duties.
The Cable Television Committee shall have the following powers and duties:
B. The Secretary shall keep minutes of all the meetings of the Committee,
which minutes and copies of official correspondence of the Committee
shall be kept on file in the office of the Township Clerk.
A. To monitor the performance of the cable franchisee and to make report
and/or recommendation to the Township Council with reference to the
franchise and any renewal.
B. To operate a local access channel within the Township of Cedar Grove,
subject to the establishment of rules and regulations by the Committee
which are to be approved by the Township Council by resolution, which
resolution may be modified from time to time. Such rules and
regulations shall include but not be limited to access to the equipment
and facility; procedures and criteria for programs and broadcasts;
training and use of volunteers in connection with the operation of the
local cable channel; access by citizens; procedures for posting of
bulletins on the scribe; and other policies and procedures necessary to
operate the channel.
C. To recommend to the governing body a method of training of
volunteers, students and Committee members who may then become
authorized to operate and use the cable equipment. The training
program is to be approved by the governing body by resolution, which
may be amended from time to time, and implemented by the
Committee.
D. To maintain an inventory, in the office of the Township Clerk, of the
equipment owned by the township and a separate list of the equipment
owned by others.
E. Annually, to submit a proposed budget to the Township Manager, and
purchase of equipment and supplies shall be subject to review and
approval by the Township Manager.
17.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 8-4 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 8-6
8:46
Chapter 10
CLAIMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 3. Fire insurance claims — See Ch. 162, Art. I.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Approval and payment of claims — See
N.J.S.A. 40A:5-17 and 40A:5-18.
§ 10-1. Presentation of claim.
The Township Council shall not make payment of any of the funds of
the Township unless the person claiming or receiving the same shall first
present a written detailed bill of the items or claims specifying particularly
the nature of the bill, claim or demand, with the certification of the party
claiming payment that said bill, claim or demand is correct. All such bills,
claims or demands shall then be certified by the Township Manager or any
other municipal employee having knowledge that the goods or merchandise
have been received by, or the services rendered to, the Township.
§ 10-2. Approval.
All bills, claims or demands which have met the requirements of § 10-1
hereof shall then be set forth in and annexed to a bill resolution which
shall be presented to the Council for approval or disapproval at a regular or
special public meeting of the Township Council.
§ 10-3. Payment.
All bills, claims or demands and any other obligations of the Township which
have been approved for payment shall be paid by check, which after being
signed by the Mayor or the Township Manager, shall be countersigned by
the Treasurer or, in the absence of the Treasurer, by the Township Clerk.
F. Annually, to submit to the Township Manager an annual report of the
programs and activities of the Committee undertaken during the prior
year.
§ 8-6 CLAIMS § 10-3
10:47
Chapter 14
COURT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 3. Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 61.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Municipal Courts — See N.J.S.A. 2A:8-1 et seq.
§ 14-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established a Municipal Court to be known as the
"Municipal Court of the Township of Cedar Grove, in the County of Essex."
§ 14-2. Seal.18
The Municipal Court of the Township shall have an Official Seal which shall
be similar to the Official Seal of the Township except as to the name. In
place of the name and legend upon the said Township Seal, the Official Seal
of the Municipal Court shall bear the impress of the name of the Court.
§ 14-3. Qualifications of Judge. [Amended 1-9-1978 by Ord. No.
77-64]
The Municipal Court of the Township shall have a Judge who shall be known
as the Municipal Judge. He shall have the qualifications required by law.
§ 14-4. Appointment of Judge; term. [Amended 2-6-1950;
7-29-1955; 1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 77-64]
The Municipal Judge of the Township shall be appointed by the Township
Council. He shall serve for a term of three years from the date of his
appointment and until his successor is appointed and qualified.
§ 14-5. Compensation of Judge. [Amended 2-6-1950; 1-9-1978 by
Ord. No. 77-64]
The Municipal Judge shall be compensated by an annual salary as more
particularly set forth in the yearly Salary Ordinance adopted by the
Township Council.19 The compensation so paid shall be in lieu of any and all
other fees.
18.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 64, Seal, Township.
19.Editor's Note: See Ch. 61, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 10-3 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 14-6
14:48
§ 14-6. Jurisdiction. [Amended 1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 77-64]
The Municipal Court of the Township and the Municipal Judge shall have,
possess and exercise all the jurisdiction, powers, functions and duties which
are or may be conferred by law and the applicable rules of the Supreme
Court of New Jersey.
§ 14-7. Appointment of Court Clerk; term. [Amended 2-6-1950;
11-20-1950; 7-29-1955]
There shall be a Clerk of the Municipal Court of the Township who shall be
appointed by the Township Council. He shall serve for a term of one year
from the date of his appointment and until his successor is appointed and
qualified.
§ 14-8. Compensation of Court Clerk. [Amended 2-6-1950;
11-20-1950]
The Court Clerk shall be compensated for his services by an annual salary
as more particularly set forth in the yearly Salary Ordinance adopted by the
Township Council.20
§ 14-9. Functions and duties of Court Clerk. [Amended 11-20-1950;
1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 77-64]
The Court Clerk shall attend all sessions of the Municipal Court of the
Township; keep the Official Seal and records of said Court; collect, receipt
for and account to the Municipal Judge for all fines, costs, impositions
and bail which may be paid into or deposited with said Court; assist the
Municipal Judge in the business administration of said Court; and perform
such other functions and duties as shall be prescribed for him by law, by the
rules of the Supreme Court of New Jersey and by the Municipal Judge.
§ 14-10. Deputy Municipal Court Clerk. [Added 11-20-1950]
The Council may designate any officer or employee of the municipality to
serve as Deputy Clerk of the Municipal Court with or without additional
compensation. Such additional compensation, if any, shall be fixed in the
yearly Salary Ordinance adopted by the Township Council. The Deputy
Clerk shall assist the Municipal Court Clerk in the performance of his
duties.
§ 14-11. Required bonds. [Amended 1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 77-64]
The Municipal Judge of the Township and the Clerk of the Municipal Court,
before entering upon the duties of their offices, shall enter into a bond as
required by law.
20.Editor's Note: See Ch. 61, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 14-6 COURT § 14-12
14:49
§ 14-12. Violations Clerk. [Added 1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 77-64]
Pursuant to the current New Jersey Court Rules, if the Judge of the
Municipal Court determines that the efficient disposition of its business and
the convenience of defendants so requires, he may designate either the
Clerk of the Court or a Deputy Clerk of the Court to be Violations Clerk.
Such person shall serve as Violations Clerk during the term of the Judge
who appointed said Violations Clerk.
Chapter 17
DEFENSE COUNCIL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 3.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Creation of Council — See N.J.S.A. App.
A:9-41.
Disaster Control Director — See N.J.S.A. App.
A:9-40.1.
§ 17-1. Council established; membership.
§ 17-2. Disaster Control Director; Chairman.
The Municipal Disaster Control Director shall be a member of the Local
Defense Council and shall serve as Chairman of the said Council.
Chapter 19
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE CRISIS INTERVENTION TEAM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 55.
§ 19-1. Establishment.
Chapter 266 of the Code of the Township of Cedar Grove21 is hereby
established as set forth herein.
A. A Local Defense Council, with powers and duties prescribed by general
law, is hereby created in the Township.
B. The said Council shall consist of no more than 15 persons. They shall be
appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the Township Manager.
§ 14-12 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 19-2
17:50
§ 19-2. Statement of policy.
In 1991, the New Jersey Legislature passed the Prevention of Domestic
Violence Act of 1991, N.J.S.A. 2C:25-17 et seq. (the "Act"), having
determined that domestic violence is a serious crime against society with
victims from all social and economic backgrounds. Pursuant to the Act,
crisis intervention teams of trained residents can be formed to assist police
authorities in dealing with domestic violence cases. On January 18, 2000,
the participation in a DVRT was mandated by Bill No. A-2786. The West
Essex DVRT will be a regional effort with volunteers servicing the residents
of Fairfield, Caldwell, Cedar Grove, Essex Fells, North Caldwell, Verona and
West Caldwell. The West Essex Domestic Violence Intervention Team would
assist victims of domestic violence by providing information on available
resources and referrals and acting as a liaison with the police and other
agencies, as appropriate.
§ 19-3. Establishment of Team; qualifications for membership;
appointment coordinator.
There is hereby created the West Essex Domestic Violence Crisis
Intervention Team. The Team shall consist of an unlimited number of
volunteers who shall be at least 21 years of age and bona fide residents
of New Jersey. All Team members shall serve without compensation.
Interested persons shall complete an application form supplied by the
Township, be fingerprinted by the Police Department and subject to a
background check. Members of the Team shall be appointed by resolution of
the Township Council. The Township Council shall also by resolution appoint
certain Team members as Coordinators. All Coordinators and other Team
members shall be supervised by the Police Department and shall serve at
the direction of the Township Council.
§ 19-4. Training program.
No person may serve as a Team member unless he/she shall have first
completed a forty-hour specialized training program as developed by the
New Jersey Division of Criminal Justice.
§ 19-5. Functions and duties.
The functions and duties of the Team shall include, but not be limited to:
A. Meeting with victims of domestic violence to provide support,
compassion and advice.
B. Providing information on available resources, appropriate agencies,
hotlines and the like and serving as a liaison with police and other
agencies as appropriate.
21.Editor's Note: This ordinance was redesignated as Ch. 19, in Part I, to maintain the
organizational scheme of the Code.
§ 19-2 DOMESTIC VIOLENCE CRISIS § 19-5
19:51
§ 19-6. Annual report.
The Police Department shall prepare and submit to the Township Council
an annual report summarizing the activities of the Team and any
recommendations it sees fit to make.
Chapter 21
DOWNTOWN ADVISORY COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 268.
§ 21-1. Committee established; initial members; membership;
terms.
The Township Council shall appoint seven members to the Downtown
Advisory Committee, which shall consist of said appointed members. Each
appointed member must be a resident of the Township. One member shall
be a Township Councilmember or his or her designee, and the remaining
members shall be general members with diverse backgrounds. Members of
the Township Council may serve as general members. The terms shall be
for a period of three years each, except that the original terms shall be
staggered and three members shall be appointed for one year, two members
for two years, and two members for three years; thereafter, appointments
and reappointments shall be made for full three-year terms. Prior to the
Township Council appointing or reappointing any member, the Downtown
Advisory Committee may provide the Council, in writing, with nonbinding
recommendations for Committee members.
§ 21-2. Purpose; powers.
C. Such other functions and duties as may be established by the Police
Department.
A. The Downtown Advisory Committee shall advise the Township Council
regarding the Township's downtown area, which shall consist of
Pompton Avenue between West Bradford Street and Myrtle Avenue. The
Committee shall prepare a report to the Township Council at least once
a year containing comments, concerns, and suggestions for
improvement of the downtown area. The Committee shall liaise with
residents, property owners, and businesses and incorporate their input
into any reports issued to the Township Council. The Committee may
also perform such advisory functions regarding modification of the
Zoning Ordinance22 as requested by the Township Council; however,
this function is in addition to, and not in lieu of, the Planning Board's
22.Editor's Note: See Ch. 268, Zoning.
§ 19-5 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 21-2
19:52
§ 21-3. Officers; meetings.
The Committee shall elect from its members a Chairman and Vice Chairman
and Secretary at an annual organizational meeting. The Township
Councilmember or his/her designee shall be liaison for the Committee with
the Township Council. The Committee shall, at its discretion, meet monthly
or more frequently. Special meetings may be called by the Chairman or Vice
Chairman on three days' notice to each member. Four or more members of
the Committee may also require the holding of a special meeting and the
Secretary of the Board shall send proper notices upon such request.
§ 21-4. Vacancies due to excessive absences; removal from office.
A vacancy shall be deemed to occur where any member shall be absent
for 50% or more of any regular or special meetings during any twelvemonth
period. The Secretary shall report on such excessive absences to
the Township Council on a regular basis and the Township Council shall fill
the vacancy for the remainder of the unexpired terms. The governing body
may remove any member with or without cause by an affirmative vote of a
majority of the entire governing body.
Chapter 23
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 3.
Length of Service Awards Program — See Ch.
39.
Volunteer organizations — See Ch. 74.
Outdoor burning — See Ch. 107.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 137.
statutory powers with regard to the Master Plan and amendments to
the Zoning Ordinance pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq. The Committee is not intended to perform any of the
statutory powers delegated to the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
B. In addition, the Committee may organize and hold events that promote
local businesses and provide a clean and safe environment for people to
shop, dine, and enjoy the downtown area. Prior to any such events, the
Committee shall submit an event description to the Township Council
that includes a proposed budget and any requests for funding. The
Township Council must approve any such request, with modifications if
applicable, by an affirmative vote of a majority of the entire governing
body.
§ 21-2 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 21-4
23:53
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Fire departments generally — See N.J.S.A.
40A:14-7 et seq.
Establishment of departments — See N.J.S.A.
40:69A-90.
§ 21-4 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 21-4
23:54
ARTICLE I
Fire Companies
§ 23-1. Department established; designation of companies.
The Volunteer Fire Department, heretofore established in the Township, is
hereby continued. The Volunteer Fire Department, herein referred to as the
"Fire Department," shall consist of the following existing companies:
§ 23-2. Company membership. [Amended 4-5-1971 by Ord. No.
70-24; 10-15-1979 by Ord. No. 79-113]
The membership of Engine Company No. 1 (Center) shall consist of a
maximum of 32 persons, including a Chief Officer, Captain and Lieutenant.
The membership of Engine Company No. 2 (North End) and Engine
Company No. 3 (South End) shall each consist of a maximum of 28 persons,
including a Chief Officer, Captain and Lieutenant. Each company shall
select its own members. Each company member shall become a member of
the Fire Department subject to certification by the Fire Chief that he meets
the qualifications set forth in § 23-3.
§ 23-3. Membership qualifications. [Amended 4-5-1971 by Ord. No.
70-24; 12-18-1972 by Ord. No. 72-20]
No person shall be eligible for membership in the Fire Department unless
he meets the eligibility requirements for membership in the New Jersey
State Firemen's Association, is a member in good standing in one of the Fire
Companies and, in addition, possesses the following qualifications:
A. Cedar Grove Engine Company No. 1.
B. Cedar Grove Engine Company No. 2.
C. Cedar Grove Engine Company No. 3.
D. Such other companies as may be established from time to time by
action of the Township Council.
A. Be a citizen of the United States and at least 18 years of age.
[Amended 2-4-1991 by Ord. No. 91-376]
B. Be a resident of the Township of Cedar Grove and be a resident of the
Township for at least six months prior to membership. [Amended
2-4-1991 by Ord. No. 91-376]
C. Be able to read and write the English language intelligently.
D. Be the holder of a currently valid driver's license issued by the Director
of the Division of Motor Vehicles of the State of New Jersey.
E. Never have been convicted of a crime or offense involving moral
turpitude.
§ 23-1 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 23-3
23:55
§ 23-4. Qualifications for continued membership. [Amended
4-5-1971 by Ord. No. 70-24]
§ 23-5. Required oath.
Every member of the Fire Department shall subscribe to, and take the
following oath before the Township Clerk: "I do solemnly swear that I will
support the Constitution of the United States, and of the State of New
Jersey, the laws and ordinances of the Township of Cedar Grove, and obey
all rules and regulations and orders of the Cedar Grove Volunteer Fire
Department, and faithfully discharge the duties as a member thereof, and
faithfully serve the Township of Cedar Grove according to the best of my
knowledge and ability, so help me God."
§ 23-6. Qualifications and election of company officers and drivers.
[Amended 6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 02-580]
F. Be of good moral character.
G. Be sound in mind and body and in good health, to be evidenced by the
certification of the Township Physician stating that, after a physical
examination of the candidate, he has found the candidate to be
physically and mentally fit to perform the duties of volunteer firemen.
H. Complete and maintain all federal- and state-mandated training as
required to perform the duties of fire fighter in the State of New Jersey.
[Added 6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 02-580]
I. Complete any additional training that may be required by the Cedar
Grove Fire Department Rules and Regulations. [Added 6-17-2002 by
Ord. No. 02-580]
A. In order to remain a volunteer fireman, a man must continue to be a
member in good standing in one of the Fire Companies. Any action
under the bylaws of the particular company resulting in his removal or
dismissal will automatically result in his removal or dismissal as a
member of the Volunteer Fire Department, without right of appeal to
any higher authority.
B. A volunteer fireman must continue to maintain the membership
qualifications set forth in § 23-3 of the Code of the Township of Cedar
Grove, except that after having attained an exempt qualifying
certificate from the New Jersey State Firemen's Association from Cedar
Grove and having completed seven years of service, such member may
reside in a municipality whose boundary is contiguous with that of the
Township of Cedar Grove. Any member maintaining membership under
the above exception may not hold a line officership in the Department.
[Amended 2-4-1991 by Ord. No. 91-376]
A. Each candidate for Captain and Lieutenant shall have successfully
proven that he or she meets the following qualifications:
§ 23-3 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 23-6
23:56
§ 23-7. Qualifications and election of Fire Chief and Deputy Fire
Chiefs. [Amended 9-15-1969 by Ord. No. 69-14]
(1) Fire-fighting ability.
(2) Administrative ability.
(3) Complete and maintain all federal- and state-mandated training as
required to perform the duties of Captain or Lieutenant in the State
of New Jersey.
(4) Complete any additional training that may be required by the
Cedar Grove Fire Department Rules and Regulations.
B. Each candidate for driver shall have successfully proven that he or she
meets the following qualifications:
(1) Successfully complete pump training or equivalent.
(2) Complete and maintain all federal- and state-mandated training as
required to perform the duties as a driver in the State of New
Jersey.
(3) Complete any additional training that may be required by the
Cedar Grove Fire Department Rules and Regulations.
C. Elections. The members of each company shall, on or before the third
Tuesday in December of each year, elect the following officers and
drivers to serve during the ensuing year: Captain, Lieutenant and at
least three drivers who shall be numbered one, two, and three, and
shall be ranked accordingly. The terms of all elected officers and drivers
shall be for one year and they shall commence their duties on January 1
following their election. All elected officers and drivers shall serve until
their successors are elected and qualified.
A. Each candidate for Chief and Deputy Chief shall have successfully
proven that he or she meets the following qualifications: [Amended
6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 02-580]
(1) Fire-fighting ability.
(2) Administrative ability.
(3) Complete any additional training that may be required by the
Cedar Grove Fire Department Rules and Regulations.
(4) Complete and maintain all federal- and state-mandated training as
required to perform the duties as a Chief or Deputy Chief in the
State of New Jersey.
(5) Shall have taken several fire-fighting courses such as given by
Rutgers University, North Jersey Fire School and other similar
training agencies.
§ 23-6 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 23-7
23:57
§ 23-8. Functions of Township Manager.
The Township Manager shall:
§ 23-9. Powers and duties of the Chief.
(6) Service as Deputy Chief shall not be required from candidates for
Chief.
B. The Chief and two Deputy Chiefs of the Fire Department, no two of
whom shall be from the same company, shall be elected at a joint
meeting of the various companies annually on or before the third
Tuesday of December. The terms of office shall be for one year, and they
shall commence their duties on January 1 following their election and
certification by the Township Manager that they meet all of the abovementioned
qualities set forth in Subsection A of this section. All elected
officers shall serve until their successors are elected and qualified.
C. In the event that the Chief or First Deputy Chief is unable to complete
his term due to death, resignation or impeachment, his office shall be
filled by the next ranking officer immediately. The vacant post shall then
be filled by a special election at the next regular meeting of the
Department. It is the intent of this section that the only office subject to
election shall be the office of the Second Deputy Chief. And further,
those officers moving up shall serve for the balance of the unexpired
term.
A. Have administrative control over the Fire Department, except as
provided in § 23-9A.
B. Perform such other duties in connection therewith as may be lawfully
prescribed by the Township Council.
C. Receive from the Chief of the Fire Department his annual report and
recommendations referred to in § 23-9.
D. Recommend to the Township Council the purchase of all supplies and
apparatus and the expenditure of all moneys. If the Fire Department
has any objections to the said recommendations, it may make such
objections known directly to the Council.
E. Prefer charges against any member of the Department whenever, in his
opinion, the Department and the Fire Chief have failed to take proper
action. In such cases the hearing shall be before the Fire Chief.
A. The Chief of the Fire Department shall be the chief fire executive officer
in charge of the Department. He shall be supreme in command at all
fires within the Township.
B. He shall submit monthly reports to the Township Manager on or before
the 10th of each month covering the preceding month's activities and
§ 23-7 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 23-9
23:58
§ 23-10. Grounds for discipline. [Amended 7-14-1986 by Ord. No.
86-274]
Any member or officer of the Fire Department or Fire Prevention Bureau
shall be subject to discipline by reprimand, demotion in rank, suspension or
dismissal, according to the nature and gravity of his offense, if found guilty
of any of the following charges:
an annual report on or before the 31st day of January of each year
covering the preceding year's activities. Reports shall consist of:
(1) A list of fires attended during the preceding month and year.
(2) Matters specifically requested by the Township Manager to be
considered and referred to in said report.
(3) Recommendations for rules and regulations which the Fire Chief
may deem advisable and for the good and welfare, government and
discipline of the Department.
C. The Chief of the Fire Department shall, on request of the Township
Manager and at such other times as the Chief shall deem necessary,
furnish a written list of the supplies and apparatus necessary or proper
for the operation of the Fire Department and such other financial items
as shall be reasonably required by the Fire Department to adequately
fulfill its obligations to the Township.
D. The Chief of the Fire Department shall have the authority to issue
orders for the members of the Fire Department, not inconsistent with
the laws of the State of New Jersey, the ordinances of the Township and
the policies of the Township Council. The rules and regulations of the
Fire Department shall be written or printed and shall be recorded in a
bound book to be kept for that purpose. Every member shall receive a
copy thereof.
E. The Chief shall designate a chain of command which shall function in
his absence.
A. Willful disobedience of orders.
B. Disrespect to a superior officer.
C. Refusal or failure to attend fires or fire drills.
D. Immorality, indecency or lewdness.
E. Neglect of duty.
F. Violation of any criminal law or penal ordinance.
G. Conduct subversive of good order and discipline of the Department.
§ 23-9 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 23-10
23:59
§ 23-11. Disciplinary proceedings. [Amended 7-14-1986 by Ord. No.
86-274]
§ 23-12. Company journals.
H. Disobedience or violation of any rule or regulation of the Fire
Department or order of the Fire Chief established pursuant to this
chapter.
A. Subject to the provisions contained in Subsection B of this section,
whenever charges are brought against a member of the Fire
Department or Fire Prevention Bureau, a hearing shall be held before
the Fire Chief, who shall make the final determination as to what action,
if any, is to be taken in the case. The hearing before the Chief shall be
handled in the procedure set forth in the Personnel Ordinance 23 of the
Township as if the hearing were being held before the Township
Manager, and the fireman against whom the charges have been made
shall be entitled to call upon the Personnel Advisory Board, composed
of members of the Township Council, to render an advisory opinion to
the Fire Chief before he makes his final determination.
B. Whenever charges are brought against the Fire Prevention Bureau
Director relating to his administrative duties under Chapter 137 of the
Code of the Township of Cedar Grove, a hearing shall be held before the
Township Manager in accordance with the procedure set forth in the
Personnel Ordinance.
A. There shall be kept at each fire station a book and/or electronic
equivalent to be known as the "Company Journal." The journal shall be
kept so as to present an accurate and complete history of the operations
and duties of each company for each day. Each item recorded in the
journal shall be briefly but clearly stated along with the exact time of its
entry. [Amended 6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 02-580]
B. All entries in the journal shall be in chronological sequence and if in
book form no erasures or obliteration should be used. Instead, a line
should be drawn through the error and followed on the next line with
the correct statements. Each entry shall be authenticated by a
signature. [Amended 6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 02-580]
C. The Company Journal should be kept in a designated place when not in
use, and inaccessible to unauthorized persons.
23.Editor's Note: See Ch. 52, Personnel.
§ 23-10 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 23-12
23:60
ARTICLE II
Fire Prevention Bureau
[Added 5-7-1979 by Ord. No. 79-89]
§ 23-13. Establishment.
A Fire Prevention Bureau is hereby established in the Fire Department
of the Township of Cedar Grove for the purpose of implementing and
performing the functions required under Chapter 137, Fire Prevention, of
the Code of the Township.
§ 23-14. Organization and membership.
A. Fire Prevention Bureau membership. [Amended 3-17-1980 by Ord.
No. 80-127]
(1) The Fire Prevention Bureau shall consist of the Fire Chief and nine
Fire Prevention Bureau Inspectors who shall be appointed by the
Township Manager for terms of three calendar years from among
the nominated members of the three fire companies equally, except
as provided below.
(2) The President of each said fire company shall, upon the approval of
the membership of his company at a regular meeting, nominate
qualified persons from his company for approval and appointment
by the Township Manager.
(3) In the event that any fire company is unable to nominate at least
three persons or such lesser amount as required to fill vacancies for
the Fire Prevention Bureau, the Chief of the Fire Department shall
select a qualified nominee(s) from any fire company, regardless of
equal fire company representation on the Bureau.
(4) The initial terms of inspectors appointed shall be as follows:
(a) Three inspectors (one from each company): term to expire
December 31, 1982.
(b) Three inspectors (one from each company): term to expire
December 31, 1981.
(c) Three inspectors (one from each company): term to expire
December 31, 1980.
(5) All terms subsequent to the initial appointment terms shall be for
three years. Vacancies shall be filled for unexpired terms in the
same manner as other appointments to the Bureau by the Township
Manager.
B. Qualifications of inspectors. Nominees for appointment as Fire
Prevention Bureau Inspectors must satisfy the following qualifications:
[Amended 7-14-1986 by Ord. No. 86-274]
§ 23-13 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 23-14
23:61
(1) Active membership in good standing of a Fire Company or life
membership in good standing of a Fire Company having obtained
an exempt qualifying certificate from the New Jersey State
Fireman's Association.
(2) Residence in the Township or, if such nominee shall have received
exemption status from the New Jersey State Fireman's Association,
residence in a contiguous town.24
C. Supervisory and clerical personnel. The Fire Prevention Bureau shall be
supervised and directed by the Fire Chief of the Township with respect
to all aspects of enforcement and inspection under Chapter 137, Fire
Prevention, of the Code of the Township of Cedar Grove. The Fire Chief
shall be assisted by the Fire Prevention Bureau Director, who shall be
responsible for the administrative duties delegated to him by the Fire
Chief and for the duties under Chapter 137, Fire Prevention, of the
Code of the Township of Cedar Grove. The Fire Prevention Bureau
Director shall be appointed by the Fire Chief with the advice and
consent of the Township Manager and shall be under the direct
supervision of the Fire Chief with respect to the administrative duties
described in Chapter 137, Fire Prevention, with ultimate supervisory
power over such administrative duties resting with the Township
Manager. The Director shall serve for a period of one year or until his
successor shall be appointed. The members of the Fire Prevention
Bureau shall annually elect a Secretary who shall serve for a period of
one year or until his successor is elected. [Amended 7-14-1986 by
Ord. No. 86-274; 5-2-1988 by Ord. No. 88-312]
D. Duties. Inspections of all existing commercial, industrial and
multifamily buildings and structures shall be conducted by the Fire
Prevention Bureau on a regular basis, at least annually, and written
records of such inspections shall be kept by the Bureau on forms to be
established by the Bureau as may be approved or revised from time to
time by the Township Manager. Copies of any such records shall be
provided to the Township Manager at his request. Notwithstanding
anything to the contrary herein contained, it is not the intention of this
chapter to establish the Fire Prevention Bureau as the local
enforcement agency of the Uniform Fire Safety Act pursuant to N.J.S.A.
52:27D-202a. The function of the Fire Prevention Bureau shall be in
addition to the enforcement of such Act by the State of New Jersey as
permitted by N.J.S.A. 52:27D-202b. [Added 5-2-1988 by Ord. No.
88-312]
24.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(3), which immediately followed this subsection and
which required certification from the Bureau of Fire Safety as a qualification of nominees
for appointment as inspectors was repealed 5-2-1988 by Ord. No. 88-312.
§ 23-14 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 23-14
23:62
Chapter 27
FLAG, TOWNSHIP
GENERAL REFERENCES
Township Seal — See Ch. 64.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Ordinances generally — See N.J.S.A. 40:48.2.
§ 27-1. Designation of official flag.
The flag heretofore provided and used by and for the Township as its
Official Flag is hereby continued as the Official Flag of the Township. The
Official Flag shall be flown at all public functions involving the Township, on
patriotic holidays and at such other times as may be reasonable and proper.
Chapter 29
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 29, Regional Flood Control Board, adopted 3-20-2006 by
Ord. No. 06-642, was repealed 11-6-2017 by Ord. No. 17-818.]
Chapter 31
HEALTH COUNCIL, ADVISORY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 3.
Food-handling establishments — See Ch. 142.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 179.
Plumbing — See Ch. 194.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Creation of boards generally — See N.J.S.A.
40:69A-90.
§ 31-1. Council established; function; membership. [Amended
2-20-1989 by Ord. No. 89-339]
A. There shall be a Township Advisory Health Council who shall serve in
an advisory capacity in matters pertaining to the Health Department
and its facilities and programs. The Advisory Health Council shall be
governed by the general provisions set forth in N.J.S.A. 26:3-1 et seq.,
§ 23-14 FLAG, TOWNSHIP § 31-1
27:63
§ 31-2. Appointment and terms of members.
§ 31-3. Filling of vacancies. [Amended 5-16-1977 by Ord. No. 77-46]
In the event of the resignation of any member of the Advisory Health
Council, his death, inability to serve or absence from 50% or more of
the regularly scheduled meetings of the Health Council in any twelvemonth
period, in which latter event removal shall automatically occur, the
Township Council shall fill said vacancy for the remainder of the unexpired
term.
§ 31-4. Officers.
as may be amended from time to time, and not the specific provisions
relating to townships.
B. The Advisory Health Council shall consist of eight members, seven of
whom shall be citizen members, and one member of the Township
Council. One of the citizen members, preferably, should be a physician.
[Amended 6-19-1989 by Ord. No. 89-345]
A. The members of the Advisory Health Council shall be appointed by the
Township Council.
B. The respective terms of office of the initially appointed members shall
be as follows: one member shall be appointed for a term expiring on
December 31, 1963; two members shall be appointed for terms expiring
on December 31, 1964; and two members shall be appointed for terms
expiring on December 31, 1965. Upon the expiration of the respective
terms of the initially appointed members, the term of each member
thereafter appointed shall be three years, commencing on the first day
of January. The above-referenced terms of office shall apply to the
citizen members. The term of the member of the Township Council shall
be for one year expiring on June 30. [Amended 6-19-1989 by Ord.
No. 89-345]
C. The respective terms of office of the additional members added in 1989
shall be as follows: one member shall be appointed for a term expiring
on December 31, 1990; one member shall be appointed for a term
expiring on December 31, 1991. Upon the expiration of the respective
terms of the additional appointed members, the term of each member
thereafter appointed shall be three years, commencing on the first day
of January. [Added 2-20-1989 by Ord. No. 89-339]
A. The Advisory Health Council shall elect a President and Vice President
at the organizational meeting to be held in January.
B. The Health Officer shall serve as Secretary of the Advisory Health
Council and shall keep on file minutes of all meetings and copies of
official correspondence of the said Advisory Health Council.
§ 31-1 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 31-5
31:64
§ 31-5. Meetings.
§ 31-6. Power to make recommendations.
The Advisory Health Council may make recommendations:
§ 31-7. Advisory opinions on appeals of rulings by Health Officer.
A. The Advisory Health Council shall hold regular meetings at the same
time and day of each month in the Township Municipal Building as fixed
in its organizational meeting in January.
B. Special meetings of the Advisory Health Council may be called by the
President on three days' notice to each member. Special meetings shall
be called by the President upon written request of two members of the
Advisory Health Council, in which case three days' notice of the said
meeting shall be given to each member. In case of emergency, the threeday
notice requirement may be waived by the written consent of a
majority of all the members of the Advisory Health Council.
C. The Advisory Health Council may make and amend rules and
regulations concerning the conduct of its meetings.
A. To the Township Health Officer concerning or relating to the operation
or administration of the Department of Health.
B. To the Township Council concerning or touching upon matters of policy
or ordinance affecting the Department of Health.
A. Whenever an appeal in writing is made to the Township Manager within
10 days from a ruling of the Health Officer regarding the denial,
suspension or revocation of a license or permit as provided for
elsewhere in the Code of the Township of Cedar Grove, the Manager
shall convene the Advisory Health Council for the purpose of soliciting
its advice regarding a decision on the appeal. In such cases, the opinion
of the Advisory Health Council shall be advisory in nature only. The
Township Manager shall make his individual decision on the matter
upon receipt of the advice of the Advisory Health Council. In cases
where appeals are made to the Manager, he shall set a date for the
hearing within 14 days of receiving the written request and shall render
his decision within 10 days of completion of the appeal proceedings.
B. Pending such appeal, the said ruling of the Health Officer shall be
stayed unless in the opinion of the Township Manager a public health
emergency otherwise requires.
§ 31-5 HEALTH COUNCIL, ADVISORY § 31-7
31:65
Chapter 33
HERITAGE ADVISORY COMMITTEE
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Creation of committees generally — See
N.J.S.A. 40:69A-90.
§ 33-1. Committee established.
There is hereby created a Heritage Advisory Committee, hereinafter in this
chapter referred to as the "Committee."
§ 33-2. Membership; compensation.
The Committee shall consist of five members, and they shall be appointed
by the Township Council for a term of one year. The members shall serve
without compensation, but, with the consent of the Township Council, they
may be reimbursed for expenses incurred in the performance of their duties
as members of the Committee.
§ 33-3. Authority and responsibility.
A. The Heritage Advisory Committee shall be responsible for the
development of local programs to promote public interest in local
history and, with the approval of the Township Council and within the
limits of funds appropriated or otherwise made available to it,
undertake the restoration, operation, maintenance and preservation of
real property acquired by the Township.
B. The Committee, as from time to time authorized by the Township
Council, may establish museum and cultural programs, exhibits and
displays, including the fine and performing arts; engage in
archaeological, genealogical and historic research; publish reports; and
engage in such related activities to promote and develop public interest
and understanding of historic and cultural matters.
§ 31-7 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 33-3
33:66
Chapter 38
LAND USE PROCEDURES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use boards and departments — See Ch.
3.
Public improvement specifications — See Ch.
201.
Soil removal — See Ch. 226.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 230.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 234.
Zoning — See Ch. 268.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Planning and zoning generally — See N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
Planning Board — See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23 et
seq.
Zoning Board of Adjustment — See N.J.S.A.
40:55D-69 et seq.
§ 33-3 LAND USE PROCEDURES § 33-3
38:67

ARTICLE I
Planning Board
§ 38-1. Board established; membership.
There is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23 et seq., in the
Township of Cedar Grove, a Planning Board of nine members consisting of
the following four classes:
§ 38-2. Terms of members.
§ 38-3. Removal of members.
Any member of the Planning Board other than the Class I member, after a
public hearing if he requests one, may be removed by the Township Council
for cause.
§ 38-4. Filling of vacancies.
If a vacancy of any class shall occur otherwise than by expiration of a
term, it shall be filled by appointment, as above provided in § 38-1, for the
unexpired term.
A. Class I: the Mayor.
B. Class II: one of the officials of the Township other than a member of the
Township Council to be appointed by the Mayor.
C. Class III: a member of the Township Council to be appointed by it.
D. Class IV: six other citizens of the Township to be appointed by the
Township Council. The members of Class IV shall hold no other
municipal office except that one member may be a member of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment and one may be a member of the Board of
Education.
A. The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond to his
official tenure.
B. The terms of the members composing Class II and Class III shall be for
one year or terminate at the completion of their respective terms of
office, whichever occurs first.
C. The terms of the members composing Class IV shall be for four years,
provided that nothing herein shall be construed to affect the term of any
member of the Planning Board serving as such on the effective date of
this chapter, who shall continue in office, subject to removal, until the
completion of the term for which he was appointed. All terms shall run
from January 1 to December 31.
§ 38-1 LAND USE PROCEDURES § 38-5
38:69
§ 38-5. Conflicts of interest prohibited.
No member of the Planning Board shall be permitted to act on any matter in
which he has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or financial interest.
§ 38-6. Members to serve without compensation.
All members of the Planning Board shall serve without compensation.
§ 38-7. Organization and staff.
The Planning Board may adopt bylaws and rules and regulations governing
its procedural operation consistent with the provisions of the Municipal
Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. (hereinafter sometimes referred to
as the "Land Use Law"), and the ordinances of the Township. The Planning
Board shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from the members of Class
IV and select a Secretary who may or may not be a member of the Planning
Board or a Township employee. The Planning Board may employ or contract
for and fix the compensation of legal counsel, other than the Municipal
Attorney, and experts and other staff and services as it may deem necessary,
not exceeding, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the
Township Council for its use.
§ 38-8. Powers.
A. The Planning Board shall follow the provisions of this chapter and the
Land Use Law and shall accordingly exercise the following powers:
(1) To make and adopt and from time to time amend a Master Plan for
the physical development of the Township in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
(2) To administer the provisions of the Land Subdivision Ordinance and
Site Plan Review Ordinance25 of the Township in accordance with
the provisions of said ordinances and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37 et seq.
(3) As may from time to time be directed by the Township Council, to
prepare a program of municipal capital improvement projects
projected over a term of at least six years, and amendments
thereto, in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-29 et
seq.
(4) To take action with reference to the Official Map of the Township in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32 et seq.
(5) To take action with reference to Chapter 268, Zoning and
conditional use applications in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-62 et seq.
25.Editor's Note: See Ch. 234, Subdivision of Land, and Ch. 268, Zoning, Art. X, Site Plan
Approval.
§ 38-5 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 38-8
38:70
(6) When reviewing applications for approval of subdivision plats, site
plans or conditional uses, to grant, to the same extent and subject
to the same restrictions as the Zoning Board of Adjustment:
(a) Variances pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c and § 38-16A(3)
relating to lot area, lot dimensional, setback and yard
requirements, provided that relief from lot area requirements
shall not be granted for more than one lot.
(b) Direction pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 for issuance of a
permit for a building or structure in the bed of a mapped street
or public drainageway, flood control basin or public area
reserved pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32.
(c) Direction pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-27 for issuance of a
permit for a building or structure not related to a street.
(d) All of the above powers to be exercised in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60.
(7) To consider and make a report to the Township Council, within 35
days after referral, as to any proposed development regulation,
adoption, revision or amendment in accordance with the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26a.
(8) To report to the Zoning Board of Adjustment with reference to any
application which is referred to it by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment in accordance with the provisions of § 38-16. Such
report to be addressed to the issue of whether the application may
be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and
will not substantially impair the intent and purpose of the zone plan
and Chapter 268, Zoning. Nothing contained herein shall be
construed to extend the time for action imposed upon the Zoning
Board of Adjustment by operation of law.
(9) To make recommendations, on its own initiative, to the Township
Council concerning the adoption, revision or amendment of any
development regulation. [Added 4-4-1977 by Ord. No. 77-41]
(10) In connection with its review of an application for land subdivision
or site plan approval, the Planning Board may consider the
conformity of the application with pertinent sections of Chapter
268, Zoning; provided, however, that official action with respect to
such conformity has not been taken by any other authorized official
or board of the Township. [Added 4-4-1977 by Ord. No. 77-41]
B. The Planning Board may:
(1) Participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans
required by state or federal laws or regulation.
(2) Assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous
planning process.
§ 38-8 LAND USE PROCEDURES § 38-8
38:71
(3) Perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by
ordinance or resolution of the Township Council for the aid and
assistance of the Township Council or other agencies or officers.26
26.Editor's Note: Former § 38-8.1, Fees, added 7-11-1977 by Ord. No. 77-52, as amended
8-6-1979 by Ord. No. 79-100, which immediately followed this section, was repealed
5-21-1984 by Ord. No. 84-219.
§ 38-8 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 38-8
38:72
ARTICLE II
Zoning Board of Adjustment
§ 38-9. Board established; membership.
§ 38-10. Terms of members.
§ 38-11. Removal of members.
Any member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, after a public hearing if he
requests one, may be removed by the Township Council for cause.
§ 38-12. Filling of vacancies.
If a vacancy shall occur otherwise than by expiration of a term, it shall be
filled by appointment as above provided for the unexpired term.
§ 38-13. Conflicts of interest prohibited.
No member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be permitted to act
on any matter in which he has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or
financial interest.
§ 38-14. Members to serve without compensation.
All members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall serve without
compensation.
A. There is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 et seq., in
the Township of Cedar Grove, a Zoning Board of Adjustment consisting
of seven residents of the Township appointed by the Township Council.
No member may hold any elective office or position in the Township
except that one member may also be a member of the Planning Board.
B. There shall be two alternates to serve on the Board, to be designated
"Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2" by the Chairman of the Board.
[Added 10-2-1978 by Ord. No. 78-78]
A. The term of each member shall be for four years, provided that nothing
herein shall be construed to affect the term of any member of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment serving as such on the effective date of this
chapter, all of whom shall continue in office until the completion of the
terms for which they were appointed. The initial terms of the members
appointed under this chapter shall be determined so that expiration of
their terms shall be distributed evenly over the first four years after
their appointment, provided that the initial term of no member shall
exceed four years. All terms shall run from July 1 to June 30, except
initial terms as hereinbefore provided.
B. The terms for alternates shall be two years. [Added 10-2-1978 by
Ord. No. 78-78]
§ 38-9 LAND USE PROCEDURES § 38-15
38:73
§ 38-15. Organization and staff.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman
from its membership and select a Secretary who may or may not be a
member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment or a Township employee. The
Zoning Board of Adjustment may employ or contract for and fix the
compensation of legal counsel, other than the Municipal Attorney, and
experts and other staff and services as it shall deem necessary, not
exceeding, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the
Township Council for its use.
§ 38-16. Powers.
A. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers:
(1) To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that
there is error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal made
by an administrative officer based on or made in the enforcement of
Chapter 268, Zoning.
(2) To hear and decide requests for interpretation of the Zoning Map or
Chapter 268, Zoning, or for decisions upon other special questions
upon which such Board is authorized to pass by any Zoning or
Official Map Ordinance in accordance with the Municipal Land Use
Act.
(3) Where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape
of a specific piece of property or by reason of exceptional
topographic conditions or by reason of other extraordinary and
exceptional situation or condition of such piece of property, the
strict application of any regulation in Chapter 268, Zoning, would
result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to or
exceptional and undue hardship upon the owner of such property,
to grant, upon an application or an appeal relating to such property,
a variance from such strict application so as to relieve such
difficulties or hardship; provided, however, that no variance shall
be granted under this subsection to allow a structure or use in a
district restricted against such structure or use, and provided
further that the proposed development does not require approval
by the Planning Board of subdivision, site plan or conditional use in
conjunction with which the Planning Board shall review a request
for a variance pursuant to § 38-8A(6) and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60a.
(4) To grant a variance to allow a structure or use in a district
restricted against such structure or use in particular cases and for
special reasons, but only by the affirmative vote of at least 2/3 of
the full authorized membership of the Board.
B. No variance or other relief may be granted under the terms of this
section unless such variance or other relief can be granted without
substantial detriment to the public good and will not substantially
§ 38-15 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 38-16
38:74
§ 38-17. Additional powers.
§ 38-18. Appeals; application procedure.
impair the intent and purpose of the zone plan Chapter 268, Zoning.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment may refer any application under this
section to any appropriate person or agency, including the Planning
Board, for its report. No such reference shall extend the period of time
within which the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act.
A. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall, in addition to the powers
specified in § 38-16 of this chapter and subject to the procedures set
forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-72 to 55D-75 and §§ 38-18 through 20 of this
chapter, have power:
(1) To direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 for a
building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public
drainageway, flood control basin or public area reserved on the
Official Map.
(2) To direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36 for a
building or structure not related to a street.
(3) To grant, to the same extent and subject to the same restrictions as
the Planning Board, land subdivision or site plan approval in
accordance with the Land Subdivision Ordinance or Site Plan
Review Ordinance27 and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37 et seq. or conditional
use approval pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67 whenever the Board is
reviewing an application for approval of a use variance pursuant to
§ 38-16A(4).
B. Whenever an application for development requests relief pursuant to
Subsection A herein, the Board of Adjustment shall grant or deny
approval of the application within 120 days after submission by a
developer of a complete application to the administrative officer or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-76c.
C. An application under this section may be referred to any appropriate
person or agency, including the Planning Board, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-26, for its report, provided that such reference shall not extend
the period of time within which the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall
act.
A. Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any interested
party affected by any decision of an administrative officer of the
Township based on or made in the enforcement of Chapter 268, Zoning,
or Official Map. Such appeal shall be taken within 65 days by filing a
notice of appeal with the officer from whom the appeal was taken,
27.Editor's Note: See Ch. 234, Subdivision of Land, and Ch. 268, Zoning, Art. VII.
§ 38-16 LAND USE PROCEDURES § 38-18
38:75
§ 38-19. Deadlines within which decisions must be reached.
§ 38-20. Actions that may be taken on appeals.
In exercising the above-mentioned power of appeal the Zoning Board of
Adjustment may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the
action, order, requirement, decision, interpretation or determination
appealed from and to that end have all the powers of the administrative
officer from whom the appeal was taken.
together with three copies of said notice with the Planning and Zoning
Coordinator. Said notice of appeal shall specify the grounds for said
appeal. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith
transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon which
the action appealed from was taken.
B. A developer may file an application for development with the Zoning
Board of Adjustment for action under any of its powers without prior
application to an administrative officer. Applications addressed to the
original jurisdiction of the Zoning Board of Adjustment without prior
application to an administrative officer shall be filed with the Planning
and Zoning Coordinator. Three copies of the application shall be filed.
At the time of filing the application the applicant shall also file all plot
plans, maps or other papers required by virtue of any provision of this
chapter or any rule of the Zoning Board of Adjustment. The applicant
shall obtain all necessary forms from the Planning and Zoning
Coordinator. The Planning and Zoning Coordinator shall inform the
applicant of the steps to be taken to initiate proceedings and of the
regular meeting dates of the Board.
C. An appeal to the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall stay all proceedings
in furtherance of the action in respect to which the decision appealed
from was made, unless the officer from whom the appeal was taken
certifies to the Zoning Board of Adjustment, after the notice of appeal
shall have been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the
certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or
property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than
by court order pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-75.
A. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall render its decision not later than
120 days after the date an appeal is taken from the decision of an
administrative officer or not later than 120 days after the date of the
submission of a complete application for development to the Board
pursuant to the provisions of § 38-18.
B. Failure of the Board to render a decision within such one-hundredtwenty-
day period or within such further time as may be consented to
by the applicant shall constitute a decision favorable to the applicant.
§ 38-18 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 38-21
38:76
§ 38-21. Expiration of variances. [Amended 4-4-1977 by Ord. No.
77-41]
Subject to other provisions of this chapter, all exceptions or variances
granted by the Zoning Board of Adjustment or Planning Board, pursuant
to § 38-16A(3) and (4) hereof, shall expire one year from the date granted
unless the applicant secures a building permit and commences necessary
construction within that period and shall expire two years after the date
granted unless the applicant has completed said construction, alteration or
improvement within said two-year period. If the work has not commenced
within one year or if all work is not completed within two years, the
variance and any permit issued pursuant thereto shall be null and void.
Where the applicant fails to complete all necessary work within two years
of the grant of the variance, the Zoning Officer shall give the applicant
10 days' notice in writing that he shall enforce the two-year limitation and
revoke the applicant's building permit. However, for good cause shown, the
Zoning Board of Adjustment or Planning Board, upon written application,
may extend the time limitations in this section. Upon failure of the applicant
to demonstrate good cause for an extension of the time to complete all
necessary work or a finding by the Board that conditions have materially
altered or changed since the date the variance was granted, the Board
shall declare said variance null and void. Construction is deemed to have
commenced when the applicant has performed substantial physical work to
commit the land to the improvement or alteration which was the subject
of the variance, beyond mere preparatory work, such as surveying or
excavation, and has shown an intent to continue the construction.
§ 38-22. Rules and regulations.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall adopt such rules and regulations as
may be necessary to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this
chapter.
§ 38-23. (Reserved)28
28.Editor's Note: Former § 38-23, Fees for actions before Board, amended 1-9-1978 by Ord.
No. 77-64, was repealed 5-21-1984 by Ord. No. 84-219.
§ 38-21 LAND USE PROCEDURES § 38-23
38:77

ARTICLE III
Provisions Applicable to Both Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment
§ 38-24. Conduct of meetings.
§ 38-25. Minutes.
Minutes of every executive session, regular meeting and special meeting
shall be kept, showing the time and place of the meeting, the members
present, the subjects considered, the names of the persons appearing and
addressing the Board and of the persons appearing by attorney, the actions
taken by the Board, the findings, if any, made by the Board and reasons
therefor and the vote of each member. The minutes shall thereafter be
made available for public inspection during normal business hours at the
office of the Planning and Zoning Coordinator. Any interested party shall
have the right to compel production of the minutes for use as evidence in
any legal proceeding concerning the subject matter of such minutes. Such
interested party shall be charged a fee established by the Township Council
for reproduction of the minutes for his use.
§ 38-26. Fees. [Amended 5-21-1984 by Ord. No. 84-219]
A. Meetings of both the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
shall be public and shall be scheduled no less often than once a month,
and any meeting so scheduled shall be held as scheduled unless
canceled for lack of applications for development to process.
B. Special meetings may be provided for at the call of the Chairman or on
the request of any two Board members, which meetings shall be held on
notice to its members and the public in accordance with all applicable
legal requirements.
C. No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being
present.
D. All action shall be taken by majority vote of a quorum except as
otherwise required by any provision of this chapter or N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq.
E. Meetings shall be designated as executive sessions, regular meetings or
special meetings. Executive sessions shall be for the purpose of
discussing and studying any matters that come before the Board. All
meetings shall be subject to the requirements of the Open Public
Meetings Act (N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.).
A. The following schedule of fees is hereby established for the filing of
applications or appeals, as the case may be, before the Planning Board,
Zoning Board of Adjustment or Township Council:
(1) Preliminary major subdivision:
§ 38-24 LAND USE PROCEDURES § 38-26
38:79
(a) Base fee: $500. [Amended 11-7-1988 by Ord. No. 88-326]
(b) Plus each additional lot: $50.
(2) Final major subdivision: [Amended 11-7-1988 by Ord. No.
88-326]
(a) Base fee: $250.
(b) Plus each additional lot: $50.
(3) Minor subdivision:
(a) Base fee: $200. [Amended 11-7-1988 by Ord. No. 88-326]
(b) Plus each additional lot: $50.
(4) Site plan:
(a) Multifamily, major: [Amended 6-4-1984 by Ord. No. 84-220;
4-2-2001 by Ord. No. 01-556]
[1] For the first acre: $500.
[2] Plus each additional acre or fraction thereof: $75.
[3] Plus each unit: $50
(b) Multifamily, minor: [Amended 6-4-1984 by Ord. No.
84-220; 4-2-2001 by Ord. No. 01-556]
[1] Base application: $250.
[2] Plus each additional unit: $50.
[3] Plus each unit: $50.
(c) Other than multifamily, new:
[1] For the first acre: $500.
[2] Plus each additional acre or fraction thereof: $75.
[3] Plus total floor area, per square foot: $0.05. [Amended
6-4-1984 by Ord. No. 84-220]
(d) Other than multifamily, additions:
[1] Base fee: $250.
[2] Plus total floor area, per square foot: $0.05. [Amended
6-4-1984 by Ord. No. 84-220]
(5) A variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c in connection with a
one- or two-family detached dwelling: [Amended 11-7-1988 by
Ord. No. 88-326; 4-2-2001 by Ord. No. 01-556]
§ 38-26 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 38-26
38:80
§ 38-26.1. Initial and supplemental preapproval escrows. [Added
3-4-1991 by Ord. No. 91-378]
(a) For the first variance application: $100.
(b) For each additional variance application: $15.
(6) A variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c in all cases other than
Subsection A(5) above: [Amended 11-7-1988 by Ord. No.
88-326; 4-2-2001 by Ord. No. 01-556]
(a) For the first variance application: $300.
(b) For each additional variance application: $50.
(7) A variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d: [Amended 11-7-1988
by Ord. No. 88-326; 4-2-2001 by Ord. No. 01-556]
(a) For one- and two-family dwellings: $350.
(b) For all other structures: $1,000.
(8) Conditional use: $500. [Amended 11-7-1988 by Ord. No.
88-326]
(9) An appeal pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70a: $75.
(10) A request for interpretation pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70b: $75.
(11) An appeal to the Township Council from a decision of municipal
agency: $75.
B. In the event of an application involving a combination of two or more of
the above applications, the fee shall be computed by totaling the sum of
the fees required in connection with each type of application required.
C. The aforesaid fees shall be paid at the time the application is made for
review to the administrative officer of the Township of Cedar Grove, and
checks shall be made payable to the Township of Cedar Grove.
D. In the event that the applicant requests a special meeting and the
request is granted by the Board, the applicant shall pay an additional
fee for each such meeting in the amount of $250. Such fee must be paid
no later than 10 days before the scheduled special meeting. [Added
3-4-1991 by Ord. No. 91-378]
A. In connection with any application to the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment, in addition to the application fee, an applicant
shall deposit a cash escrow with the Board at the time of filing of an
application. The escrow shall be paid to the Township of Cedar Grove
and used by the municipality to pay for expenses incurred in connection
with any review of the application, including the following:
§ 38-26 LAND USE PROCEDURES § 38-26.1
38:81
(1) Professional services by outside consultants and/or the Township’s
professional staff retained to conduct a review or report and/or
testify in connection with the application. [Amended 6-4-2007 by
Ord. No. 07-678]
(2) Attorney's fees incurred in connection with time spent in
preparation of written reports and opinions and preparation of
resolutions. The escrow shall not be used to pay for normal
preparation for meetings or attendance at meetings which are
compensated through the attorney's meeting stipend or retainer.
B. Initial escrow.
(1) The initial amount of escrow to be posted shall be as follows:
(a) Minor subdivision: $1,000.
(b) Preliminary major subdivision: $750 per lot; minimum $3,000.
(c) Final major subdivision: $500 per lot; minimum $2,000.
(d) Preliminary site plan: $250 for each 1,000 square feet or part
thereof of floor area for commercial or industrial uses; $350
per dwelling unit for residential uses. The minimum fee shall
be $3,000 for a major site plan, or $1,000 for a minor site plan.
[Amended 4-2-2001 by Ord. No. 01-556]
(e) Final site plan: $125 for each 1,000 square feet of floor area or
part thereof for commercial or industrial uses; $75 per
dwelling unit for residential uses; minimum for any use $2,000.
(f) Informal review pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.1: $1,000.
(g) Conditional use: $5,000.
(h) Appeal pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70a: $1,000.
(i) Interpretation or special question pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70b: $1,000.
(j) C variance (each variance): $1,000, except for detached one- or
two-dwelling unit uses.
(k) D variance: [Amended 4-2-2001 by Ord. No. 01-556]
[1] For one- and two-family dwellings: $1,000.
[2] For all other structures: $7,500.
(2) Where an application to a Board involves more than one of the
above-listed matters, the escrow shall be computed by addition of
all appropriate escrow amounts.
C. Within 45 days after the filing of an application for development, the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the power,
§ 38-26.1 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 38-26.1
38:82
§ 38-26.2. Post-approval escrows. [Added 3-4-1991 by Ord. No.
91-378]
Subsequent to an approval of a final major subdivision or final site plan and
prior to any land disturbance taking place on the site, the developer shall
deposit with the municipality a post-approval cash escrow in an amount
equal to 5% of the anticipated cost of the installation of the proposed
improvements, as agreed to by the Township, including streets, grading,
pavement, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, streetlighting, shade trees, surveyors'
monuments, water mains, culverts, storm sewers, sanitary sewers or other
means of sewage disposal, drainage structures, erosion control and
sedimentation control devices, public improvements of open space and, in
the case of site plans only, other on-site improvements and landscaping. The
escrow shall be used by the municipality for payment of all fees and costs
incurred by the municipality in connection with the post-approval review
process, including the following:
§ 38-26.3. Escrow procedures. [Added 3-4-1991 by Ord. No. 91-378;
amended 4-2-2001 by Ord. No. 01-556]
after receipt of a recommendation from the Director of Community
Development, to determine whether the escrow amount set forth in
Subsection B above is adequate based upon the anticipated complexity
of issues to be presented or the number of professionals necessary to
be retained. In the event that the Board determines that the initial
escrow may be insufficient, then and in that event, the Board may adopt
a resolution requiring payment of a specific supplemental amount of
escrow. Such supplemental escrow shall be paid by the applicant prior
to the first scheduled date for hearing on the application. Failure to pay
the supplemental escrow shall result in a denial of the application.
A. Professional fees incurred by outside consultants and/or the Township’s
professional staff in connection with inspection of the various
improvements, together with any reports or information which may be
requested by the municipality from those professionals. [Amended
6-4-2007 by Ord. No. 07-678]
B. Attorneys' fees incurred in preparation of a developer's agreement,
opinions and reports obtained during the course of the development
and resolutions and other documents in connection with sureties,
acceptance of public improvements and other matters directly related
to the development.
A. The municipality shall make all of the payments for the fees and costs to
be charged against any initial, supplemental or post-approval escrow.
All payments charged to the escrow shall be made pursuant to vouchers
stating the hours spent, the hourly rate and the expenses incurred. All
unexpended sums shall be returned to the applicant or developer that
posted the escrow after all final charges are incurred. Charges to any
such escrow shall be made at the same rate as all other work of the
§ 38-26.1 LAND USE PROCEDURES § 38-26.3
38:83
§ 38-27. Hearings.
same nature charged by the professional to the municipality. Prior
to payment being authorized by the Township Council, vouchers for
services incurred by the Board shall be subject to review and
recommendation by the Board. Upon return of the balance of either
the initial or supplemental escrow or the post-approval escrow, the
municipality shall render a written final accounting to the applicant or
developer, as appropriate, indicating the uses to which the deposit was
put.
B. If at any time expenditures from an escrow account cause the account
balance to diminish to less than 25% of the initial deposit, that escrow
account shall be replenished to its full original balance. The procedure
to obtain these replenished escrow contributions shall be consistent
with this ordinance and the Municipal Land Use Law.
A. Necessity. The Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment shall
hold a hearing on each application for development, or adoption,
revision or amendment of the Master Plan.
B. Rules. The Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment may make
rules governing the conduct of hearings before such Boards, which
rules shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq. or of this chapter. Any maps and documents for which approval
is sought at a hearing shall be on file and available for public inspection
at least 10 days before the date of the hearing during normal business
hours in the office of the Planning and Zoning Coordinator. The
applicant may produce other documents, records or testimony at the
hearing to substantiate, clarify or supplement the previously filed maps
and documents.
C. Oaths. The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as he may
designate shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
evidence, including witnesses and documents presented by the parties,
and the provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law
(N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
D. Testimony. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding
officer, and the right of cross-examination shall be permitted to all
interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if
not represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to
reasonable limitations as to time and number of witnesses.
E. Evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the
hearing, but the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence.
F. Records.
§ 38-26.3 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 38-27
38:84
§ 38-28. Notice requirements for hearings on development
applications.
Whenever a hearing is required on an application for development pursuant
to § 38-27A, notice thereof shall be given as follows:
(1) Each Board shall provide for the verbatim recording of the
proceedings by either stenographic, mechanical or electronic
means. The Board shall furnish a transcript or duplicate recording
in lieu thereof on request made, in writing, to any interested party
at his expense.
(2) In the event that a hearing is started but not concluded at the same
meeting, the applicant, at its cost and expense, shall provide to the
Board three copies of a transcript of such hearing. The transcript
shall be prepared and submitted to the Board at least 10 days prior
to the scheduled continuation of the hearing. [Added 3-4-1991 by
Ord. No. 91-378]
A. Notice shall state the date, time and place of the hearing; the nature of
the matters to be considered; an identification of the property proposed
for development by street address, if any, and by reference to lot and
block numbers as shown on the current Township Tax Map; and the
location and times at which any maps and documents for which
approval is sought are available for inspection pursuant to § 38-27B.
B. The applicant shall cause notice of the hearing to be given by
publication in the official newspaper of the Township at least 10 days
prior to the date of the hearing. Proof of such publication shall be
supplied by the applicant to the Planning and Zoning Coordinator prior
to the hearing date. [Amended 6-16-1986 by Ord. No. 86-272]
C. The applicant shall cause notice to be given to the owners of all real
property, as shown on the current Township Tax Map, located within
200 feet in all directions of the property which is the subject of the
hearing. Such notice shall be given by serving a copy thereof on the
owner as shown on the said current Township Tax Map or his agent in
charge of the property, or by mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to
the property owner at his address shown on the said current Township
Tax Map. Notice to a partnership owner may be made by service upon
any partner. Notice to a corporate owner may be made by service upon
its president, a vice president, secretary or other person authorized by
appointment or by law to accept service on behalf of the corporation.
D. The applicant shall cause notice of all hearings on applications for
development involving property located within 200 feet of an adjoining
municipality to be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Clerk of such municipality, which notice shall be in addition to the
notice required to be given pursuant to Subsection C herein to the
owners of land in such adjoining municipality which are located within
200 feet of the subject premises.
§ 38-27 LAND USE PROCEDURES § 38-28
38:85
§ 38-29. Notice requirements for hearings concerning Master Plan.
The Planning Board shall give public notice of a hearing on adoption,
revision or amendment of the Master Plan as follows:
E. The applicant shall cause notice to be given by personal service or
certified mail to the County Planning Board of a hearing of any
application for development of property adjacent to an existing county
road or proposed road shown on the Official County Map or on the
County Master Plan, adjoining other county land or situate within 200
feet of a municipal boundary.
F. The applicant shall cause notice to be given by personal service or
certified mail to the Commissioner of Transportation of a hearing on an
application for development of property adjacent to a state highway.
G. The applicant shall cause notice to be given by personal service or
certified mail to the Director of the Division of State and Regional
Planning in the Department of Community Affairs of a hearing on an
application for development of property which exceeds 150 acres or
500 dwelling units. Such notice shall include a copy of any maps or
documents required to be on file with the Planning and Zoning
Coordinator pursuant to § 38-27B.
H. All notices hereinabove specified in this section to be given by the
applicant shall be given at least 10 days prior to the date fixed for the
hearing, and the applicant shall file an affidavit of proof of service with
the Board holding the hearing on the application for development.
I. Any notice made by certified mail as hereinabove required shall be
deemed to be complete upon mailing in accordance with the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-14.
A. Notice shall be given by publication in the official newspaper of the
Township at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing.
B. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the Clerk
of an adjoining municipality of all hearings on adoption, revision or
amendment of a Master Plan involving property situated within 200 feet
of such adjoining municipality at least 10 days prior to the date of any
such hearing.
C. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the County
Planning Board of all hearings on the adoption, revision or amendment
of the Master Plan at least 10 days prior to the hearing, and such notice
shall include a copy of any proposed Master Plan, or any revision or
amendment thereto, and the adoption, revision or amendment of the
Master Plan not more than 30 days after the date of such adoption,
revision or amendment, and such notice shall include a copy of the
Master Plan or revision or amendment thereto.
D. The form of notice shall be the same as that required in § 38-28A.
§ 38-28 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 38-29
38:86
§ 38-30. Certification of lists of property owners.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12c, the Planning and Zoning
Coordinator of the Township shall, within seven days after receipt of a
request therefor and upon receipt of payment of a fee of $10 make and
certify a list from the current tax duplicate of names and addresses of
owners to whom the applicant is required to give notice pursuant to
§ 38-28C.
§ 38-31. Form and notice of decisions.
§ 38-32. Conditional approvals.
E. Any notice made by certified mail as hereinabove required shall be
deemed to be complete upon mailing in accordance with the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-14.
A. Each decision on any application for development shall be in writing
and shall include findings of facts and conclusions based thereon.
B. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the Board within 10 days of the
date of decision to the applicant, or if represented, then to his attorney,
without separate charge. A copy of the decision shall also be mailed to
all persons who have requested it in writing and who have paid the fee
prescribed by the Township Council. A copy of the decision shall also be
filed in the office of the Planning and Zoning Coordinator, who shall
make the decision available for public inspection at his office during
reasonable hours.
C. A brief notice of the decision shall be published in the official
newspaper of the Township. The Planning and Zoning Coordinator shall
cause the notice to be published, shall charge the applicant the fee
prescribed by the Township Council and shall provide the applicant
with proof of publication.
A. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39 and 40:55D-65, every
application for development submitted to the Planning Board or to the
Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be accompanied by proof that no
taxes or assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent on
the property which is the subject of such application; or, if it is shown
that taxes or assessments are delinquent on said property, any
approvals or other relief granted by either Board shall be conditioned
upon either the prompt payment of such taxes or assessments or the
making of adequate provisions for the payment thereof in such manner
that the Township will be adequately protected.
B. In the event that a developer submits an application for development
proposing a development that is barred or prevented, directly or
indirectly, by a legal action instituted by any state agency, political
subdivision or other party to protect the public health and welfare or by
a directive or order issued by any state agency, political subdivision or
§ 38-29 LAND USE PROCEDURES § 38-32
38:87
§ 38-32.1. Developer's agreement with Township. [Added 2-3-1992
by Ord. No. 92-395]
Subsequent to every final approval of a development application and prior
to any land disturbance or construction on the property which is the subject
of such development application, the developer shall enter into a
developer's agreement with the Township. The Township Council shall have
the power to waive the requirement of a developer's agreement, by
resolution, in the event that it determines the matter is of such a nature that
an agreement is not necessary for purposes of enforcement of the decision
of the municipal agency and the protection of the public health, safety or
welfare. In the event that a developer seeks a final approval in phases, each
such approval shall require a developer's agreement in accordance with this
section. Notwithstanding the requirement of this section, no developer's
agreement shall be required in connection with a "C" variance for a oneor
two-family home which does not involve any subdivision, site plan or
conditional use application.
§ 38-32.2. Development fees. [Added 6-21-2004 by Ord. No. 04-610]
court of competent jurisdiction to protect the public health and welfare,
the Board shall process such application for development in accordance
with this chapter and Township development regulations; and, if such
application for development complies with Township development
regulations and this chapter, the Board shall approve such application
conditioned on removal of such legal barrier to development.
C. In the event that development proposed by an application for
development requires an approval by a governmental agency other
than the Board, the Board shall, in appropriate instances, condition its
approval upon the subsequent approval of such governmental agency,
provided that the Board shall make a decision on any application for
development within the time period provided in the development
regulations of the Township, including this chapter, or within an
extension of such period as may be agreed to by the applicant, unless
the Board is prevented or relieved from so acting by operation of law.
A. Purpose. In Holmdel Builder's Ass'n V. Holmdel Township, 121 N.J. 550
(1990), the New Jersey Supreme Court determined that mandatory
development fees are authorized by the Fair Housing Act of 1985,
N.J.S.A. 52:27d-301 et seq., and the State Constitution subject to the
Council on Affordable Housing's (COAH) adoption of rules. The purpose
of this section is to establish standards for the collection, maintenance
and expenditure of development fees pursuant to COAH's rules. Fees
collected pursuant to this section shall be used for the sole purpose of
providing low- and moderate-income housing. This section shall be
interpreted within the framework of COAH's rules on development fees.
B. Definitions. For purposes of this section and consistent with all
Township of Cedar Grove ordinances relating to the Township of Cedar
§ 38-32 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 38-32.2
38:88
Grove housing element and fair share housing plan, the following
definitions shall apply:
COAH — The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of
any land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having
an enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more
parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure,
or of any mining excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the
use of any building or other structure, or land or extension of use of
land, for which permission may be required pursuant to the New Jersey
Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.).
DEVELOPMENT FEES — Money paid by a developer for the
improvement of property as permitted in N.J.A.C. 5:94-6.[Amended
4-17-2006 by Ord. No. 06-641]
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The assessed value of a property
divided by the current state equalization ratio for the municipality.
Estimates at the time of building permit may be obtained by the Tax
Assessor utilizing estimates for construction cost. Final equalized
assessed value shall be determined at project completion by the
Municipal Assessor.[Amended 4-17-2006 by Ord. No. 06-641]
HOUSING UNIT — A house, apartment, room or group of rooms
occupied or intended to be occupied by a household living
independently of other households. The term shall also mean and
include a unit occupied or intended to be occupied by a household in
an alternative living arrangement.[Amended 4-17-2006 by Ord. No.
06-641]
JUDGMENT OF REPOSE — A judgment issued by the Superior Court
approving a municipality's plan to satisfy its fair share obligation.
SUBSTANTIVE CERTIFICATION — A determination by COAH
approving a municipality's Housing Element and Fair Share Plan in
accordance with the provisions of the Fair Housing Act and the rules
and criteria set forth by COAH. A grant of substantive certification shall
run for a period of 10 years beginning on the date that a municipality
files a Housing Element and Fair Share Plan with the Council in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 52:27D-313, but shall not extend beyond a
period of 10 years from December 20, 2005.[Amended 4-17-2006 by
Ord. No. 06-641]
C. Residential development fees. [Amended 4-17-2006 by Ord. No.
06-641]
(1) Developers shall pay a development fee of 1% of the equalized
assessed value for development of any new residential housing unit
§ 38-32.2 LAND USE PROCEDURES § 38-32.2
38:89
or units in any zoning district in the Township, provided no
increased density is permitted. If a "d" variance is granted pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d(1) to permit construction of a residential
unit or units in a district restricted against such use, this provision
shall apply equally to the new unit(s).
(2) The fee shall be realized on the equalized assessed value for each
unit, whether units are for sale or for rent.
(3) If a "d" variance is granted for density pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d(5), then the additional residential units realized (above
what is permitted by right under the existing zoning) will incur a
bonus development fee of 6% rather than the development fee of
1%. However, if the zoning on a site has changed during the twoyear
period preceding the filing of the "d" variance application, the
density for the purposes of calculating the bonus development fee
shall be the highest density permitted by right during the two-year
period preceding the filing of the "d" variance application. The fee
shall be based on the equalized assessed value for each unit,
whether units are for sale or for rent.
D. Nonresidential development fees. [Amended 4-17-2006 by Ord. No.
06-641]
(1) For nonresidential development in any zoning district within the
Township, developers shall pay a fee of 2% of the equalized
assessed value. If a "d" variance is granted to permit nonresidential
development in district restricted against such use, this provision
shall apply equally to the nonresidential construction. The fee shall
be based on the equalized assessed value whether the development
is intended for owner-occupancy, for sale or for rent.
(2) Where an existing nonresidential structure in any zoning district is
expanded, the development fee shall be calculated on the increase
in the equalized assessed value of the improved structure.
(3) If a "d" variance is granted for floor area pursuant to N.J.S.A
40:55D-70d(4), then the additional nonresidential floor area
realized (above what is permitted by right under the existing
zoning) will incur a bonus development fee of 6% rather than the
development fee of 2%. However, if the zoning on a site has
changed during the two-year period preceding the filing of the "d"
variance application, the floor area for the purposes of calculating
the bonus development fee shall be the highest permitted by right
during the two-year period preceding the filing of the "d" variance
application. The development fee shall be based on the equalized
assessed value of the nonresidential development.
E. Eligible exaction, ineligible exaction and exemptions.
(1) Developers of sites zoned for inclusionary development shall be
exempt from development fees.
§ 38-32.2 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 38-32.2
38:90
(2) Developers of low- and moderate-income housing units outside of
any area zoned for inclusionary development shall be exempt from
paying development fees for such units, provided said units are
fully compliant with all COAH regulations, inclusive of those
governing construction, occupancy, affordability controls, and
affirmative marketing.
(3) Developers that have received preliminary or final approval prior to
the effective date of this section shall be exempt from paying a
development fee unless the developer seeks a substantial change in
the approval. Such exemption shall expire at the time of expiration
of the applicable period of statutory protections provided pursuant
to the New Jersey Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S. 40:55D-1 et
seq.).
(4) Developers of additions or improvements to existing residential
housing units shall be exempt from paying a development fee.
(5) Developers of land, buildings, outbuildings and/or other structures
dedicated to any public park, playground, school, library, museum,
fire or emergency rescue service or any municipal facility shall be
exempt from paying a development fee.
(6) Developers of land, buildings, accessory buildings and/or other
structures dedicated to a house of worship shall be exempt from
paying a development fee.
F. Developers shall pay 50% of the calculated development fee to the
Township of Cedar Grove at the time of issuance of building permits.
The remaining 50% shall be paid at the issuance of certificate(s) of
occupancy. [Amended 4-17-2006 by Ord. No. 06-641]
G. Housing trust fund.
(1) There is hereby created an interest-bearing housing trust fund in
the State Street Bank and Trust, Co. (State of New Jersey Cash
Management Fund, Morgan Stanley Trust Custodian) for the
purpose of receiving development fees from residential and
nonresidential developers in the Township of Cedar Grove. All
development fees paid by developers pursuant to this section shall
be deposited in this fund. No money shall be expended from the
housing trust fund unless the expenditure conforms to a spending
plan approved by COAH.
(2) If COAH determines that the Township of Cedar Grove is not in
conformance with COAH's rules on development fees, COAH is
authorized to direct the manner in which all development fees
collected pursuant to this section shall be expended. Such
authorization is pursuant to this section, COAH's rules on
development fees and written authorization from the governing
body to the State Street Bank and Trust, Co. (State of New Jersey
Cash Management Fund, Morgan Stanley Trust Custodian).
§ 38-32.2 LAND USE PROCEDURES § 38-32.2
38:91
H. Use of funds.
(1) Money deposited in the housing trust fund may be used for any
activity approved by COAH for addressing the Township of Cedar
Grove's low- and moderate-income housing obligation. Such
activities may include, but are not necessarily limited to, housing
rehabilitation, new construction, regional contribution agreements,
the purchase of land for low- and moderate-income housing,
extensions and/or improvements of roads and infrastructure to lowand
moderate-income housing sites, assistance designed to render
units more affordable to low- and moderate-income households and
administrative costs necessary to implement the Township of Cedar
Grove's housing element. The expenditure of all money shall
conform to a spending plan approved by COAH.
(2) At least 30% of the revenues collected shall be devoted to render
units more affordable. Examples of such activities include, but are
not limited to, down payment and closing cost assistance, lowinterest
loans and rental assistance. This provision shall not apply
in the case of development fees collected to finance an RCA, a
rehabilitation program, a new construction project or unless
otherwise exempt as per N.J.A.C. 5:93-8-16(c).
(3) No more than 20% of the revenues shall be expended on
administrative costs necessary to develop, revise or implement the
housing element. Examples of eligible administrative activities
include personnel, consultant services, space costs, consumable
supplies and rental or purchase of equipment directly associated
with plan development or plan implementation.
I. Expiration of Ordinance. This section shall expire if COAH dismisses or
denies Cedar Grove's petition for substantive certification, if
substantive certification expires prior to Cedar Grove receiving COAH's
approval of this section or if COAH revokes Cedar Grove's substantive
certification or this section.
§ 38-32.2 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 38-32.2
38:92
ARTICLE IV
Appeals
§ 38-33. Appeals to Zoning Board of Adjustment.
An appeal to the Zoning Board of Adjustment may be taken by any
interested party affected by any decision of an administrative officer of the
Township based on or made in the enforcement of Chapter 268, Zoning,
or Official Map in accordance with the provisions of § 38-18 and N.J.S.A.
40:55D-72 et seq.
§ 38-34. Appeals to Township Council.
A. Any interested party may appeal to the Township Council any final
decision of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment. Such
appeal shall be made within 10 days of the date of publication of such
final decision pursuant to § 38-31C. The appeal to the Township Council
shall be made by serving the Township Clerk in person or by certified
mail with a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof and the
name and address of the appellant and name and address of his
attorney, if represented. Such appeal shall be decided by the Township
Council only upon the record established before the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment.
B. Notice of the meeting to review the record shall be given by the
Township Council by personal service or certified mail to the appellant,
to those entitled to notice of a decision pursuant to § 38-31B and to the
Board from which the appeal is taken, at least 10 days prior to the date
of the meeting. The parties may submit oral and written argument on
the record at such meeting, and the Township Council shall provide for
verbatim recording and transcripts of such meeting pursuant to
§ 38-27F.
C. The Township Council shall conclude a review of the record within the
time limits prescribed by law as may be extended. In all appeals, except
for an appeal resulting from the granting of a variance by the Zoning
Board of Adjustment under authority of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d, the
appellant shall provide and assume the expense for an original and six
copies of a transcript for use by the Township Council pursuant to
§ 38-27F. In the event of an appeal from a decision of the Zoning Board
of Adjustment granting a variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d, the
appellant shall pay the first $50 of the cost of production of the
aforesaid transcripts, and the Township of Cedar Grove and the
appellant shall share equally in the cost of production of the transcripts
above such amount. [Amended 12-5-1983 by Ord. No. 83-208]
D. The Township Council may reverse, remand or affirm, wholly or in part,
or may modify the final decision of the Planning Board or Zoning Board
of Adjustment, as the case may be.
§ 38-33 LAND USE PROCEDURES § 38-34
38:93
E. The affirmative vote of a majority of the full authorized membership of
the Township Council shall be necessary to reverse, remand and/or
modify any final action of either Board.
F. An appeal to the Township Council shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the action in respect to which the decision appealed from
was made, unless the Board from whose action the appeal is taken
certifies to the Township Council, after a notice of appeal shall have
been filed with such Board, that by reason of facts stated in the
certificate, a stay would, in its opinion, cause imminent peril to life or
property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by
court order.
G. The Township Council shall mail a copy of the decision to the appellant
or, if represented, then to his attorney, without separate charge, and for
a fee to be established by it to any interested party who has requested
in writing a copy of the decision, not later than 10 days after the date of
the decision. The Township Clerk shall cause a brief notice of the
decision to be published in the official newspaper of the Township, shall
charge the appellant the fee prescribed by the Township Council and
shall provide the appellant with proof of publication. The applicant may
also arrange publication at his option. The time to file a notice of appeal
shall commence to run from the first publication of the decision, by
whomever arranged.
H. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to restrict the right of any
party to obtain a review by any court of competent jurisdiction
according to law. [Amended 4-4-1977 by Ord. No. 77-41]
§ 38-34 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 38-34
38:94
ARTICLE V
General Provisions
§ 38-35. Definitions.
Whenever a term is used in the development regulations of the Township,
including this chapter, which is defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., such
term is intended to have the meaning set forth in the definition of such
term found in said statute, unless a contrary intent is clearly expressed in
the context of the development regulation. The term "administrative officer"
shall mean the Planning and Zoning Coordinator.
§ 38-36. Repealer.
A. All sections of the Land Subdivision Ordinance, Zoning Ordinance, Site
Plan Review Ordinance29 or any other ordinance of the Township of
Cedar Grove which contain provisions contrary to the provisions of this
chapter shall be and are hereby, to the extent of such inconsistency,
repealed.
B. Specifically repealed, without limiting the generality of the implied
repealer expressed above, are the following chapters, articles and
sections of the general ordinances and Chapter 268, Zoning, of the
Township:
(1) General ordinances repealed:
(a) Chapter 5, Article 1, Sections 1 through 12.30
(b) Chapter 5, Article 2, Sections 13 through 18.1.31
(2) Zoning Ordinances repealed:32
(a) Article XIII, Section 1, preliminary provisions dealing with
expiration and revocation of exceptions, variances and building
permits, only [Revised Ordinance No. 74-3(a)].
(b) Article XIII, Section 2(e), the second and third unnumbered
paragraphs, only [Revised Ordinance No. 74-3(a)].
(c) Article XIII, Section 3.
29.Editor's Note: See Ch. 234, Subdivision of Land, and Ch. 268, Zoning.
30.Editor's Note: Said Ch. 5, Art. 1, Secs. 1 through 12, of the former Revised Ordinances was
the ordinance establishing the Planning Board, adopted 7-6-1954, as amended 7-29-1955
and 8-19-1963, pursuant to the former statute.
31.Editor's Note: Said Ch. 5, Art. 2, Secs. 13 through 18.1, of the former Revised Ordinances
was the ordinance establishing the Zoning Board of Adjustment, adopted 7-29-1955, as
amended 12-12-1960, 5-6-1963, 10-7-1963, 8-10-1964, 2-6-1967 by Ord. No. 67-4 and
10-2-1967 by Ord. No. 67-13, pursuant to the former statute.
32.Editor's Note: The references in Subsection B(2)(a), (b) and (c) are to a prior Zoning
Ordinance which is no longer in effect. See now the revised Zoning Ordinance in Ch. 268,
Zoning.
§ 38-35 LAND USE PROCEDURES § 38-37
38:95
§ 38-37. Continuance of pending applications.
All applications for development filed prior to the effective date of this
chapter may be continued, but any appeals arising out of decisions made on
any such application shall be governed by the provisions of Article IV of this
chapter.
§ 38-38. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Land Use Procedures
Ordinance of the Township of Cedar Grove."
§ 38-39. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect on February 1, 1977, in order to comply
with the requirements of the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-92,
and in accordance with the resolution declaring an emergency adopted
concurrently herewith.
§ 38-40. Filing of chapter.
Immediately upon adoption of this chapter, the Township Clerk shall file a
copy with the County Planning Board as required by law. The Clerk shall
also file with the County Planning Board copies of all other ordinances of
the Township relating to land use, such as the Land Subdivision, Zoning and
Site Plan Review Ordinances. 33
§ 38-41. Authority and intent.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the requirements and authority of the
Municipal Land Use Law of New Jersey, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., and is
intended to implement the provisions of said statute which are mandatory
and to elect the optional provisions thereof to the extent that the same are
specifically recited herein. To the extent that the powers and limitations
of the Zoning and Planning Boards may not be fully recited herein, the
statutory provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. shall be deemed to control.
33.Editor's Note: See Ch. 234, Subdivision of Land, and Ch. 268, Zoning.
§ 38-37 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 38-41
38:96
Chapter 39
LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 23. Volunteer organizations — See Ch. 74.
§ 38-41 LAND USE PROCEDURES § 38-41
38:97

ARTICLE I
Volunteer Fire Department
[Adopted 8-21-2000 by Ord. No. 00-539]
§ 39-1. Establishment.
A length of service awards program (LOSAP) is hereby created in
accordance with Chapter 388 of the Laws of 1997, being N.J.S.A. 40:14-183
et seq., to reward members of the volunteer fire department for their loyal,
diligent, and devoted services to the residents of the Township of Cedar
Grove.
§ 39-2. Purpose.
The LOSAP shall provide for fixed annual contributions to a deferred income
account for each volunteer member that meets the criteria set forth below;
that such contributions shall be established by the Mayor and Council of
the Township of Cedar Grove pursuant to P.L. 1997, c. 388; and that such
plan shall be administered in accordance with the laws of the State of New
Jersey, the US Internal Revenue Code, and this article.
§ 39-3. Calculation of annual contributions. [Amended 3-20-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-805]
The LOSAP shall provide for annual contributions to each eligible member
in accordance with the following credit system:
A. Credits based upon years of service. An active volunteer member shall
receive credit for a qualifying year earned by such member. A
"qualifying year" shall be defined as a calendar year during which such
member has been awarded at least 100 points pursuant to the following
point system:
(1) Fire Department responses: 50 points maximum, 30 points
minimum. Points are credited based upon the following schedule of
percent attendance at the Fire Department responses to which
volunteer firefighters have been dispatched:
Percent
Attendance Points
20% to 29.9% 30
30% to 39.9% 40
40% and over 50
(2) Drills: 36 points maximum, 14 points minimum. Points are credited
for participation in Fire Department authorized fire company,
mutual aid and special drills:
(a) Department drills: two points; and
§ 39-1 LAND USE PROCEDURES § 39-3
38:99
(b) Company drills: two points.
(3) Training: 30 points maximum. Points are credited for certified
firematic training courses upon receipt of certification of
completion:
(a) Authorized course where attendance required is less than 20
hours: 10 points;
(b) Authorized course where attendance required is more than 20
hours, but less than 40 hours: 20 points; and
(c) Authorized course where attendance is required for 40 or more
hours: 30 points.
(4) Holder of an elected or appointed firematic position: 50 points
maximum. Points are credited for completion of one-year term in
position.
(a) Department Chief: 50 points.
(b) Deputy Chiefs: 40 points.
(c) Captain: 30 points.
(d) Dir. of Fire Prevention: 30 points.
(e) Lieutenant: 25 points.
(f) Drivers: 15 points.
(g) Fire Prevention Inspector: 15 points.
(h) Ex-Chief: 10 points.
(i) Fire Service Instructor: 10 points.
(j) Public Information Officer: 10 points.
(k) NIFRS Reports Officer: 10 points.
(l) LOSAP Coordinator: 10 points.
(m) Respiratory Protection Off.: 10 points.
(n) Operations/Tech Rescue Specialist: 10 points.
(o) Trench/Auto/Conf. Space: 10 points.
(p) Emergency Medical Tech: 10 points.
(5) Meetings: 36 points maximum, 14 points minimum. Points will be
credited for attendance at regular and special Department and Fire
Company meetings:
(a) Department meetings: two points; and
§ 39-3 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 39-3
38:100
§ 39-4. Maximum annual contribution. [Amended 3-20-2017 by Ord.
No. 17-805]
The maximum annual contribution for an active volunteer member shall
be $1,150 per year, with an annual adjustment due to changes in the CPI
beginning in January 2017 in accordance with the Director of the Division of
Local Government Services' annual calculation published in a local finance
notice and in the New Jersey Register.
§ 39-5. Maximum credit for prior years' service.
The LOSAP shall authorize the crediting of prior year service up to a
maximum of 10 years.
§ 39-6. Budget.
The estimated total amount to be budgeted for the program is $50,312.50
for the program's initiation year and $28,750 for the subsequent year.
(b) Company meetings: two points.
(6) Administrative officials and appointees: 20 points maximum. Points
will be credited for completion of a one-year term in an elected or
appointed position. Five points each for the following positions:
(a) Department or Company President;
(b) Department or Company Vice President;
(c) Department or Company Secretary;
(d) Department or Company Treasurer;
(e) Exempt Fireman Status;
(f) Relief or Exempt Association President;
(g) Relief or Exempt Association Secretary;
(h) Relief or Exempt Association Treasurer;
(i) Relief or Exempt Association Representative; and
(j) Relief or Exempt Association Delegate.
(7) Committee activities: 20 points maximum. Points will be credited
for active participation in official Fire Department committees as
authorized by the Chief of the Department:
(a) Committee Chair: four points; and
(b) Committee Member: two points.
§ 39-3 LAND USE PROCEDURES § 39-7
38:101
§ 39-7. When effective.
This article shall not take effect unless it is approved by the voters as a
public question at the next general election as provided by New Jersey State
statute,34 and if approved shall become effective January 1, 2001.
34.Editor's Note: Ord. No. 00-539 was approved at election 11-7-2000.
§ 39-7 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 39-7
38:102
ARTICLE II
Ambulance and Rescue Squad
[Adopted 9-11-2000 by Ord. No. 00-540]
§ 39-8. Establishment.
A length of service awards program (LOSAP) is hereby created in
accordance with Chapter 388 of the Laws of 1997, being N.J.S.A. 40:14-188
et seq., to reward members of the Cedar Grove Ambulance and Rescue
Squad for their loyal, diligent, and devoted services to the residents of the
Township of Cedar Grove.
§ 39-9. Purpose.
The LOSAP shall provide for fixed annual contributions to a deferred income
account for each volunteer member that meets the criteria set forth below;
that such contributions shall be established by the Mayor and Council of
the Township of Cedar Grove pursuant to P.L. 1997, c. 388; and that such
plan shall be administered in accordance with the laws of the State of New
Jersey, the US Internal Revenue Code, and this article.
§ 39-10. Calculation of annual contributions.
The LOSAP shall provide for annual contributions to each eligible member
in accordance with the following one-hundred-point credit system. For
purposes set forth herein, an eligible member shall be defined as a member
who earns 100 points in any year. Ambulance and Rescue Squad Point
System:
A. Ambulance and Rescue Squad responses: 60 points maximum. Points
are credited based on the following schedule of percent duty time at the
Ambulance and Rescue Squad to which volunteers have been on duty
for a twelve-hour shift. Shifts covered by other members are not
included.
70% to 79.9% duty time = 20 points
80% to 89.9% duty time = 40 points
90% and up of duty time = 60 points
B. Extra duty: 50 point maximum. One point is awarded for each extra
duty call answered. This includes second and third calls; first calls that
do not have preassigned duty crew.
C. Drills: 36 points maximum, 12 points minimum. Points are credited for
participation in Ambulance and Rescue Squad drills. Two points per
drill hour.
D. Training: 36 points maximum. Points are credited for training courses.
Proof of course and hours are required.
§ 39-8 LAND USE PROCEDURES § 39-10
38:103
§ 39-11. Maximum annual contribution. [Amended 3-20-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-805]
The maximum annual contribution for an active volunteer member shall
be $1,150 per year, with an annual adjustment due to changes in the CPI
beginning in January 2017 in accordance with the Director of the Division of
Local Government Services' annual calculation published in a local finance
notice and in the New Jersey Register.
(1) Authorized training: 2 points per training hour.
(2) EMT initial training: 10 points.
E. Holder of an elected or appointed position: 25 points maximum. Points
are credited for completion of one-year term in an elected or appointed
position.
(1) Captain: 25 points.
(2) President: 25 points.
(3) Assistant Captain: 20 points.
(4) Vice President: 20 points.
(5) Rescue Lieutenant: 15 points.
(6) Ambulance Lieutenant: 15 points.
(7) Corresponding Secretary: 15 points.
(8) Recording Secretary: 15 points.
(9) Treasurer: 15 points.
(10) Vehicle Officer: 5 points.
(11) Training Officer: 5 points.
(12) Supply Officer: 5 points.
(13) Instructors - EMT, CPR, CEVO First Aid or other credential: 2
points.
F. Membership meetings: 24 points maximum. Points will be credited for
attendance at regular and special meetings. Two points per meeting.
G. Regular committee activities: 15 points maximum. Points will be
credited for active participation in official Ambulance and Rescue
Squad committees as authorized by the President. Committee
Chairman: three points.35
35.Editor's Note: Former Subsection H, regarding work details/sanctioned activities, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 17-805.
§ 39-10 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 39-12
38:104
§ 39-12. Maximum credit for prior years' service.
LOSAP shall authorize the crediting of prior year service up to a maximum
of 10 years.
§ 39-13. Budget.
The estimated total amount to be budgeted for the program is $35,937.50
for the program's initiation year.
§ 39-14. When effective.
This article shall not take effect unless it is approved by the voters as a
public question at the next general election as provided by New Jersey State
statute,36 and if approved shall become effective January 1, 2001.
36.Editor's Note: Ord. No. 00-540 was approved at election 11-7-2000.
§ 39-12 LAND USE PROCEDURES § 39-14
38:105
Chapter 40
LIBRARY BOARD, PUBLIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 3. Use of library — See Ch. 165.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Establishment — See N.J.S.A. 40:54-1 et seq. Board of Trustees - See N.J.S.A. 40:54-9 et seq.
§ 40-1. Continuation of library and Board of Trustees.
The Free Public Library of the Township of Cedar Grove, under the
management of a Board of Trustees, heretofore established pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:54-1 et seq., is hereby continued.
§ 40-2. Membership of Board of Trustees; terms; filling of
vacancies.
§ 40-3. Members to serve without compensation; limitations on
expenses.
The Trustees shall receive no compensation for their services and shall not
incur any expense or enter into any obligations to an amount in excess of
the annual appropriation for the library purposes and of the funds on hand.
§ 40-4. Powers and duties of Board of Trustees.
The Board of Trustees shall:
A. The Board of Trustees shall consist of seven members: one of whom
shall be the Mayor or the Mayor's designee; one, the local
Superintendent of Schools or the Superintendent's designee; and five
citizens appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the governing body.
The appointments shall be for terms as prescribed by general law. Upon
the expiration of the term of office of any citizen Trustee or upon the
vacancy occurring in the Board during any unexpired term thereof, the
Mayor shall, with the consent of the governing body, make such
appointment or fill such vacancy for the unexpired term. [Amended
4-17-2000 by Ord. No. 00-530]
B. A Trustee's absence from 50% or more of the regularly scheduled
meetings of the Board in any twelve-month period shall require and
cause his removal from the Board. The Chairman or presiding officer
shall advise the Mayor of such excessive absences, and the Mayor shall
fill the vacancy for the unexpired term. [Added 5-16-1977 by Ord.
No. 77-46]
§ 39-14 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 40-4
40:106
§ 40-5. Annual report of Board of Trustees.
The Board of Trustees shall annually make a report of its transactions,
accounts and the state and condition of the library to the governing body of
the municipality.
Chapter 42
LOCAL ASSISTANCE BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 3.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Public assistance generally — See N.J.S.A.
44:8-107 et seq.
Local boards — See N.J.S.A. 44:8-114 et seq.
§ 42-1. Board established; membership.
A. Have the power to engage suitable rooms for the use of the library and
reading room and shall have the supervision, care and control thereof.
B. Adopt proper rules and regulations for the government of the library in
order to render the use of the library and reading room of the greatest
benefit to the greatest number of residents of the Township.
C. Have the power to exclude from the use of the library and reading room
any and all persons who shall willfully violate its rules and regulations.
D. Hire librarians and other personnel and fix their compensation. In so
doing, the Board shall attempt to follow the provisions of Chapter 52,
Personnel, in order to effect uniform treatment for all municipal
employees.
E. Generally to do all things necessary and proper for the maintenance of
the public library of the Township.
F. Exercise such other powers as may be authorized and perform such
other duties as may be prescribed by general law or by ordinances of
the Council not inconsistent with the Optional Municipal Charter Law.37
A. There shall be a Local Assistance Board consisting of five members, and
they shall be appointed by the Township Manager in consultation with
the Township Council. [Amended 1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 77-64]
37.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 et seq.
§ 40-4 LOCAL ASSISTANCE BOARD § 42-1
42:107
§ 42-2. Terms of members; filling of vacancies.
§ 42-3. Powers and duties.
The Local Assistance Board and its Director of Welfare appointed by the
Township Manager shall have and perform the powers and duties
prescribed by the General Public Assistance Law (N.J.S.A. 44:8-107 et seq.).
Chapter 45
MUNICIPAL ALLIANCE COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 83. Controlled dangerous substances — See Ch.
179, Art. II.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Appointment of Committee — See N.J.S.A.
26:2BB-1 et seq.
§ 45-1. Statutory authority.
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has in P.L. 1989, Chapter 51,
approved March 27, 1989, established a Governor's Council on Alcoholism
and Drug Abuse and permitted the governing body of each municipality
to appoint a Municipal Alliance Committee to identify alcoholism and drug
prevention, education and community needs. Therefore, the governing body
of the Township of Cedar Grove, County of Essex and State of New Jersey,
does hereby ordain as follows.
§ 45-2. Findings.
B. The members of the Board shall serve without compensation, but shall
be allowed their necessary and actual expenses.
A. The terms of members of the Board shall be as follows:
(1) The term of one member shall be for one year, and such member
only may be appointed from among the membership of the Council.
(2) The terms of the remaining four members shall be for four years
each, one term expiring in each year.
B. The term of each member of the Board shall begin on the first day of
January, and each member shall continue in office until his successor
shall be appointed and shall qualify.
C. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term only.
§ 42-1 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 45-2
45:108
§ 45-3. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to establish a means for the Township of
Cedar Grove to actively participate in the state's efforts against alcoholism
and drug abuse by:
§ 45-4. Establishment; membership.
§ 45-5. Appointments; terms.
A. Alcoholism and drug abuse are major health problems facing the
residents of the State of New Jersey and the Township of Cedar Grove.
B. The cooperation and active participation of all communities in the state
is necessary to achieve the goal of reducing alcoholism and drug abuse.
A. Organizing and coordinating efforts involving schools, law
enforcement, business groups and other community organizations for
the purpose of reducing alcoholism and drug abuse.
B. In cooperation with local schools, developing comprehensive and
effective alcoholism and drug abuse education programs.
C. Developing comprehensive alcoholism and drug abuse education,
support and outreach efforts for parents in the community.
D. Developing comprehensive alcoholism and drug abuse community
awareness programs.
A. There shall be a Cedar Grove Municipal Alliance Committee which shall
serve in an advisory capacity to the governing body in matters
concerning the identification of alcoholism and drug prevention,
education and community needs and implementation of programs
formulated pursuant to this chapter.
B. The Cedar Grove Municipal Alliance Committee shall consist of 14
members: one of whom shall be a member of the governing body; one of
whom shall be a representative of the Board of Education; one of whom
shall be a representative of the Townwide Family and School
Association; one of whom shall be a member of the Cedar Grove Police
Department; one of whom shall be a municipal department head; and
nine citizens, one of whom may be a local religious representative.
[Amended 3-19-1990 by Ord. No. 90-359; 3-16-1992 by Ord. No.
92-397; 1-4-1993 by Ord. No. 92-414]
A. The one representative of the governing body and the one
representative of the Board of Education shall be appointed by and
serve at the pleasure of the Township Council and Board of Education,
respectively.
B. The balance of the members of the Committee shall be appointed by the
Township Council and shall serve for a period of three years, except
§ 45-2 MUNICIPAL ALLIANCE COMMITTEE § 45-5
45:109
§ 45-6. Vacancies.
In the event of the resignation of any member appointed pursuant to § 45-5B
above or his death or inability to serve or his absence from 50% or more
of the regularly scheduled meetings of the Committee in any twelve-month
period, in which latter event removal shall automatically occur, the
Township Council shall fill said vacancy for the remainder of the unexpired
term.
§ 45-7. Organization; officers.
§ 45-8. Meetings.
The Municipal Alliance Committee shall hold regular monthly meetings at
the same time and day of each month in the Township Municipal Building as
set in its organizational meeting in January. Special meetings may be called
by the Chairman on three days' notice to each member of the Committee.
The Committee may make and amend rules and regulations concerning the
conduct of its meetings.
§ 45-9. Powers and duties.
The Municipal Alliance Committee shall make recommendations to the
Township Council for:
that the respective terms of office of the originally appointed members
shall be as follows:
(1) Four members shall serve for terms of three years.
(2) Three members shall serve for terms of two years.
(3) Two members shall serve for terms of one year.
C. The term of each member, except for the initial term, shall begin on the
first day of January, and each member shall continue in office until his
successor shall be appointed.
A. The Municipal Alliance Committee shall elect a Chairman, Vice
Chairman and Secretary at its organizational meeting in January.
B. The Secretary shall keep minutes of all the meetings of the Committee,
which minutes and copies of official correspondence of the Committee
shall be kept on file in the office of the Township Clerk.
A. Creating a network of community leaders, private citizens and
representatives from public and private human service agencies who
are dedicated to a comprehensive and coordinated effort to promote
and support drug and alcohol prevention and education programs and
related activities with an emphasis on youth.
B. Conducting an assessment of the community to determine the needs of
the community in relation to alcoholism and drug abuse issues.
§ 45-5 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 45-9
45:110
Chapter 46
(RESERVED)
Chapter 47
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 3. Shade Tree Committee — See Ch. 67.
§ 47-1. Establishment.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 et seq., there is hereby established an
Environmental Commission in the Township of Cedar Grove for the
protection, development or use of natural resources, including water
resources, within the territorial limits of the Township.
§ 47-2. Membership; compensation; terms; alternate members.
C. Identifying existing efforts and services acting to reduce alcoholism and
drug abuse.
D. Coordinating projects within the municipality to avoid fragmentation
and duplication.
E. Developing programs to be implemented at the municipal level or
participate in regionally developed programs that accomplish the
purpose of the Alliance effort and the purposes of the Municipal
Alliance Committee.
F. Assisting the municipality in acquiring funds for Alliance programs and
developing a subcommittee on fundraising.
G. Cooperating with the Governor's Council on Alcoholism and Drug
Abuse and the County Local Advisory Committee on Alcoholism and
Drug Abuse/Alliance Steering Subcommittee to provide municipal data,
reports or other information which may be required for the County
Annual Alliance Plan or needed to assist the Alliance effort.
A. The Environmental Commission shall consist of seven members
appointed by the governing body, one of whom shall be a member of the
Township Planning Board and all of whom shall be residents of the
Township of Cedar Grove. The members shall serve without
compensation except as herein provided. The governing body shall
designate one of the members to serve as Chair and presiding officer of
the Commission. Members shall serve for terms of three years or until a
successor is appointed and qualified, except that of the first members
§ 45-9 (RESERVED) § 47-2
46:111
§ 47-3. Powers and duties.
appointed, the terms of three members shall expire on December 31,
2000, the terms of three members shall expire on December 31, 2001,
and the term of one member shall expire on December 31, 2002.
B. The governing body may remove any member of the Commission for
cause on written charges served on the member and after a hearing
thereon at which the member shall be entitled to be heard in person or
by counsel.
C. A vacancy on the Commission which occurs otherwise than by
expiration of a term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same
manner as the original appointment.
D. The governing body may appoint not more than two alternate members
to be designated as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." The terms
of the alternate members shall be for two years, except that the terms
of the alternate members first appointed shall be two years for
Alternate No. 1 and one year for Alternate No. 2. A vacancy which
occurs otherwise than by expiration of a term shall be filled by the
governing body for the unexpired term only.
E. An alternate member, after public hearing, if one is requested, may be
removed by the governing body for cause.
F. An alternate member may participate in discussion of the proceedings
but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member
may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice
must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1
shall vote first.
G. No member or alternate member shall be permitted to act on any
matter in which he or she, either directly or indirectly, has any personal
or financial interest.
A. The Environmental Commission shall have power to conduct research
into the use and possible use of the open land areas of the municipality
and may coordinate the activities of unofficial bodies organized for
similar purposes, and may advertise, prepare, print and distribute
books, maps, charts, plans and pamphlets which in its judgment it
deems necessary for it purposes with the approval of the governing
body.
B. The Commission shall keep an index of all open areas, publicly or
privately owned, including open marshlands, swamps and other
wetlands, in order to obtain information on the proper use of such areas
and may from time to time recommend to the Township Planning Board
or the Mayor and Council plans and programs for inclusion in the
Master Plan and the development and use of such areas.
§ 47-2 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 47-3
47:112
§ 47-4. Records; annual report.
The Environmental Commission shall keep records of its meetings and
activities and shall make an annual report to the governing body.
§ 47-5. Appropriation of funds.
The governing body may appropriate funds for the expenses incurred by the
Environmental Commission. The Commission may appoint such clerks and
employees as it may from time to time require within the limits of funds
appropriated to it.
§ 47-6. Studies and recommendations.
The Environmental Commission shall have power to study and make
recommendations concerning open space preservation, water resources
management, air pollution control, solid waste management, noise control,
soil and landscape protection, environmental appearance, marine resources
and protection of flora and fauna.
Chapter 52
PERSONNEL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 3.
Fire Department — See Ch. 23.
Public Library Board — See Ch. 40.
Police Department — See Ch. 55.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 61.
C. The Environmental Commission may, subject to the approval of the
governing body, acquire property, both real and personal, in the name
of the Township by gift, purchase, grant, bequest, devise or lease for
any of its purposes and shall administer the same for such purposes
subject to the terms of the conveyance or gift. Such an acquisition may
be to acquire the fee or any lessor interest, development right,
easement (including conservation easement), covenant or other
contractual right (including a conveyance on conditions or with
limitations or reversions), as may be necessary to acquire, maintain,
improve, protect, or limit the future use of or otherwise conserve and
properly utilize open spaces and other land and water areas in the
Township.
§ 47-3 PERSONNEL § 47-6
52:113
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Appointment of officers and employees
generally — See N.J.S.A. 40:69A-100.
Powers and duties of Manager — See N.J.S.A.
40:69A-95 et seq.
Officers and employees generally — See
N.J.S.A. 40A:9-1 et seq.
Temporary leaves of absence — See N.J.S.A.
40A:9-158.
Leaves for employees entering armed
forces — See N.J.S.A. 40A:9-159.
Removal of officers and employees — See
N.J.S.A. 40A:9-161.
Salaries and compensation — See N.J.S.A.
40A:9-165.
Fire — See N.J.S.A. 40A:14-7 et seq.
Police — See N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118 et seq.
Personnel Advisory Board — See N.J.S.A.
40:69A-95.
§ 47-6 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 47-6
52:114
ARTICLE I
Personnel Policy; Scope
§ 52-1. Declaration of policy.
The Council does hereby declare the following principles to constitute the
personnel policy of the Township:
§ 52-2. Authority to appoint and promote personnel.
All employees, officers and department heads of the Township shall be
appointed and promoted by the Township Manager, except where the power
to appoint rests with the Township Council or other Township boards or
bodies as provided by the Optional Municipal Charter Law, general law, this
chapter or other ordinance of the Township.
§ 52-3. Allocation of offices and positions to classified or exempt
service.
A. Employment in the Township government shall be based on merit and
fitness, free of personal and political considerations.
B. Just and equitable incentives and conditions shall be established and
maintained in order to promote efficiency and economy in the operation
of the Township government.
C. Positions with similar duties and responsibilities shall be classified and
compensated for on a uniform basis.
D. Appointments, promotions and other personnel actions requiring the
application of the merit principle shall be based on systematic tests and
evaluations.
E. Every effort shall be made to stimulate high morale by fair
administration of this chapter and by consideration of the rights and
interests of employees, consistent with the best interests of the public
and the Township.
F. Continuity of employment shall be subject to good behavior, satisfactory
performance of work, necessity for the performance of work and
availability of funds.
A. General allocation. All offices and positions of the Township shall be and
are hereby allocated to the classified service and exempt service.
B. Exempt service. The exempt service shall include the following:
(1) All elected officials and members of citizen boards and committees.
(2) Township Manager, Township Clerk, Township Attorney and
Township Auditor.
(3) Members of the Volunteer Fire Department.
§ 52-1 PERSONNEL § 52-3
52:115
§ 52-4. Applicability. [Amended 1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 77-64]
The provisions of this chapter, hereinafter set forth, shall apply only to the
classified service unless otherwise specifically provided therein. Employees
who are members of a union or who bargain with the Township collectively
through an appointed bargaining agent shall be subject to the terms and
conditions of their applicable collective bargaining agreements and such
portions of this chapter which are not in conflict therewith. In the event
that there is a conflict between any provision of this chapter and those
provisions contained in the current collective bargaining agreement, it is
understood that the provisions of the negotiated contract shall prevail.
(4) Positions involving seasonal or part-time employment.
(5) Volunteer personnel and personnel appointed to serve without
compensation.
(6) Consultants and counsel rendering temporary professional service.
C. Classified service. The classified service shall include all other full-time
positions in the Township service which are not specifically placed in
the exempt service by this chapter.
§ 52-3 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 52-4
52:116
ARTICLE II
Position-Classification Plan
§ 52-5. Analysis of positions; submission of recommendations;
assignment of positions. [Amended 1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 77-64]
The Township Manager shall periodically make or cause to have made
an analysis of the duties and responsibilities of all full-time positions in
the Township except his own position. He shall thereupon recommend to
the Council appropriate modifications to the Position-Classification Plan of
March 18, 1974, which is in effect upon the adoption of this provision.
Within 30 days after the adoption of any position-classification plan or
amendment thereto by resolution of the Council and, where appropriate,
after approval in accordance with the terms of any collective bargaining
agreement, the Township Manager shall assign each position to an
appropriate class in accordance with the approved position-classification
plan.
§ 52-6. Basis of classification.
Each position shall be assigned or allocated to an appropriate job
classification on the basis of the kind and level of its duties and
responsibilities to the end that all positions in the same classification shall
be sufficiently alike to permit the use of a single descriptive title, the
same tests of competence and the same salary range, thus carrying out
the basic principle of classification which is equal pay for equal work. A
job classification may contain one position or a number of positions. The
Township Manager shall from time to time review the job classifications and
submit a report thereof to the Council.
§ 52-7. Changes in plan.
A. The classification plan may be amended from time to time by the
Township Council. Such changes may result from the need of creating
new positions, changes in organization or changes in assigned duties
and responsibilities.
B. The Township Manager shall review all requests for the creation of new
positions, the abolition or consolidation of present positions,
reclassification of positions to different job classes or the reallocation of
positions to new salary ranges. In such review, he shall study the
current duties and responsibilities of the position concerned and take
the appropriate action necessary to ensure the correct classification
and allocation of the position.
C. Each department head shall report to the Township Manager any
changes in his organization or assignment of duties and responsibilities
to a given employee which result in changes in the positionclassification
plan or in the classification of any of the positions in his
department.
§ 52-5 PERSONNEL § 52-7
52:117
§ 52-8. Abolishment of position or reduction in personnel.
A position may be abolished or the number of personnel reduced by the
Township Council for reasons of economy or for reasons of a reorganization
within a department or departments. In such an event, every effort shall
be made by the Township Manager to reassign any affected permanent
employee to another position in the Township service for which the
employee may be qualified. If no such position is available immediately, the
name of the affected employee shall be kept on file, and he shall be offered
employment should a vacancy occur in a position for which he is qualified,
prior to taking applications for the vacancy.
D. An employee may submit a request in writing to the Township Manager
at any time for a review of the duties and responsibilities of his position.
Such a request shall be submitted through his department head and
shall include the employee's own description of his current duties and
responsibilities. The Township Manager shall then make an
investigation of the position to determine its correct allocation. He shall
report his findings in writing to the Council and shall furnish a copy to
the employee requesting the review and to his department head. With
respect to employees who are subject to a collective bargaining
agreement, the methods of review, if inconsistent with the provisions of
this subsection, shall be those set forth in the collective bargaining
agreement. [Amended 1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 77-64]
§ 52-7 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 52-8
52:118
ARTICLE III
Administration of Pay Plan
§ 52-9. Notice of salary ranges; basis for increase following
maximum salary.
After each class of position has been assigned to a salary range and the
pay plan and rules for its administration have been adopted by the Council,
each employee shall be advised of his rate of pay and the salary range
to which his position title has been assigned. When an employee attains
the maximum rate of the salary range for his position, he shall not receive
further salary increases, unless:
§ 52-10. Payment of new employees at minimum of salary range;
exception. [Amended 1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 77-64]
New employees shall be paid at the minimum of the approved salary ranges
for the positions to which they are appointed. In exceptional cases, the
Township Manager shall recommend to the Council an appointment at
a rate above the minimum, but at less than the maximum in the said
classification.
§ 52-11. Payment of demoted employees. [Amended 1-9-1978 by
Ord. No. 77-64]
When an employee is demoted to a grade having a lower salary range, his
salary will be reduced by 5% when placed in such grade. If a demotion
occurs, within or without the employee's classification, for disciplinary
reasons, then the salary reduction limitation above shall not be applicable,
and the Township Manager may fix the salary level of said employee at such
rate as he may determine is appropriate.
§ 52-12. Payment of persons temporarily appointed. [Amended
1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 77-64]
When a vacancy is filled by a temporary appointment, the employee shall
be paid at the minimum of the approved salary range for the position. In
exceptional cases, the Township Manager may recommend to the Council
an appointment at a rate above the minimum, but at less than the maximum.
§ 52-13. Payment of reinstated employees. [Amended 1-9-1978 by
Ord. No. 77-64]
When an employee is reinstated following dismissal or is reappointed
following a layoff to a position in the same classification, said reinstatement
A. His position is reclassified.
B. He is promoted to another position having a higher salary range.
C. A general salary increase is granted to all employees.
§ 52-9 PERSONNEL § 52-13
52:119
shall be at the salary rate which he had received immediately prior to
dismissal or layoff.
§ 52-14. Payment of persons reemployed. [Amended 1-9-1978 by
Ord. No. 77-64]
When an employee is reemployed following a resignation in good standing
to a position in the same classification, he will enter the position at the
minimum rate of the salary range for the position. However, if his
resignation has been of less than 90 days' duration, his reemployment shall
be at the same rate which he received immediately prior to his resignation.
§ 52-13 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 52-14
52:120
ARTICLE IV
Basis for Appointments; Employment Status
§ 52-15. Basis for original appointments.
§ 52-16. Temporary appointments.
In the absence of an appropriate list or for the filling of temporary or
seasonal positions, or temporarily in the case of emergencies, vacancies
may be filled by temporary appointments by the Township Manager. Such
temporary appointments shall have a maximum duration of 12 months. No
temporary appointment shall be construed to confer tenure of office upon
the employee, and any temporary appointment may be terminated at any
time by the Township Manager.
§ 52-17. Application procedure.
Applicants for Township employment shall apply on forms provided by
the Township and designed to obtain pertinent information concerning the
applicant's education, training, experience, character and other factors
necessary to determine his fitness and qualifications for service in the
Township. All applicants shall file their applications with the office of the
Township Manager.
§ 52-18. Grounds for rejection of application.
A. In the selection of probationary or permanent employees, the Township
Manager shall give preference to Township residents and citizens of the
United States who have equal qualifications with other nonresident
applicants. [Amended 1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 77-64]
B. Original appointments by the Township Manager to vacancies in the
Township service shall be based upon merit, which may be determined
by competitive examinations insofar as practicable. Competitive
examinations shall test the abilities and aptitudes of candidates for the
duties to be performed. Such examinations may include such factors as
education, experience, aptitude, knowledge, character and physical and
mental fitness, but they shall not include inquiry into the political or
religious affiliation or the race of any candidate. The Township
Manager, in the selection for the appointment, shall use good judgment,
based upon the qualifying examinations heretofore described in this
section and personal interviews with the applicants.
A. Applications may be rejected where the candidate:
(1) Lacks any of the established qualifications and requirements for
appointment to the position for which he has applied.
(2) Is physically or psychologically unfit to perform the duties of the
position to which he seeks appointment. [Amended 1-9-1978 by
Ord. No. 77-64]
§ 52-15 PERSONNEL § 52-18
52:121
§ 52-19. Physical examinations; background investigations.
[Amended 1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 77-64]
The Township Manager shall require all job applicants to submit to a
physical examination or submit a physical examination report by a qualified
physician, be fingerprinted and submit such other information as may be
reasonably required by the Township Manager or Police Department in
connection with a thorough background investigation.
§ 52-20. Types of examinations.
The examination for original appointments may be oral, written or
performance, psychiatric, physical or a combination thereof. The type and
extent of examination shall be determined by the Township Manager in
accordance with the position to be filled and the number of applicants for
the position. The aforesaid types of examinations shall be designed to assist
the Township Manager in arriving at the best decision in appointing new
employees.
§ 52-21. Time and place of examinations.
Examinations shall be given in such convenient places and at such times as
to attract qualified candidates.
§ 52-22. Results of examinations.
(3) Is addicted to the habitual or excessive use of drugs or intoxicants.
(4) Has been convicted of any crime or offenses, including disorderly
persons offenses, involving moral turpitude or disgraceful conduct.
(5) Has been dishonorably discharged from the Armed Services of the
United States and has not received a presidential pardon.
(6) Has been dismissed from previous employment for delinquency,
insubordination or misconduct.
(7) Has practiced or attempted to practice any deception or fraud in
his application, in his examination or in securing his eligibility for
appointment.
(8) Is not within the age limits prescribed in the class specifications or
examination announcements.
B. A candidate may, even after he is permitted to take a competitive
examination, be declared ineligible for employment for any of the
foregoing reasons. Employment during a probationary period shall not
be considered a waiver of such reasons.
A. Candidates who qualify for appointment through the examining
procedures shall be placed on a list for the appropriate classifications
title in the rank order of the grades they obtained on the examination.
§ 52-18 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 52-22
52:122
§ 52-23. Probationary period following appointment or promotion;
training period required for police officers.
B. Insofar as may be applicable, the following rules shall determine the
final examination grade:
(1) Candidates may be required to attain a satisfactory grade on one or
more parts of an examination in order to continue the examination
or to be eligible for appointment.
(2) Final grades shall be determined by averaging the grades of each
part of the examination.
C. Final grades in examinations shall be filed in the office of the Township
Manager.
D. The Township Manager shall cause each candidate who participated in
the examination to be notified in writing of his examination result.
A. Each new employee shall serve a probationary period of 12 months. At
the completion of the sixth and 12th months, the employee's
department head shall prepare a written evaluation of the employee's
performance in which the department head shall recommend the
retention or dismissal of the probationary employee. These reports on a
probationary employee shall be submitted to the Township Manager for
his approval. If at the end of 12 months the probationary employee shall
have been deemed to have successfully completed his probationary
period by the department head and the Township Manager, he shall be
granted status as a regular employee with all rights and privileges
pertaining to his employment or position. If, however, at the conclusion
of his probationary period the employee shall not have been deemed to
have successfully completed his probationary period, he shall be
dismissed. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to
prohibit the suspension or dismissal of a probationary employee at any
time during his probationary period if, in the judgment of the Township
Manager, such an action would be in the best interests of the Township,
and such probationary employee shall not have the right to be heard by
the Advisory Personnel Board established pursuant to Article XII of this
chapter. [Amended 1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 77-64]
B. A 12 months' probationary period, together with written evaluation of
the sixth and 12th months shall also pertain to an employee promoted
to a higher classification. Such probationary status will in no way affect
the rights and status in the original or lower classification. [Amended
1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 77-64]
C. Each new police officer shall be required to satisfactorily complete a
basic police training program recognized by the New Jersey Police
Training Commission prior to receiving a permanent appointment.
§ 52-22 PERSONNEL § 52-24
52:123
§ 52-24. Permanent employment status.
Classified employees who satisfactorily complete their probationary period
shall have permanent employment status, conditioned upon good behavior
and satisfactory job performance and, where required by statute, continued
residence in the Township. They shall be subject to removal by the
appointing authority only for cause or for reason of economy, after proper
notice and the opportunity to be heard, as set forth in Article XII of this
chapter.
§ 52-24 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 52-24
52:124
ARTICLE V
Promotions
§ 52-25. Definitions. [Amended 1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 77-64]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PROMOTION — An advancement in classification having:
§ 52-26. Filling of vacancies; criteria for promotions.
§ 52-27. Temporary promotions.
Pending the availability of a list determined by the Township Manager
to be appropriate, he may fill vacancies by a temporary promotion. Such
temporary promotions shall have a maximum duration of six months.
A. New duties of greater difficulty or responsibility; and
B. A salary range having a greater maximum.
A. Vacancies may be filled, at the option of the Township Manager, by
utilizing promotional examinations on a competitive basis. Such
examinations may be written, oral, performance, physical, psychiatric
or a combination thereof. Such types of examinations shall be designed
to assist the Township Manager in arriving at the best decision in
promoting Township employees. [Amended 1-9-1978 by Ord. No.
77-64]
B. Where the Township Manager finds that no permanent employee is
qualified for promotion to the vacancy, he may fill the same, with or
without the assistance of competitive examinations, by other qualified
nonpermanent employees or other candidates who may apply. In any
case, promotions shall give appropriate consideration to the applicant's
qualifications, record of past performance and the length and quality of
his service. [Amended 1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 77-64]
C. In making promotions, the Township Manager shall give due
consideration to the recommendations of the department head
concerned, although he shall not be bound by such recommendations.
D. Upon promotion of a full-time employee, the Township Manager may
grant a full salary increment effective immediately. [Added 1-9-1978
by Ord. No. 77-64]
§ 52-25 PERSONNEL § 52-27
52:125

ARTICLE VI
Payment of Salary and Other Forms of Compensation
§ 52-28. Pay period; computation of daily and hourly rate.
§ 52-29. Overtime pay; computing of overtime.
A. The Township normally shall pay its employees on a biweekly payroll
schedule, that is, once in every two weeks, or a total of 26 times
annually. Each payroll period shall consist of 10 working days, so that
the daily rate of pay of each employee normally shall be 1/260 of his
annual salary. In order to avoid the possibility of an unusual year in
which 27 paydays could occur, adjustment may be made as to the
particular day of the week in which pay shall be received.
B. The hourly rate, unless otherwise provided or agreed, shall be
computed by dividing the weekly rate by the number of hours in the
employee's prescribed workweek. [Amended 1-9-1978 by Ord. No.
77-64]
A. Employees may be compensated for overtime work when such
compensation has been recommended by the department head and
approved by the Township Manager. In all instances, however, overtime
compensation shall commence only after the employee has worked the
full 40 hours during the workweek for which overtime compensation is
sought. Holidays and vacation days may be counted toward the 40
hours for overtime but not sick days. Authorized overtime
compensation shall be computed at an hourly rate equal to 1 1/2 times
the equivalent hourly rate prescribed in § 52-28B. [Amended
1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 77-64]
B. When an employee works a prescribed workweek of less than 40 hours,
overtime pay shall be computed at the normal equivalent hourly rate up
to 40 hours, after which the time-and-a-half provisions would take
effect.
C. For employees on specialized activities, working on a two-week, eightyhour
basis, overtime pay of 1 1/2 times the normal hourly equivalent
shall take effect only after the employee has worked 80 hours in the pay
period. Employees working a prescribed two-week pay period of less
than 80 hours shall be paid overtime on the basis of their normal
equivalent hourly rate up to 80 hours, after which the time-and-a-half
provisions would take effect.
D. When it becomes necessary for personnel to be called out on
emergency calls, such personnel will be credited with a minimum of two
hours' time.
E. Overtime compensation policy for employees in collective bargaining
units shall be governed by the specific provisions of said agreements.
[Added 1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 77-64]
§ 52-28 PERSONNEL § 52-30
52:127
§ 52-30. Deductions for leave without pay.
Salary deductions for leave without pay shall be computed on the basis of
hourly rate as prescribed in § 52-28B.
§ 52-31. Salary increments. [Amended 1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 77-64]
Merit increases or salary increments may be granted to each employee
effective January 1 of each year until the employee's salary shall reach the
maximum salary provided in his position title by Township ordinance. No
employee, however, shall be granted such merit increase or annual salary
increment until his department head has certified in writing to the Township
Manager that, during the past year, the employee's performance and service
were such as to make him deserving of an increase, setting forth the basis
for such conclusion. Employees who will have served less than one full year
on January 1 next shall be subject to consideration for a merit increase or
salary increment as follows:
§ 52-32. Longevity payments. [Added 3-18-1968 by Ord. No. 68-3;
amended 3-18-1974 by Ord. No. 74-4]
A. Employed between January 1 and March 31: up to full increment.
B. Employed between April 1 and June 30: up to 1/2 of increment.
C. Employed between July 1 and September 30: up to 1/4 of increment.
D. Employed after October 1: no increment.
A. In addition to salary and compensation, for every permanent employee
in the classified and exempt service of the Township of Cedar Grove, for
long and faithful service, longevity payments shall be provided to
covered employees beginning with the employee's 10th year of service
as follows, which sums shall be payable in December of the current
year:
Length of Service
(years) Amount
10 to 11 $200
12 to 13 $300
14 to 15 $500
16 to 17 $600
18 to 19 $800
20 or more $900
NOTES:
Longevity payments shall not be considered or included in any
overtime calculations or pension contributions.
§ 52-30 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 52-32
52:128
B. Years of service shall be determined as provided for in § 52-35, which is
used to determine accrued sick leave and vacation allowance. Years of
service shall be computed to December 31 for payments of longevity to
be made in December of each calendar year. Time charged to an
employee for authorized sick leave, military leave, terminal leave or any
other type of authorized leave shall be credited to an employee in
computing years of service. Except for the aforementioned, an
employee's years of service must be continuous service.
C. Any employee who shall terminate his service with the Township prior
to December 1 shall not be entitled to any longevity payments for the
current year, except where a retiring employee with not less than 10
years' service has accrued sick and vacation leave time which, if it were
taken as terminal leave, would extend the period of employment beyond
December 1. [Amended 6-4-1979 by Ord. No. 79-90]
D. Computation of overtime compensation, salary subject to pension
contribution or additional compensation of any nature shall exclude
longevity payments.
E. Such longevity payment shall be notwithstanding the maximum salary
provided for such office or employment by ordinance.
F. Notwithstanding the foregoing schedule of longevity payments, no
employee hired after January 1, 1974, shall be entitled to receive
longevity payments pursuant to the above schedule or any prior
Township schedule of longevity payments.
G. Any employee who is receiving or is entitled to receive longevity
payments under this section and is within three years of completing the
minimum service requirements for normal retirement eligibility, as
defined by the State Division of Pensions pursuant to the public pension
plan in which he is enrolled through the Township, may elect to have
said longevity payment converted to a lump-sum salary payment and to
receive the same as wages; provided, however, that said converted
longevity payment shall be reduced by the amount which the Township
is required to pay for the Township's share of pension contributions and
social security taxes, as well as other usual wage deductions and
withholdings. Said converted longevity payment shall not, however, be
included or considered in the computation of overtime compensation,
salary increases or other additional salary benefits but shall be part of
the employee base salary for pension contribution purposes. In all other
respects the aforegoing provisions concerning longevity payments shall
apply to the wages received as a result of the conversion. Any person
electing to convert longevity payments hereunder shall make the
request, in writing, to the Township Treasurer on or before December
1, for the calendar year for which it is to be effective. [Added
10-6-1980 by Ord. No. 80-142; amended 12-1-1980 by Ord. No.
80-145]
§ 52-32 PERSONNEL § 52-32
52:129

ARTICLE VII
Hours of Work and Holidays
§ 52-33. Official workweek; designation of hours.
§ 52-34. Holidays.
A. The official workweek of the Township shall be a five-day, forty-hour
week. The Council, however, may reduce the hours of work required of
employees in specific departments to not less than 35 hours per week.
B. The Township Manager shall set forth the hours of work for each
department, including the amount of time that shall be allowed for
lunch. [Amended 1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 77-64]
A. Due to the emergency nature of the work of the Police Department, the
provisions of this section shall not be applicable to the members of that
Department.
B. Official holidays. [Amended 1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 77-64; 2-17-1992
by Ord. No. 92-396; 10-21-2002 by Ord. No. 02-587]
(1) The following official holidays with pay shall be observed by the
Township for actively working employees: New Year’s Day,
Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving
Day and Christmas Day.
(2) In addition to the above, the Township shall observe six floating
holidays which shall be designated each year by the Township.
C. If a holiday falls on a Sunday, it shall be observed on the following
Monday. In the event that a holiday falls on a Saturday, and no alternate
day for holiday observance is designated by the Township Manager,
then the employee shall be entitled to a day's pay for the Saturday
holiday. [Amended 1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 77-64]
D. Where it is necessary to maintain service requiring an employee to
work on an official holiday, such employee shall be compensated by
being permitted to take an equal amount of time off with pay on a
regular working day at a time approved by the Township Manager.
E. In the event that an official holiday is observed during an employee's
vacation, he shall be entitled to an additional vacation day, and, should
an official holiday occur while an employee is on sick leave, he shall not
have that holiday charged against his sick leave.
F. Due to the emergency nature of the work of the Police Department and
the fact that members cannot be given normal holiday privileges, each
member of the Police Department shall be entitled to additional pay for
seven paid holidays. Such payment shall be made on December 15 of
each calendar year, subject to the following conditions: [Added
10-19-1970 by Ord. No. 70-18]
§ 52-33 PERSONNEL § 52-34
52:131
(1) An employee must be actively employed as of December 1 of the
calendar year to be eligible for the seven paid holidays.
(2) Should an employee terminate this service prior to December 1, he
shall receive holiday payment according to the following schedule:
Termination Date Number of Paid Holidays
From January 1 to April 1 1
From January 1 to July 1 3
From January 1 to October 1 5
From January 1 to December 1 7
G. Each new employee of the current calendar year serving in the Police
Department shall be entitled to the following minimum number of
holidays with pay as per the following schedule: [Added 10-19-1970
by Ord. No. 70-18]
Date of Employment Number of Paid Holidays
From January 1 to April 1 7
From April 1 to July 1 5
From July 1 to October 1 3
From October 1 to December 1 1
H. Nothing in this section shall be construed to apply to any person whose
employment has been terminated for any reason prior to the adoption of
this section. [Added 10-19-1970 by Ord. No. 70-18]
§ 52-34 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 52-34
52:132
ARTICLE VIII
Vacations and Leaves of Absence
§ 52-35. Vacations for certain employees. [Amended 9-21-1972 by
Ord. No. 72-18; 1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 77-64; 10-2-1978 by Ord. No.
78-79]
A. Each full-time classified and full-time exempt employee, except as
provided in § 52-36 and except department heads, shall be entitled to
the following minimum amounts of vacation with pay:
Years of Service
Amount of Vacation Leave
(working days during year of service)
1 to 4 10
5 11
6 12
7 13
8 14
9 15
10 to 11 16
12 to 13 17
14 to 15 18
16 to 17 19
18 to 19 20
20 to 24 21
25 or more 22
B. Anyone whose date of employment falls between January 1 and October
1 shall be entitled to count that period of time as a year of service.
C. All department heads, except as provided in § 52-36, shall be entitled to
the following minimum amounts of vacation with pay:
Years of Service
Amount of Vacation Leave
(working days during each year of
service)
1 to 4 15
5 to 7 16
8 to 10 17
11 to 13 18
14 to 16 19
17 to 19 20
§ 52-35 PERSONNEL § 52-35
52:133
§ 52-36. Vacations for members of Police Department. [Amended
7-1-1974 by Ord. No. 74-17]
Because of the emergency nature of the work of the Police Department
and the fact that members cannot be given normal holiday allowance, each
member of the Police Department shall be entitled to five working days'
vacation leave per year with pay, in addition to the amount of vacation leave
with pay allowed in the schedule set forth in § 52-35.
§ 52-37. Vacation leave eligibility; accumulation.
Years of Service
Amount of Vacation Leave
(working days during each year of
service)
20 to 24 21
25 or more 22
D. Any department head whose date of employment falls between January
1 and October 1 shall be entitled to count that period of time as a year
of service.
A. Vacation leave shall be considered to be on a calendar-year basis.
However, in the event that an employee terminates his municipal
service prior to the first day of June in any year, he shall not be entitled
to any vacation for that year. [Amended 3-21-1966 by Ord. No. 66-7]
B. Full-time temporary employees shall not be eligible for vacation leave
unless they have been so employed for six consecutive months or more.
Permanent part-time employees with one year's service and a minimum
of 21 hours of work per week shall be eligible for a vacation leave equal
to their regularly scheduled workweek, but not to exceed 30 hours.
Part-time employees with less than 21 hours per week shall not be
eligible for vacation leave. New probationary employees shall be
entitled to 10 working days of vacation leave for the year if they were
hired prior to March 1 and five working days of vacation leave for the
year if they are hired after March 1 and prior to June 1. If they are hired
after June 1, they are not eligible for any vacation leave that year.
[Amended 10-20-1980 by Ord. No. 80-144]
C. Vacation leave earned in accordance with § 52-35 above shall not
accumulate except as provided herein and shall be used by each
employee within the calendar year in which it is earned. Vacation leave,
subject to the advance approval of the department head, may be taken
from time to time in units of full days. Vacation leave in units of less
than full days may be taken only with the advanced approval of the
Township Manager. Where in any calendar year the vacation leave or
any part thereof is not granted by the Township by reason of pressure of
Township business, such vacation leave or parts thereof not granted
shall accumulate when approved by the Township Manager and shall be
§ 52-35 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 52-37
52:134
§ 52-38. Leaves for jury duty. [Added 1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 77-64]
A full-time employee who is required to serve on jury duty shall receive up
to two weeks' leave for said purpose with pay, provided that prompt notice
of the requirement to serve is provided to the Township Manager and he
shall have the opportunity to take the necessary steps to seek to excuse
essential employees from such service. An employee receiving wages from
the Township during jury duty service shall remit to the Township all
compensation received for the jury service.
§ 52-39. Sick leave.
available for use by the employee the next succeeding calendar year
only. [Amended 2-18-1985 by Ord. No. 85-233]
D. At the time of separation from service, an employee shall be entitled to
any full days' vacation pay accumulated and not previously used.
E. The foregoing provisions notwithstanding, no part-time employee hired
after September 1, 1984, shall be entitled to receive any vacation leave
benefits pursuant to this chapter. [Added 10-1-1984 by Ord. No.
84-225]
A. As used in this section, "sick leave" means paid leave that may be
granted to each full-time classified and full-time exempt actively
working Township employee who through sickness or injury becomes
incapacitated to a degree that makes it impossible for him to perform
the duties of his position or who is quarantined by a physician because
he has been exposed to a contagious disease. [Amended 1-9-1978 by
Ord. No. 77-64]
B. A certificate from the Township Physician or the employee's own
physician may be required as sufficient proof of the need for sick leave.
In case of sick leave due to a contagious disease or exposure to same, a
certificate from the Township Department of Health shall be required.
C. Full-time employees shall accumulate sick leave on the basis of 12 days
of sick leave per year. Employees hired prior to March 1 will be entitled
to 12 days of sick time that year. Employees hired after March 1 and
prior to July 1 shall be entitled to six days of sick leave for that year, and
employees hired after July 1 shall be entitled to 1/2 day of sick leave per
full month of employment between July 1 and December 31 of that year.
[Amended 1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 77-64]
D. Sick leave can be accumulated without limit during each employee's
length of service. At the time of separation from service, as a result of
retirement or a work-connected disability, an employee shall receive
accumulated maximum sick leave of 60 days prior to date of retirement,
so as to coincide with date of retirement. The employee shall be entitled
to terminal leave on the basis of full days of sick leave accumulated and
not previously used. Sick leave benefits shall be payable on a biweekly
§ 52-37 PERSONNEL § 52-39
52:135
§ 52-40. Effect of prior provisions on sick leave. [Added 3-21-1966
by Ord. No. 66-7; amended 2-16-1970 by Ord. No. 70-2; 8-13-1973
by Ord. No. 73-21]
Any unused sick leave accumulated at December 31, 1965, shall be payable
in the manner prescribed by the ordinance in effect at that time. Any unused
sick leave accumulated from January 1, 1966 through December 31, 1969,
shall be payable in the manner prescribed by the ordinance in effect at that
time. Any unused sick leave accumulated from January 1, 1970, through
December 31, 1972, shall be payable in the manner prescribed by the
ordinance in effect at that time.
§ 52-41. Leaves as a result of injury in the line of duty.
basis or, at the option of the Township, in one or more lump sum
payments at its discretion. In the event of the death of an employee,
said benefits shall be payable in a lump sum to his spouse, if still
living at the time of the employee's death; and in the event that the
spouse predeceases the employee, the same shall be payable to the
surviving children, in equal shares; and in the event that the employee
dies without survival of children, benefits shall be payable to his estate.
[Amended 3-21-1966 by Ord. No. 66-7; 2-16-1970 by Ord. No.
70-2; 8-13-1973 by Ord. No. 73-21; 10-18-1976 by Ord. No.
76-25]
E. Accumulated sick leave may be used by an employee for personal
illness, illness in his immediate family which requires his attendance
upon the ill person, quarantine restrictions, pregnancy or disabling
injuries. The term "immediate family" for the purposes of this
subsection shall mean and refer only to the employee's spouse, child,
parent or unmarried brother or sister.
A. When a full-time Township employee is injured in the line of duty, the
Council may, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:11-8,38 pass a resolution giving the
employee up to one year's leave of absence with pay. When such action
is taken, the employee shall not be charged any sick leave time for time
lost due to such particular injury.
B. Following the passage of a resolution referred to in Subsection A
hereof, a contract shall be executed between the employee and the
Township, setting forth that the employee shall reimburse the Township
from moneys he may receive as workmen's compensation, temporary
benefits or from possible legal settlement from or judgment against the
person or persons responsible for the injury.
38.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:11-8 was repealed by P.L. 1971, c. 200, and the current provision
is N.J..S.A. 40A:9-7.
§ 52-39 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 52-42
52:136
§ 52-42. Maternity leave. [Amended 1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 77-64]
Maternity leave may be granted up to one year, provided that the request
for such leave is made in writing to the department head not later than the
fourth month of pregnancy. Requests for maternity leave must be favorably
endorsed by the department head and approved by the Township Manager
before becoming effective. Such leave, if granted, shall be without pay.
§ 52-43. Military leave.
§ 52-44. Leave as compensation for overtime. [Amended 1-9-1978
by Ord. No. 77-64]
A. Any full-time employee who is a member of the National Guard, Air
National Guard or a reserve component of any of the Armed Forces of
the United States and is required to engage in field training shall be
granted a military leave of absence with pay for the period of such
training as is authorized by law. Such paid leave of absence shall be in
addition to his vacation.
B. When an employee, not on probation, has been called to active duty or
inducted into the military or naval forces of the United States, he shall
automatically be granted an indefinite leave of absence without pay for
the duration of such active military service. Each employee may be
reinstated without loss of privileges or seniority, provided that he
reports for duty with the Township within 90 days following his
honorable discharge from military service.
C. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection B, any full-time
permanent employee who is called to active duty for any military action
involving the Country of Iraq shall be entitled to leave with differential
pay, meaning the difference between the municipal salary and military
pay. The employee will be considered on paid leave of absence for
pension and health benefit coverage. Such leave shall cease upon
discharge from active service, and the employee shall be required to
return to employment immediately upon release. [Added 2-18-1991
by Ord. No. 91-377; amended 4-21-2003 by Ord. No. 03-592]
(1) An employee who voluntarily continues his military service beyond
the time when he may be released or who voluntarily reenters the
military service shall be considered as having abandoned his
employment and resigned.
(2) An eligible employee shall be entitled to leave with differential pay
for up to 180 days, unless such period of leave is extended by
resolution adopted by the governing body.
(3) An eligible employee's entitlement to leave with differential pay
shall be limited to only two voluntary tours of service for military
action. [Added 6-20-2005 by Ord. No. 05-630]
§ 52-42 PERSONNEL § 52-44
52:137
§ 52-45. Leave because of death in immediate family.
Leave with pay, not exceeding three days, shall be granted by the Township
Manager to any employee in either the full-time classified or full-time
exempt service in the event of a death in his immediate family. The term
"immediate family" for the purpose of this section shall include only: the
employee's spouse, child, parent, brother or sister; the child, parent,
brother or sister of his spouse; or a relative living under the same roof.
§ 52-46. Leave without pay.
Leave without pay shall be granted only to a full-time classified or full-time
exempt employee. Normally, it shall be granted only when the employee
has used his accumulated sick and vacation leave in the case of illness,
or his vacation leave if leave without pay is requested for reasons other
than illness. Written request for leave without pay must be initiated by
the employee, favorably endorsed by his department head and approved by
the Township Manager before becoming effective. Such leave, except for
military leave without pay, shall not be approved for a period longer than
six months at one time. The Township Manager may extend such leave for
an additional six months or any portion thereof.
§ 52-47. Requests for leave.
A request for any type of leave, except sick leave or death leave, shall
be made on a form prescribed by the Township Manager. Such request,
whenever possible, shall be made far enough in advance to permit approval
and at the same time to permit coverage for the particular employment
so that municipal services shall not suffer. In the case of sick leave, the
employee shall notify his department head immediately if he is unable to
report for work.
A. In lieu of overtime compensation, an employee may be granted leave
with pay as compensation for overtime work, provided that the same is
not specifically prohibited by federal or state law or otherwise provided
in a collective bargaining agreement to which the employee is subject.
The Township Manager shall determine whether overtime shall be
compensated for by the granting of compensatory leave or payment in
cash. Compensatory leave, when granted, must be scheduled and used
within 90 days from the time earned, unless otherwise approved by the
Township Manager.
B. Compensation leave shall be granted on the same basis as overtime
compensation, namely, only for that time worked in excess of the
regular 40 hours during one week. When an employee works a
prescribed workweek of less than 40 hours, compensatory leave shall
be granted on an hour-for-hour basis up to 40 hours, at which time the
regular overtime compensation policy would take effect.
§ 52-44 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 52-47
52:138
ARTICLE IX
Political Activity by Employees39
§ 52-48. Certain political activities prohibited; penalty for failure to
comply.
A. It shall be the declared policy of the Township to appoint all Township
employees, either classified or exempt, without regard to political
considerations. For the purposes of this section, "Township employees"
are defined to include full-time, temporary, seasonal or part-time
personnel appointed by the Township Manager or the Township Council
and receiving an annual or hourly reimbursement for their services.
B. In accordance with the policy expressed in Subsection A of this section,
Township employees shall not engage in any of the following prohibited
political activities:
(1) Seeking or accepting nomination or election to any Cedar Grove
municipal office, other than the Board of Education, without first
obtaining a leave of absence.
(2) Using influence publicly in any way for or against any candidate for
elective office in the municipal government.
(3) Circulating petitions or publicly campaigning in behalf of any
elective municipal official or working at the polls in any municipal,
primary or general election.
(4) Soliciting or receiving any subscription or contribution for any
municipal political purpose or party.
C. Employees who wish to engage in prohibited political activity shall
resign from the service.
D. Violation of any provision of Subsection B of this section shall be
deemed sufficient cause for suspension or dismissal from the Township
service.
E. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent Township
employees from becoming or continuing to be members of any political
party, club or organization; attending political meetings; expressing
their views in private on political matters outside of working hours and
off Township premises; or voting with complete freedom in any election.
39.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 56, Political Activities.
§ 52-48 PERSONNEL § 52-48
52:139

ARTICLE X
Reporting Accidents; Outside Employment; Department Rules and
Regulations; Personnel Records
§ 52-49. Reports of injuries in the performance of duties.
An employee who is injured in the performance of his duties shall
immediately report the accident to his supervisor, who shall complete a
form provided for such reports. The completed accident report form shall
then be submitted to the Township Manager.
§ 52-50. Outside employment. [Amended 1-9-1978 by Ord. No.
77-64]
§ 52-51. Departmental rules and regulations.
A. Employees shall not accept outside employment or engage in outside
business activities without the prior approval of the Township Manager.
Applications for permission to accept such outside employment shall be
made annually in writing on forms prescribed and provided by the
Township Manager. The application shall set forth pertinent
information concerning the type of work to be engaged in, the name
and address of the prospective employer and the hours of such
employment.
B. An application for permission to accept outside employment shall be
disapproved by the Township Manager where such outside employment
shall serve as a conflict of interest with the employee's regular job.
However, the Manager shall not otherwise deny such approval but shall
reserve the right thereafter to require an employee to terminate his
outside employment where it shall prove to be detrimental or interfere
with the performance of the employee's regular functions with the
Township, the Manager's determination in that regard to be binding.
A. Subject to the approval of the Township Manager, a department head
may from time to time establish, amend and supplement rules and
regulations for governing the internal operations of his department and
the conduct and decorum of its personnel. Such departmental rules and
regulations shall not be inconsistent or in conflict with the provisions of
any statute of this state, this chapter or other ordinances of the
Township.
B. The rules and regulations shall be in writing, signed by the head of the
department and approved by the Township Manager and shall be filed
in the office of the Township Clerk. They shall be binding on all persons
subject to the jurisdiction of the department. A written copy of said
rules and regulations shall be distributed to the personnel of the
department affected thereby and shall be posted in the headquarters of
the department. Copies thereof shall also be available to the personnel
of the department upon request.
§ 52-49 PERSONNEL § 52-52
52:141
§ 52-52. Maintenance of personnel records.
The Township Manager shall maintain adequate personnel records for each
employee of the Township. Such records should include dates of
appointments and promotions, job titles, salaries, commendations,
disciplinary actions, leave of any type taken and accumulated, merit ratings
and the like.
§ 52-52 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 52-52
52:142
ARTICLE XI
Separation from Employment; Disciplinary Action
§ 52-53. Types of separation.
Classified employees who have acquired permanent employment status,
as provided in § 52-24, may be temporarily suspended from the Township
employ by layoff or suspension or permanently separated by resignation or
dismissal, as more particularly set forth in this article.
§ 52-54. Layoff procedure.
Whenever there is a lack of work or a lack of funds requiring a reduction
in the number of employees in a department of the Township government,
the required reductions shall be made in such job classification or
classifications as the Township Manager may designate in consultation with
the department head. Employees shall be laid off in the inverse order
of their length of service. Within each affected job class, all temporary
employees shall be laid off before probationary employees, and all
probationary employees shall be laid off before permanent employees.
Employees so affected shall be given a minimum of two weeks' notice or two
weeks pay in lieu thereof.
§ 52-55. Resignation procedure.
An employee may resign from his position by tendering a written
resignation to his department head, who in turn shall forward it to the
Township Manager. Unless there are disciplinary charges pending against
the employee, the Township Manager shall notify the employee in writing
of acceptance of his resignation in good standing. An employee shall give a
minimum of two weeks' notice before the effective date of his resignation.
§ 52-56. Causes for dismissal.
A permanent employee may be dismissed from the service for cause. The
causes sufficient for removal from the service shall include the following:
A. Neglect of duty.
B. Absence without leave or failure to report after authorized leave has
expired or after such leave has been disapproved or revoked; provided,
however, that any regular member or officers of the Police Department
who shall be absent from duty without just cause for a term of five days
continuously and without leave of absence shall, at the expiration of
such five days, cease to be a member of the Police Department, as
provided by N.J.S.A. 40:47-3, as amended.40
C. Incompetency or inefficiency or incapacity due to mental or physical
disability.
40.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:47-8 was repealed by P.L. 1971, c. 197, and the current provision
is N.J.S.A. 40A:14-9.
§ 52-53 PERSONNEL § 52-56
52:143
§ 52-57. Suspensions.
D. Insubordination or serious breach of discipline.
E. Intoxication while on duty.
F. Commission of a criminal act.
G. Participating in any political activity prohibited by § 52-48 of this
chapter.
H. Disobedience of the departmental rules and regulations established
pursuant to § 52-51 of this chapter.
I. Unauthorized use or acquisition of Township equipment or property.
[Amended 1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 77-64]
J. Conduct unbecoming a public employee.
A. The Township Manager may, when in his opinion the circumstances
surrounding disciplinary charges pending against a permanent
employee are sufficiently serious, temporarily suspend such employee
until final decision is reached. In the event that the disciplined
employee elects to appeal to the Advisory Personnel Board, the
temporary suspension by the Township Manager shall continue until
five days after the recommendation by the Personnel Board is made to
the Manager. [Amended 1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 77-64]
B. When, in the judgment of the Township Manager, any employee's work
performance or conduct justifies disciplinary action short of dismissal,
the employee may be suspended in lieu of dismissal, without pay, for a
period not exceeding 20 working days.
§ 52-56 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 52-57
52:144
ARTICLE XII
Advisory Personnel Board
§ 52-58. Creation; purpose.
While the Township Council is aware that the Township Manager has the
sole power to discipline and remove employees as set forth in Section 9-15
of the Optional Municipal Charter Law (N.J.S.A. 40:69A-95), nevertheless,
the Council is also aware that Section 9-9 of said statute (N.J.S.A.
40:69A-89) refers to a Personnel Board and the creation by the Council of
bodies with advisory powers. Accordingly, in the interest of good personnel
relations and of a proper esprit de corps in municipal employees, there is
hereby created an Advisory Personnel Board, hereinafter referred to in this
article as the "Advisory Board," consisting of the Township Council.
§ 52-59. Functions; clerical assistance.
§ 52-60. Matters that may be brought before Board; procedure.
§ 52-61. Review procedure.
A. It shall be the duty of the Board to hear grievances and render written
advisory opinions on employee disciplinary matters, hereinafter
described, in order to guide the Township Manager in reaching an
appropriate decision in such matters.
B. The Township Clerk, in the course of his duties, shall provide the
Advisory Board with clerical help in the keeping of minutes, in the
writing of opinions and in other necessary clerical work.
A. Any employee who is subject to any of the following disciplinary
measures shall be entitled at his option to present his side of the case to
the Advisory Board:
(1) Suspension without pay for more than three days, at any one time.
(2) Demotion for disciplinary reasons.
(3) Dismissal for disciplinary reasons.
B. An employee may, in writing, request the Advisory Personnel Board for
leave to present any other grievance matter, provided that his written
request is submitted to the Advisory Personnel Board within 10 days of
the date that the original action took place causing his application to
the Advisory Personnel Board. If the Advisory Personnel Board decides
that, on the basis of the written request, the grievance is important
enough to justify further Board investigation, it may grant the request
and permit the employee to present to it such grievance matter. The
decision of the Advisory Personnel Board on such a request shall be
given in writing to the employee within two weeks from receipt of such
written request. [Amended 9-18-1967 by Ord. No. 67-12]
§ 52-58 PERSONNEL § 52-61
52:145
§ 52-62. Scope and applicability.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to apply to the procedure for the
suspension, removal, fine, reduction or demotion in rank of any qualified
officer or employee of the municipality who by reason of an applicable
statute of this state has acquired permanent employment status and is
entitled to a public hearing. In such case, the procedure for preferring
charges against such officer or employee, the notice thereof and the public
hearing or trial thereon before the Township Manager shall be in
accordance with the provisions of the applicable statutes.
A. Whenever the Township Manager, on the basis of careful investigation
and an interview with the employee concerned, contemplates any
disciplinary action of the type described in § 52-60A, he shall furnish
the employee and the Advisory Board with his reasons in writing,
together with a statement of his intended action.
B. The employee concerned may then furnish the Board and the Township
Manager with a written statement setting forth reasons for objecting to
the proposed disciplinary action, within seven days of receipt of the
Township Manager's reasons.
C. The Advisory Board shall then schedule a meeting of its members for
the purpose of reviewing the matter and rendering its advisory opinion.
Such opinion shall be submitted to the Township Manager within 15
days of the receipt of the employee's statement referred to in
Subsection B of this section.
D. The proceedings of the Advisory Board meetings shall be informal. The
Board may render an advisory opinion based upon the written
statements of the principals or may, in its discretion, call in the
employee and the Township Manager and any other persons having
knowledge of the matter under discussion or may call for any records
relating thereto.
E. Meetings of the Advisory Board shall be private. The Board's advisory
opinion shall be a confidential report to the Township Manager.
§ 52-61 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 52-62
52:146
Chapter 55
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 3.
Fire Department — See Ch. 23.
Personnel — See Ch. 52.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 61.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Creation and establishment of police
department — See N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118 et seq.
§ 55-1. Department continued; composition; status of members;
eligibility requirements. [Amended 4-19-1954; 7-29-1955]
A. The Police Department of the Township heretofore established is
hereby continued and shall consist of the following personnel:
(1) In order of rank, one Chief of Police, five Lieutenants, five
Sergeants and 20 police patrol officers. Such appointees, following
a satisfactory probationary period as set forth in § 52-23 of the
Code of the Township of Cedar Grove, shall then become regular
and permanent members of the Police Department as provided in
N.J.S.A. 40:47-5.41 [Amended 6-4-2007 by Ord. No. 07-674;
9-20-2010 by Ord. No. 10-712; 3-21-2011 by Ord. No. 11-722;
10-3-2011 by Ord. No. 11-732; 4-10-2014 by Ord. No. 14-769;
3-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-791]
(2) Special policemen as may now or hereafter be appointed by the
Township Manager for a one-year term under the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:47-19, as amended.42
(3) Temporary police officers or men needed in a case of an emergency,
or when their services are not needed throughout the entire year,
appointed by the Township Manager as authorized under the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:47-3, as amended.43
(4) Temporary policemen appointed by the Township Manager where
regular or permanent members of the police force have entered the
military or naval force of the United States or of this state, as
authorized under the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:47-4.3 et seq.44
41.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:47-5 was repealed by P.L. 1971, c. 197. See now N.J.S.A.
40A:14-17 and 40A:14-128.
42.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:47-19 was repealed by P.L. 1971, c. 197. See now N.J.S.A.
40A:14-146.8 et seq.
43.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:47-3 was repealed by P.L. 1971, c. 197. See now N.J.S.A. 40A:14-9
and 40A:14-122.
§ 52-62 PERSONNEL § 55-1
52:147
§ 55-2. Administration of Department. [Added 7-29-1955; amended
1-24-2000 by Ord. No. 99-523]
(5) The civilian employees as authorized by the Council and appointed
by the Township Manager.
B. Persons employed in the Police Department pursuant to Subsections
A(2), (3) and (4) of this section shall not have the status of regular and
permanent members of the Police Department and shall not be entitled
to receive the benefits of tenure of office accorded to regular and
permanent members of the Police Department under N.J.S.A. 40:47-5
and 40:47-6, as amended.45
C. No person shall be employed in or appointed to the Police Department,
whether as a regular and permanent member or otherwise, nor shall
any regular and permanent member of the Police Department be
appointed to a superior position therein unless he qualifies for such
employment, appointment or promotion in accordance with the
applicable provisions and requirements of the statutes of New Jersey,
Chapter 52, Personnel, of the Code of the Township of Cedar Grove and
the classification plan adopted by resolution of the Council pursuant to
§ 52-5 of the Code of the Township of Cedar Grove.
A. The Police Department shall preserve the public peace; protect life and
property; detect and arrest offenders of the laws of New Jersey and the
ordinances of the Township of Cedar Grove; direct and control traffic;
provide attendance and protection during emergencies; provide
appearances in court; cooperate with all other law enforcement
agencies; and provide training for the efficiency of its members and
officers (N.J.S.A. 40A:14-152).
B. The Township Manager is designated as the appropriate authority as
provided in the New Jersey Statutes. The appropriate authority is
responsible for the overall performance of the Police Department. The
appropriate authority shall adopt and promulgate rules and regulations
for the governing of the Police Department and for the discipline of its
members (N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118). To the extent that § 52-51 (governing
the promulgation of rules by department heads) conflicts with this
section, this section shall control regarding the Police Department.
C. The Chief of Police is the head of the Police Department and is
appointed by the appropriate authority. The Chief of Police is directly
responsible to the appropriate authority for the Department’s efficiency
and day-to-day operations. Pursuant to the direction and policies
established by the appropriate authority, the Chief of Police shall:
44.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:47-4.3 was repealed by P.L. 1971, c. 197. See now N.J.S.A.
40A:14-15 and 40A:14-144.
45.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:47-5 and 40:47-6 were repealed by P.L. 1971, c. 197. See now
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-17 and 40A:14-128 and N.J.S.A. 40A:14-19 and 40A:14-147, respectively.
§ 55-1 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 55-2
52:148
§ 55-3. Powers and duties of members. [Amended 9-20-2010 by Ord.
No. 10-712; 3-21-2011 by Ord. No. 11-722]
The Chief of Police and the officers and members of the Police Department
shall severally exercise the powers and perform and discharge the duties
and responsibilities pertaining to their respective offices and positions as
shall be prescribed by the statutes of this state, the ordinances of the
Township, the classification plan referred to in § 55-1C hereof and by the
duly promulgated rules and regulations of the Police Department.
[Amended 9-20-2010 by Ord. No. 10-712; 3-21-2011 by Ord. No.
11-722]
(1) Administer and enforce the rules and regulations of the Police
Department and any special emergency directive for the
disposition and discipline of the Department, its members, and
officers;
(2) Have, exercise, and discharge the functions, powers, and duties of
the Police Department;
(3) Have charge and control of the administration of the Police
Department and of its property, apparatus, and equipment;
(4) Prescribe the duties and assignments of all members and officers;
(5) Delegate such authority as deemed necessary for the efficient
operation of the Police Department to be exercised under the
Chief’s direction and control; and
(6) Report at least monthly to the appropriate authority in such form as
shall be prescribed by this authority on the operation of the Police
Department during the preceding month and make other reports as
requested by the appropriate authority (N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118).
D. No member or officer of the Police Department shall be suspended,
removed, fined or reduced in rank for any cause other than for
incapacity, misconduct or disobedience as provided in the New Jersey
statutes and the Police Department's rules and regulations (N.J.S.A.
40A:14-147).
E. No person shall be appointed to the Police Department who is not
qualified as provided in New Jersey Statutes. The Appropriate Authority
may also require that an applicant for appointment to the Police
Department shall successfully complete a physical, mental and
psychological examination (N.J.S.A. 40A:14-122 and N.J.S.A.
40A:14-l47).
§ 55-2 PERSONNEL § 55-3
52:149
Chapter 56
POLITICAL ACTIVITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Political activities by Township
employees — See Ch. 52, Art. IX.
§ 55-3 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 55-3
56:150
ARTICLE I
Use of Public Property for Fundraising
[Adopted 5-1-2000 by Ord. No. 00-532]
§ 56-1. Short title.
"An Ordinance Banning the Use of Government Buildings and Government
Equipment for Political Fundraising.
§ 56-2. Findings.
§ 56-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
CANDIDATE — Any individual seeking election to a public office of the
federal government, state, county, municipality, school district or political
organization at an election.
CONTRIBUTION — Includes all loans and transfers of money or other thing
of value to or by any candidate, elected official or political organization and
all pledges or other commitments or assumptions of liability to make any
such transfer. Contributions shall be deemed to have been made upon the
date when such commitment is made or liability assumed.
MUNICIPALITY — This municipality and any officer, department, board,
commission, or agency thereof.
MUNICIPAL OFFICIAL, EMPLOYEE AND APPOINTEE — Any person
holding elective municipal office or holding an appointed position in the
municipal government, or in any agency, commission, board, or office
A. Whereas, political contributions have a profound impact on government
decision making; and
B. Whereas, our laws in New Jersey do not presently ban solicitation or
acceptance of contribution by public office holders and employees while
on public property or by use of public facilities; and
C. Whereas, a conflict may arise between the business of political
fundraising and the business of government in Town Hall and other
government-owned premises, and this may cause a distraction from the
People's business; and
D. Whereas, the most appropriate method to prevent this conflict and to
insure the integrity of government decisions is the prohibition of
political fundraising on or by use of public property.
E. Therefore, it is accordingly found and determined that the paramount
public interest in a clean and accountable government requires the
prohibition of political fundraising on public property or by use of
public facilities.
§ 56-1 POLITICAL ACTIVITIES § 56-3
56:151
thereof, whether the position is full-time or part-time, compensated or
uncompensated; and any employee of municipal government or in any
agency, commission, board, or office thereof, whether the position is fulltime
or part-time.
POLITICAL ORGANIZATION — Any two or more persons acting jointly, or
any corporation, partnership or any other incorporated or unincorporated
association which is organized to, or does, aid or promote the nomination,
election or defeat of any candidate or candidates for federal, state, county,
municipal or school board office. "Political organization" includes, but is not
limited to, organizations otherwise defined as "political committee," "joint
candidates committee," and "legislative leadership committee."
PROPERTY OF THE MUNICIPALITY — Buildings, land, vehicles, phones,
FAX machines, computers or other office equipment or supplies and other
real or personal property owned, leased or controlled by the municipality,
except for public roads and open park land.
SOLICIT — To seek by oral or written communication a contribution as same
is defined herein.
§ 56-4. General regulations.
A. Prohibition against soliciting or accepting political contributions on
public property. No municipal official, employee or appointee may
solicit, commit to pay, or receive payment of or a commitment to pay
any contribution for any candidate, elected official or political
organization while in or on the property of the municipality or utilizing
the property of the municipality.
B. Prohibited forms of fundraising. Prohibited forms of fundraising shall
include but are not limited to:
(1) Soliciting or accepting contributions using municipal telephones,
FAX machines or computers.
(2) Soliciting or accepting contributions using personal telephones
while on the property of the municipality.
(3) Soliciting or accepting contributions through the use of publicly
owned computers or privately owned personal computers while on
the property of the municipality.
(4) Using municipal letterhead to solicit or accept contributions.
(5) Sending correspondence from municipal buildings or by use of
municipal services, equipment or postage.
(6) Face-to-face soliciting of an individual or an owner or
representative of a business entity while on the property of the
municipality.
(7) Use of automobiles owned or leased by the municipality to accept
or solicit contributions.
§ 56-3 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 56-4
56:152
§ 56-5. Violations and penalties.
Violation of any provision of this article shall be punished by a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days or imprisonment in the county jail
for a term not exceeding 90 days or a fine not exceeding $1,000.
C. Reporting requirements. It shall be the responsibility of any employee
or appointed or elected official who observes any prohibited forms of
fundraising to report such conduct to the Municipal Ethics Board, if one
exists, or in the alternative, to the Municipal Prosecutor and the
Municipal Clerk who shall report same to the governing body.
D. Whistleblower provision. It shall be unlawful for any employee, elected
official or appointee to be dismissed, reprimanded, retaliated against or
otherwise intimidated for complying with the reporting requirements
mandated by this article.
§ 56-4 POLITICAL ACTIVITIES § 56-5
56:153
Chapter 57
POOL ADVISORY COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 3. Advisory Recreation Board — See Ch. 59.
§ 57-1. Committee established; membership; terms.
The Township Council shall appoint seven members to the Pool Advisory
Committee which shall consist of said appointed members plus the
Recreation Director. Each appointed member must be a resident of the
Township and a member of the pool. Two members shall be selected from
the membership of the Recreation Advisory Board; one member shall be
a teenager; one member shall be a parent of a Township swim team
participant, and three members shall be general members with diverse
backgrounds. The terms shall be for a period of three years each, except
that the original terms shall be staggered and three members shall be
appointed for one year, two members for two years and two members
for three years; thereafter, appointments shall be made for full three-year
terms.
§ 57-2. Purpose; powers.
The Pool Advisory Committee shall be responsible for reviewing and
reporting to the Council with respect to the operations and maintenance of
the Cedar Grove Municipal Pool. The Committee may make and amend rules
and procedures concerning the conduct of their meetings. The Committee
shall not have any powers which affect the operation of the pool or the
direction of its working force, and its power shall be solely recommendatory.
§ 57-3. Officers; meetings.
The Board shall elect from its members a Chairman and Vice Chairman
and Secretary at an annual organizational meeting. The Recreation Director
shall serve as the administrative member and shall be liaison for the
Committee with the Township Council, but shall not have voting powers
concerning recommendations to be contained in reports to the governing
body. The Committee shall at its discretion meet monthly or more
frequently. Special meetings may be called by the Chairman or Vice
Chairman on three days' notice to each member. Four or more members of
the Committee may also require the holding of a special meeting and the
Secretary of the Board shall send proper notices upon such request.
§ 57-4. Vacancies due to excessive absences.
A vacancy shall be deemed to occur where any citizen member shall be
absent for 50% or more of any regular or special meetings during any
§ 56-5 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 57-4
57:154
twelve-month period. The Township Council shall fill the vacancy for the
remainder of the unexpired terms and the Recreation Director shall report
on such excessive absences to the Township Council on a regular basis.
Chapter 58
PROFESSIONAL SERVICE CONTRACTS
§ 58-1. Approval of statute.
The Township Council hereby expresses its approval of the State's "Pay to
Play" legislation as set forth in N.J.S.A. § 19:44A-20.1 et seq.
§ 58-2. Applicability.
Requests for RFQs for professional services shall be for the following
professional services:
§ 58-3. RFQ criteria.
All RFQs for professional services as set forth above shall be prepared
and published in accordance with N.J.S.A. § 19:44A-20.1 et seq., and all
such RFQs shall be evaluated on the basis of the most advantageous to the
Township of Cedar Grove, price and other factors considered. The specific
criteria will include, but will not be limited to:
A. Township Attorney;
B. Municipal Prosecutor;
C. Auditor;
D. Consulting Engineer, Planning and Zoning;
E. Planning Board Attorney;
F. Zoning Board Attorney;
G. Any other professional services for architectural, engineering, special
legal counsel, or other consultant services.
A. Individual and firm experience and reputation;
B. Knowledge of the operations of the municipality and the services to be
provided as professional service for which the RFQ is being solicited;
and
C. Other factors that the Mayor and Township Council conclude are in the
best interests of the Township of Cedar Grove.
§ 57-4 PROFESSIONAL SERVICE CONTRACTS § 58-4
58:155
§ 58-4. Contracts contingent upon available funding.
All awards of contracts for professional services as set forth above are and
shall be subject to the availability of funds.
§ 58-5. Public advertisement.
The form of public advertisement shall be made on the Township of Cedar
Grove's official website, www.cedargrovenj.org.
Chapter 59
RECREATION BOARD, ADVISORY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 3. Use of recreation areas — See Ch. 205.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Creation of advisory boards — See N.J.S.A.
40:69A-89.
§ 59-1. Establishment; membership; compensation. [Amended
12-2-1963]
§ 59-2. Appointment of members; terms of members;
commencement of terms. [Amended 12-2-1963]
A. There shall be an Advisory Board of Recreation which shall serve in an
advisory capacity in matters concerning the Recreation Department
and its facilities and programs.
B. The Advisory Board of Recreation shall consist of 11 members, one of
whom shall be a member of the Township Council, one a member of the
Board of Education and nine citizens. The Director of Recreation shall
serve as an ex officio member. [Amended 2-5-1968 by Ord. No. 68-1;
1-20-1975 by Ord. No. 75-1]
C. The members of the Board shall serve without compensation.
A. The one representative of the Township Council and the one
representative of the Board of Education shall be appointed by and
serve at the pleasure of the Township Council and the Board of
Education, respectively.
B. The citizen members of the Advisory Board shall be appointed by the
Council and shall serve for a period of three years, except that the
respective terms of office of the originally appointed citizen members
shall be as follows: three members shall serve for a term of three years;
§ 58-4 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 59-2
59:156
§ 59-3. Vacancies. [Amended 5-16-1977 by Ord. No. 77-46]
In the event of the resignation of any citizen member or his death or
inability to serve, or his absence from 50% or more of the regularly
scheduled meetings of the Board in any twelve-month period, in which latter
event removal shall automatically occur, the Township Council shall fill said
vacancy for the remainder of the unexpired term.
§ 59-4. Organization; officers.
§ 59-5. Meetings.
The Advisory Board of Recreation shall hold regular monthly meetings at
the same time and day of each month in the Township Municipal Building as
set in its organizational meeting in January. Special meetings may be called
by the Chairman on three days' notice to each member of the Board; or
upon three days' notice to all members signed by at least two members of
the Board. The Advisory Board may make and amend rules and regulations
concerning the conduct of its meetings.
§ 59-6. Powers and duties.
The Advisory Board may make recommendations:
two members for a term of two years; and two members for a term of
one year. The term of each citizen member shall begin on the first day
of January, and each member shall continue in office until his successor
shall be appointed and shall qualify.
A. The Advisory Board of Recreation shall elect a Chairman and Vice
Chairman at its organizational meeting in January.
B. The Director of Recreation shall automatically assume the duties of
Secretary to the Advisory Board and shall keep on file minutes of all the
meetings and copies of official correspondence of the said Board.
A. To the Manager and the Director concerning or relating to the
operation and administration of the Department of Recreation.
B. To the Council concerning or touching upon matters of policy affecting
the Department of Recreation.
C. To the Board of Education concerning or relating to the use of facilities
and the athletic equipment and plant of the school system.
§ 59-2 RECREATION BOARD, ADVISORY § 59-6
59:157
Chapter 61
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 3. Personnel — See Ch. 52.
Chapter 64
SEAL, TOWNSHIP
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 3. Township flag — See Ch. 27.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Authority to have a municipal seal — See
N.J.S.A. 40:69A-29(c).
§ 64-1. Seal established.
The Seal heretofore provided and used by and for the Township as its
Official Seal is hereby established and continued as the Official Seal of the
Township. Said Official Seal is represented below.
§ 64-2. Custodian; use.
The Official Seal shall be kept in the office of the Township Clerk, who
shall be the custodian thereof. Said Seal shall be imprinted upon all official
documents, papers and instruments executed by or on behalf of the
Township.
§ 59-6 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 64-2
61:158
Chapter 67
SHADE TREE COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 3.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 100.
Trees — See Ch. 246.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Creation of advisory boards — See N.J.S.A.
40:69A-89.
§ 67-1. Committee established; function; compensation.
§ 67-2. Membership and manner of appointment.
The Advisory Shade Tree Committee shall consist of:
§ 67-3. Terms of members; commencement of terms; filling of
vacancies.
A. Pursuant to the Optional Municipal Charter Law, P.L. 1950, c. 210,
Section 9-9 (N.J.S.A. 40:69A-89), there is hereby created the Advisory
Shade Tree Committee.
B. The function of the Advisory Shade Tree Committee shall be to render
advice to the Township Council and the Township Manager concerning
the regulation, planting, care and control of shade and ornamental
trees and shrubbery upon and in the streets, highways, public places,
parks and parkways within the jurisdiction of the Township.
C. The members of the Advisory Shade Tree Committee shall serve
without compensation.
A. Three members appointed by the Township Council, who shall be
residents of the Township. Such members shall be commonly known
and referred to as the "citizen members of the Committee."
B. One nonvoting member designated by the Township Manager from
among the Township staff and confirmed by resolution of the Council.
Such member shall be commonly known and referred to as the "staff
member of the Committee."
A. The terms of the initially appointed three citizen members shall
commence upon the day of their appointment and shall be and continue
for the periods of one, two and three years respectively, beginning on
January 1 next succeeding such appointment. All subsequent
§ 64-2 SHADE TREE COMMITTEE § 67-3
67:159
§ 67-4. Organization; conduct of meetings; voting.
Chapter 70
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 3. Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 146.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Creation of authority — See N.J.S.A.
40:66A-35.
§ 70-1. Creation of Authority; statutory authority.
Pursuant to the provisions of Title 40 of the Annotated Statutes of New
Jersey, as amended, and in particular the provisions of an Act of the
Legislature of the State of New Jersey entitled the "Solid Waste
Management Law," P.L. 1968, c. 249, effective August 16, 1968 (N.J.S.A.
40:66A-32 et seq.), the Township of Cedar Grove hereby creates, together
with such other municipalities of the County of Essex who adopted within
the 1974 calendar year a substantially similar ordinance, a public body
corporate and politic under the name and style of the "West Essex Solid
Waste Management Authority," hereinafter referred to as the "Authority."
appointments of citizen members shall be for the full term of three
years, to take effect on January 1.
B. The staff member of the Committee shall serve at the pleasure of the
Township Manager.
C. Vacancies resulting from the unexpired term shall be filled for the
unexpired term only.
A. The Committee shall elect a Chairman and Secretary from among its
members. The staff member of the Committee shall be eligible for
election to the position of Secretary, but not to the position of
Chairman.
B. The Committee shall determine its own rules of internal procedure and
shall keep a record of its proceedings.
C. The Committee shall meet at least four times in each year and shall also
meet at such time as may be requested by the Township Council or
Township Manager.
D. The staff member of the Committee shall not be entitled to a vote at any
meetings of the Committee.
§ 67-3 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 70-2
70:160
§ 70-2. Function.
The Authority shall acquire, construct, maintain and operate a solid waste
disposal system for the use and benefit of the municipalities who are
members of the Authority and for the use of such other municipalities and
other persons as may be authorized by the Authority. Such solid waste
disposal system shall include all improvements, works, facilities and
property, real and personal, and rights therein, and appurtenances
necessary, useful or convenient for the treatment, deposit and disposal,
including incineration, recycling or other reduction processes, of solid
waste, garbage, ashes, trash or any solid refuse matter not usually
collected, carried away and disposed of by a sewerage system.
§ 70-3. Operation.
The solid waste disposal system of the Authority shall be jointly operated
by the members of the Authority as provided in the aforesaid Act of the
Legislature of the State of New Jersey, and such Authority shall be
authorized and empowered by the terms and provisions of a joint contract
to be entered into by all of the municipal members to have and exercise all
of the powers and authority of the Authority as provided in said Act of the
Legislature of the State of New Jersey, except as said statutory powers may
be limited by the joint contract.
§ 70-4. Sharing of costs.
The joint contract shall provide that the initial costs and expenses of the
Authority shall be shared by the contracting municipalities proportional to
their population in the most recent census.
§ 70-5. Members; terms.
Each municipality who is a member of the Authority and a party to such joint
contract shall appoint by resolution one representative to the Authority and
one alternate representative to serve in the event of the absence or inability
to act of the representative. The terms of the representatives and alternates
of the respective municipalities shall be three years.
§ 70-6. Approval of contract.
The joint contract shall be subject to approval by resolution by the Township
Council of this municipality after holding two public hearings on said
contract prior to its execution by the Mayor and Clerk.
§ 70-2 SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY § 70-6
70:161
Chapter 74
VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 3. Length of Service Awards Program — See Ch.
39.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
General powers — See N.J.S.A. 40:69A-29 and
40:69A-30.
Eligibility of volunteers for workers'
compensation — See N.J.S.A. 34:15-43.
§ 74-1. Certain organizations designated as Township units.
The Cedar Grove Ambulance Unit and Cedar Grove Rescue Squad, Inc., are
hereby recognized and designated as official Township units as required by
the workmen's compensation laws of the State of New Jersey, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 34:15-43.
Chapter 75
YOUTH ADVISORY COMMITTEE
§ 75-1. Findings.
The Governing body of the Township of Cedar Grove hereby finds that it
should establish a Youth Advisory Committee in order to address requests
by Cedar Grove teens for organized supervised drug- and alcohol-free
activities within the Township of Cedar Grove and in order to provide
a continuity of activities and programs from year-to-year and to offer
programs during the summer, as well as to provide an adult base of support
and guidance for teen activities throughout the Township.
§ 75-2. Establishment; membership.
§ 75-3. Appointment of members; terms of members.
A. There shall be a Cedar Grove Youth Advisory Committee.
B. The membership of the Youth Advisory Committee shall include four
adult advisers, 11 youths representing a cross-section of the high
school-aged population in the Township, and one liaison member each
from the Township Council and the Board of Education.
A. The one representative of the governing body and the one
representative of the Board of Education shall be appointed by and
§ 70-6 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 75-3
74:162
§ 75-4. Organization; officers.
§ 75-5. Vacancies.
In the event of the resignation of any member appointed pursuant to § 75-3B
above, or his death or inability to serve, or his absence from 50% or
more of the regularly scheduled meetings of the Committee in any twelvemonth
period, in which latter event removal shall automatically occur, the
Township Council shall fill said vacancy for the remainder of the unexpired
term.
§ 75-6. Powers and duties.
The functions of the Youth Advisory Committee shall include, but not be
limited to:
serve at the pleasure of the Township Council and Board of Education,
respectively.
B. The balance of the members of the Committee shall be appointed by the
Township Council and shall serve for two years, except that the
respective terms of office of the originally appointed members shall be
as follows:
(1) Two adult and five youth members shall serve through and
including December 31, 1997; and
(2) Two adult and six youth members shall serve through and including
December 31, 1998.
C. The term of each member, except for the initial term, shall begin on the
first day of January, and each member shall continue in office until his
successor shall be appointed.
A. The Youth Advisory Committee shall select a Chairperson, Vice
Chairperson, Treasurer and Secretary from among its members.
B. The officers shall serve for one year. Bylaws shall be adopted by the
Youth Advisory Committee.
C. Regular meetings shall be held with a calendar of meetings established
in advance.
D. The Secretary shall keep minutes of all meetings of the Committee,
which minutes and copies of official correspondence of the Committee
shall be kept on file in the office of the Township Clerk.
E. Standing and ad hoc committees may be established as needed.
A. Holding monthly meetings to assess the needs of the youth of the
Township;
§ 75-3 YOUTH ADVISORY COMMITTEE § 75-6
75:163
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 80
AFFORDABLE HOUSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 119.
Housing standards — See Ch. 158.
Rental property — See Ch. 208.
B. Planning, implementing and evaluating supervised, organized drugand
alcohol-free activities and programs to meet the needs of the youth
of the Township;
C. Involving a cross-section of the high school-aged youth from the entire
Township population in the planning and implementation of the
activities of the Youth Advisory Committee;
D. Promoting positive interaction between students and all segments of
the Township through social service activities;
E. Providing a clearinghouse for ideas, inspiration and action to all
segments of the Township's population in an effort to harness and
utilize the energy, enthusiasm, and talents of our teens as positive
contributors to the Township;
F. Reporting to the Township Council on a quarterly basis as to the
activities and programs of the Youth Advisory Committee.
§ 75-6 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 75-6
75:164
ARTICLE I
Affordable Housing Requirements
[Adopted 6-18-2012 by Ord. No. 12-743]
§ 80-1. Intent; affordable housing obligation.
§ 80-2. Definitions.
The following terms, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
given in this section:
ACCESSORY APARTMENT — A self-contained residential dwelling unit with
a kitchen, sanitary facilities, sleeping quarters and a private entrance,
which is created within an existing home, or through the conversion of
an existing accessory structure on the same site, or by an addition to
an existing home or accessory building, or by the construction of a new
accessory structure on the same site.
ACT — The Fair Housing Act of 1985, P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301
et seq.).
ADAPTABLE — Constructed in compliance with the technical design
standards of the Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
A. This article is intended to assure that low- and moderate-income units
("affordable units") are created with controls on affordability over time
and that low- and moderate-income households shall occupy these
units. This article shall apply except where inconsistent with applicable
law.
B. The Cedar Grove Planning Board has adopted a Housing Element and
Fair Share Plan pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law at N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq. The Fair Share Plan has been endorsed by the
governing body. The Fair Share Plan describes the ways the Township of
Cedar Grove shall address its fair share for low- and moderate-income
housing as determined by the New Jersey Council on Affordable
Housing ("COAH") and documented in the Housing Element.
C. This article implements and incorporates the Fair Share Plan and
addresses the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:97, as may be amended and
supplemented.
D. The Township of Cedar Grove shall file monitoring reports with COAH
in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:96, tracking the status of the
implementation of the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan. Any plan
evaluation report of the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan and
monitoring prepared by COAH in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:96 shall be
available to the public at the Township Municipal Building, Municipal
Clerk's Office, 525 Pompton Avenue, Cedar Grove, New Jersey, or from
COAH at 101 South Broad Street, Trenton, New Jersey, and on COAH's
website, www.nj.gov/dca/affiliates/coah.
§ 80-1 YOUTH ADVISORY COMMITTEE § 80-2
75:165
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity responsible for the administration
of affordable units in accordance with this article, N.J.A.C. 5:96, N.J.A.C.
5:97 and N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.
AFFIRMATIVE MARKETING — A regional marketing strategy designed
to attract buyers and/or renters of affordable units pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.15.
AFFORDABILITY AVERAGE — The average percentage of median income at
which restricted units in an affordable housing development are affordable
to low- and moderate-income households.
AFFORDABLE — A sales price or rent within the means of a low- or
moderate-income household as defined in N.J.A.C. 5:97-9; in the case of an
ownership unit, that the sales price for the unit conforms to the standards
set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6, as may be amended and supplemented,
and, in the case of a rental unit, that the rent for the unit conforms to
the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.12, as may be amended and
supplemented.
AFFORDABLE DEVELOPMENT — A housing development, all or a portion
of which consists of restricted units.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included in the
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and includes, but is not limited to,
an inclusionary development, a municipal construction project or a onehundred-
percent-affordable development.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROGRAM(S) — Any mechanism in a municipal
Fair Share Plan prepared or implemented to address a municipality's fair
share obligation.
AFFORDABLE UNIT — A housing unit proposed or created pursuant to
the Act, credited pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:97-4, and/or funded through an
Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
AGENCY — The New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency
established by P.L. 1983, c. 530 (N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1 et seq.).
AGE-RESTRICTED UNIT — A housing unit designed to meet the needs
of, and exclusively for, the residents of an age-restricted segment of the
population such that:
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE — A facility licensed by the New Jersey
Department of Health and Senior Services to provide apartment-style
All the residents of the development where the unit is situated are 62
years or older; or
A.
At least 80% of the units are occupied by one person that is 55 years or
older; or
B.
The development has been designated by the Secretary of the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development as "housing for older
persons" as defined in Section 807(b)(2) of the Fair Housing Act, 42
U.S.C. § 3607.
C.
§ 80-2 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 80-2
75:166
housing and congregate dining and to assure that assisted living services
are available when needed for four or more adult persons unrelated to the
proprietor and that offers units containing, at a minimum, one unfurnished
room, a private bathroom, a kitchenette and a lockable door on the unit
entrance.
CERTIFIED HOUSEHOLD — A household that has been certified by an
administrative agent as a low-income household or moderate-income
household.
COAH — The Council on Affordable Housing, which is in, but not of, the
Department of Community Affairs of the State of New Jersey, that was
established under the New Jersey Fair Housing Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et
seq.).
DCA — The State of New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
DEFICIENT HOUSING UNIT — A housing unit with health and safety code
violations that require the repair or replacement of a major system. A
major system includes weatherization, roofing, plumbing (including wells),
heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including septic systems), lead paint
abatement and/or load-bearing structural systems.
DEVELOPER — Any person, partnership, association, company or
corporation that is the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the
holder of an option to contract or purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation, or enlargement of any use or change in the use of any building
or other structure, or of any mining, excavation or landfill, and any use or
change in the use of any building or other structure, or land or extension
of use of land, for which permission may be required pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
INCLUSIONARY DEVELOPMENT — A development containing both
affordable units and market-rate units. This term includes, but is not
necessarily limited to, new construction, the conversion of a nonresidential
structure to residential and the creation of new affordable units through the
reconstruction of a vacant residential structure.
LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income equal to 50% or less of the median household income.
LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a low-income
household.
MAJOR SYSTEM — The primary structural, mechanical, plumbing,
electrical, fire protection, or occupant service components of a building
which include, but are not limited to, weatherization, roofing, plumbing
(including wells), heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including septic
systems), lead paint abatement or load-bearing structural systems.
§ 80-2 YOUTH ADVISORY COMMITTEE § 80-2
75:167
MARKET-RATE UNITS — Housing not restricted to low- and moderateincome
households that may sell or rent at any price.
MEDIAN INCOME — The median income by household size for the
applicable county, as adopted annually by COAH.
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross
annual household income in excess of 50% but less than 80% of the median
household income.
MODERATE-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a
moderate-income household.
MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON — The employee charged by the governing
body with the responsibility for oversight and administration of the
affordable housing program for the Township of Cedar Grove.
NONEXEMPT SALE — Any sale or transfer of ownership other than the
transfer of ownership between husband and wife; the transfer of ownership
between former spouses ordered as a result of a judicial decree of divorce
or judicial separation, but not including sales to third parties; the transfer of
ownership between family members as a result of inheritance; the transfer
of ownership through an executor's deed to a Class A beneficiary; and the
transfer of ownership by court order.
RANDOM SELECTION PROCESS — A process by which currently incomeeligible
households are selected for placement in affordable housing units
such that no preference is given to one applicant over another except for
purposes of matching household income and size with an appropriately
priced and sized affordable unit (e.g., by lottery).
REGIONAL ASSET LIMIT — The maximum housing value in each housing
region affordable to a four-person household with an income at 80% of
the regional median as defined by COAH's adopted Regional Income Limits
published annually by COAH.
REHABILITATION — The repair, renovation, alteration or reconstruction of
any building or structure, pursuant to the Rehabilitation Subcode, N.J.A.C.
5:23-6.
RENT — The gross monthly cost of a rental unit to the tenant, including the
rent paid to the landlord, as well as an allowance for tenant-paid utilities
computed in accordance with allowances published by DCA for its Section
8 program. In assisted living residences, rent does not include charges for
food and services.
RESTRICTED UNIT — A dwelling unit, whether a rental unit or ownership
unit, that is subject to the affordability controls of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as
may be amended and supplemented, but does not include a market-rate unit
financed under UHORP or MONI.
UHAC — The Uniform Housing Affordability Controls set forth in N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1 et seq.
VERY-LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income equal to 30% or less of the median household income.
§ 80-2 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 80-2
75:168
VERY-LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a verylow-
income household.
WEATHERIZATION — Building insulation (for attic, exterior walls and crawl
space), siding to improve energy efficiency, replacement storm windows,
replacement storm doors, replacement windows and replacement doors,
and is considered a major system for rehabilitation.
§ 80-3. Affordable housing programs.
The Township of Cedar Grove has determined that it will use the following
mechanisms to satisfy its affordable housing obligations:
A. A rehabilitation program.
(1) The Township of Cedar Grove's rehabilitation program shall be
designed to renovate deficient housing units occupied by low- and
moderate-income households such that, after rehabilitation, these
units will comply with the New Jersey State Housing Code pursuant
to N.J.A.C. 5:28.
(2) Both owner-occupied and renter-occupied units shall be eligible for
rehabilitation funds.
(3) All rehabilitated units shall remain affordable to low- and
moderate-income households for a minimum period of 10 years (the
control period). For owner-occupied units, the control period will
be enforced with a lien, and for renter-occupied units, the control
period will be enforced with a deed restriction.
(4) The Township of Cedar Grove shall dedicate a minimum of $10,000
for each unit to be rehabilitated through this program, reflecting
the minimum hard cost of rehabilitation for each unit.
(5) The Township of Cedar Grove shall adopt a resolution committing
to fund any shortfall in the rehabilitation programs for the
Township.
(6) The Township of Cedar Grove shall designate, subject to the
approval of COAH, one or more administrative agents to administer
the rehabilitation program in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:96 and
N.J.A.C. 5:97. The administrative agent(s) shall provide a
rehabilitation manual for the owner-occupancy rehabilitation
program and a rehabilitation manual for the rental-occupancy
rehabilitation program to be adopted by resolution of the governing
body and subject to approval of COAH. Both rehabilitation manuals
shall be available for public inspection in the office of the Township
Clerk and in the office(s) of the administrative agent(s).
(7) Units in a rehabilitation program shall be exempt from N.J.A.C.
5:97-9 and Uniform Housing Affordability Controls (UHAC), but
shall be administered in accordance with the following:
§ 80-2 YOUTH ADVISORY COMMITTEE § 80-3
75:169
(a) If a unit is vacant, upon initial rental subsequent to
rehabilitation, or if a renter-occupied unit is re-rented prior to
the end of controls on affordability, the deed restriction shall
require the unit to be rented to a low- or moderate-income
household at an affordable rent and affirmatively marketed
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:97-9 and UHAC.
(b) If a unit is renter-occupied, upon completion of the
rehabilitation, the maximum rate of rent shall be the lesser of
the current rent or the maximum permitted rent pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:97-9 and UHAC.
(c) Rents in rehabilitated units may increase annually based on
the standards in N.J.A.C. 5:97-9.
(d) Applicant and/or tenant households shall be certified as
income-eligible in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:97-9 and UHAC,
except that households in owner-occupied units shall be
exempt from the regional asset limit.
B. An accessory apartment program.
(1) All accessory apartments shall meet the following conditions:
(a) Accessory apartments are permitted by the Zoning
Ordinance46 for various zoning districts, provided the units are
affordable to low- and moderate-income households. Accessory
apartments may be developed as low-income or moderateincome
units. (Accessory apartments may be limited to only
low- or only moderate-income units as determined in the Fair
Share Plan.)
(b) Accessory apartments shall comply with all applicable statutes
and regulations of the State of New Jersey in addition to all
building codes.
(c) At the time of initial occupancy of the unit and for at least 10
years thereafter, the accessory apartment shall be rented only
to a household which is either a low- or moderate-income
household.
(d) Rents of accessory apartments shall be affordable to low- or
moderate-income households as per COAH and UHAC
regulations.
(e) There shall be a recorded deed or declaration of covenants and
restrictions applied to the property upon which the accessory
apartment is located, running with the land and limiting its
subsequent rental or sale of the unit and the accessory
apartment.
46.Editor's Note: See Ch. 268, Zoning.
§ 80-3 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 80-3
75:170
(f) The appropriate utility authority must certify that there is
water and sewer infrastructure with sufficient capacity to
serve the proposed accessory apartment. Where the proposed
location is served by an individual well and/or septic system,
the additional capacity necessitated by the new unit must meet
the appropriate NJDEP standards.
(g) The Township of Cedar Grove accessory apartment program
shall not restrict the number of bedrooms in any accessory
apartment.
(h) No accessory apartment created as a result of this chapter or
these regulations shall exceed the gross floor area of the
existing principal dwelling on the lot.
(2) The maximum number of creditable accessory apartments shall be
equal to no more than 10 or an amount equal to 10% of the
Township of Cedar Grove's fair share obligation, whichever is
greater. (Additional units may be approved by COAH if the
municipality has demonstrated successful completion of its
accessory apartment program.)
(3) The Township of Cedar Grove shall designate an administrative
entity to administer the accessory apartment program that shall
have the following responsibilities:
(a) The administrative agent shall administer the accessory
apartment program, including advertising, income qualifying
prospective renters, setting rents and annual rent increases,
maintaining a waiting list, distributing the subsidy, securing
certificates of occupancy, qualifying properties, handling
application forms, filing deed restrictions and monitoring
reports and affirmatively marketing the affordable accessory
apartment program in accordance with the UHAC.
(b) The administrative entity shall only deny an application for an
accessory apartment if the project is not in conformance with
COAH's requirements and/or the provisions of this section/
chapter. All denials shall be in writing with the reasons clearly
stated.
(c) In accordance with COAH requirements, the Township of
Cedar Grove shall provide at least $25,000 per unit to
subsidize the creation of each low-income accessory apartment
or $20,000 per unit to subsidize the creation of each moderateincome
accessory apartment. A subsidy may be used to fund
actual construction costs and/or to provide compensation for
reduced rental rates.
(4) Property owners wishing to apply to create an accessory apartment
shall submit to the administrative entity:
§ 80-3 YOUTH ADVISORY COMMITTEE § 80-3
75:171
(a) A sketch of floor plan(s) showing the location, size and
relationship of both the accessory apartment and the primary
dwelling within the building or in another structure;
(b) Rough elevations showing the modifications of any exterior
building facade to which changes are proposed; and
(c) A site development sketch showing the location of the existing
dwelling and other existing buildings; all property lines;
proposed addition, if any, along with the minimum building
setback lines; the required parking spaces for both dwelling
units; and any man-made conditions which might affect
construction.
C. A market-to-affordable program.
(1) A market-to-affordable program is established to permit the
purchase or subsidization of units through a written agreement
with the property owner and sold or rented to low- and moderateincome
households. Subject to the provisions of Subsection C(2)(c)
below, the market-to-affordable programs may produce both lowand
moderate-income units.
(2) The following provisions shall apply to market-to-affordable
programs:
(a) At the time they are offered for sale or rental, eligible units
may be new, pre-owned or vacant.
(b) The units shall be certified to be in sound condition as a result
of an inspection performed by a licensed building inspector.
(c) The municipality will provide a minimum of $25,000 per unit to
subsidize each moderate-income unit and/or $30,000 per unit
to subsidize each low-income unit, with additional subsidy
depending on the market prices or rents in a municipality.
(d) The maximum number of creditable market-to-affordable units
shall be equal to no more than 10 for-sale units and 10 rental
units or a combined total of 10% of the fair share obligation,
whichever is greater. (Additional units may be approved by
COAH if the municipality demonstrates the successful
completion of its initial market-to-affordable program.)
(3) The units shall comply with N.J.A.C. 5:97-9 and UHAC with the
following exceptions:
(a) Bedroom distribution [N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3(b) and (c)];
(b) Low-/moderate-income split [N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3(a)]; and
(c) Affordability average [N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3(d) and (e)]; however:
§ 80-3 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 80-3
75:172
§ 80-4. through § 80-6. (Reserved)
§ 80-7. New construction.
The following general guidelines apply to all newly constructed
developments that contain low- and moderate-income housing units,
including any currently unanticipated future developments that will provide
low- and moderate-income housing units.
[1] The maximum rent for a moderate-income unit shall be
affordable to households earning no more than 60% of
median income, and the maximum rent for a low-income
unit shall be affordable to households earning no more
than 44% of median income; and
[2] The maximum sales price for a moderate-income unit shall
be affordable to households earning no more than 70% of
median income, and the maximum sales price for a lowincome
unit shall be affordable to households earning no
more than 40% of median income.
A. Low/moderate split and bedroom distribution of affordable housing
units.
(1) The fair share obligation shall be divided equally between low- and
moderate-income units, except that where there is an odd number
of affordable housing units, the extra unit shall be a low-income
unit.
(2) In each affordable development, at least 50% of the restricted units
within each bedroom distribution shall be low-income units.
(3) Affordable developments that are not age-restricted shall be
structured in conjunction with realistic market demands such that:
(a) The combined number of efficiency and one-bedroom units
shall be no greater than 20% of the total low- and moderateincome
units;
(b) At least 30% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
two-bedroom units;
(c) At least 20% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
three-bedroom units; and
(d) The remaining units may be allocated among two- and threebedroom
units at the discretion of the developer.
(4) Affordable developments that are age-restricted shall be structured
such that the number of bedrooms shall equal the number of agerestricted
low- and moderate-income units within the inclusionary
development. The standard may be met by having all one-bedroom
units or by having a two-bedroom unit for each efficiency unit.
§ 80-3 YOUTH ADVISORY COMMITTEE § 80-7
75:173
B. Accessibility requirements.
(1) The first floor of all restricted townhouse dwelling units and all
restricted units in all other multistory buildings shall be subject to
the technical design standards of the Barrier Free Subcode,
N.J.A.C. 5:23-7 and N.J.A.C. 5:97-3.14.
(2) All restricted townhouse dwelling units and all restricted units in
other multistory buildings in which a restricted dwelling unit is
attached to at least one other dwelling unit shall have the following
features:
(a) An adaptable toilet and bathing facility on the first floor;
(b) An adaptable kitchen on the first floor;
(c) An interior accessible route of travel on the first floor;
(d) An interior accessible route of travel shall not be required
between stories within an individual unit;
(e) An adaptable room that can be used as a bedroom, with a door
or the casing for the installation of a door, on the first floor;
and
(f) An accessible entranceway as set forth at P.L. 2005, c. 350
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-311a et seq.), and the Barrier Free Subcode,
N.J.A.C. 5:23-7 and N.J.A.C. 5:97-3.14, or evidence that the
Township of Cedar Grove has collected funds from the
developer sufficient to make 10% of the adaptable entrances in
the development accessible:
[1] Where a unit has been constructed with an adaptable
entrance, upon the request of a disabled person who is
purchasing or will reside in the dwelling unit, an
accessible entrance shall be installed.
[2] To this end, the builder of restricted units shall deposit
funds within the Township of Cedar Grove's Affordable
Housing Trust Fund sufficient to install accessible
entrances in 10% of the affordable units that have been
constructed with adaptable entrances.
[3] The funds deposited under Subsection B(2)(f)[2] above
shall be used by the Township of Cedar Grove for the sole
purpose of making the adaptable entrance of any
affordable unit accessible when requested to do so by a
person with a disability who occupies or intends to occupy
the unit and requires an accessible entrance.
[4] The developer of the restricted units shall submit a design
plan and cost estimate for the conversion from adaptable
§ 80-7 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 80-7
75:174
to accessible entrances to the Construction Official of the
Township of Cedar Grove.
[5] Once the Construction Official has determined that the
design plan to convert the unit entrances from adaptable
to accessible meets the requirements of the Barrier Free
Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7 and N.J.A.C. 5:97-3.14, and that
the cost estimate of such conversion is reasonable,
payment shall be made to the Township of Cedar Grove's
Affordable Housing Trust Fund in care of the Township
Treasurer or Chief Financial Officer who shall ensure that
the funds are deposited into the Affordable Housing Trust
Fund and appropriately earmarked.
[6] Full compliance with the foregoing provisions shall not be
required where an entity can demonstrate that it is site
impracticable to meet the requirements. Determinations of
site impracticability shall be in compliance with the
Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7 and N.J.A.C.
5:97-3.14.
C. Maximum rents and sales prices.
(1) In establishing rents and sales prices of affordable housing units,
the administrative agent shall follow the procedures set forth in
UHAC and in COAH, utilizing the regional income limits
established by COAH.
(2) The maximum rent for restricted rental units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households earning
no more than 60% of median income, and the average rent for
restricted low- and moderate-income units shall be affordable to
households earning no more than 52% of median income.
(3) The developers and/or municipal sponsors of restricted rental units
shall establish at least one rent for each bedroom type for both lowincome
and moderate-income units.
(a) At least 10% of all low- and moderate-income rental units shall
be affordable to households earning no more than 30% of
median income.
(4) The maximum sales price of restricted ownership units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households earning
no more than 70% of median income, and each affordable
development must achieve an affordability average of 55% for
restricted ownership units; in achieving this affordability average,
moderate-income ownership units must be available for at least
three different prices for each bedroom type, and low-income
ownership units must be available for at least two different prices
for each bedroom type.
§ 80-7 YOUTH ADVISORY COMMITTEE § 80-7
75:175
(5) In determining the initial sales prices and rents for compliance with
the affordability average requirements for restricted units other
than assisted living facilities, the following standards shall be used:
(a) A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
(b) A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one-and-one-halfperson
household;
(c) A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a three-person
household;
(d) A three-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a four-and-one-halfperson
household; and
(e) A four-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a six-person
household.
(6) In determining the initial rents for compliance with the
affordability average requirements for restricted units in assisted
living facilities, the following standards shall be used:
(a) A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
(b) A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one-and-one-halfperson
household; and
(c) A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a two-person
household or to two one-person households.
(7) The initial purchase price for all restricted ownership units shall be
calculated so that the monthly carrying cost of the unit, including
principal and interest (based on a mortgage loan equal to 95% of
the purchase price and the Federal Reserve H.15 rate of interest),
taxes, homeowner and private mortgage insurance and
condominium or homeowners' association fees, does not exceed
28% of the eligible monthly income of the appropriate size
household as determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be
amended and supplemented; provided, however, that the price
shall be subject to the affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.3, as may be amended and supplemented.
(8) The initial rent for a restricted rental unit shall be calculated so as
not to exceed 30% of the eligible monthly income of the appropriate
household size as determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be
amended and supplemented; provided, however, that the rent shall
be subject to the affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.3, as may be amended and supplemented.
(9) The price of owner-occupied low- and moderate-income units may
increase annually based on the percentage increase in the regional
median income limit for each housing region. In no event shall the
§ 80-7 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 80-7
75:176
§ 80-8. Affirmative marketing requirements.
maximum resale price established by the administrative agent be
lower than the last recorded purchase price.
(10) The rent of low- and moderate-income units may be increased
annually based on the percentage increase in the Housing
Consumer Price Index for the United States. This increase shall not
exceed 9% in any one year. Rents for units constructed pursuant to
low-income housing tax credit regulations shall be indexed
pursuant to the regulations governing low-income housing tax
credits.
(11) Utilities. Tenant-paid utilities that are included in the utility
allowance shall be so stated in the lease and shall be consistent
with the utility allowance approved by DCA for its Section 8
program.
A. The Township of Cedar Grove shall adopt by resolution an Affirmative
Marketing Plan, subject to approval of COAH, compliant with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.15, as may be amended and supplemented.
B. The Affirmative Marketing Plan is a regional marketing strategy
designed to attract buyers and/or renters of all majority and minority
groups, regardless of race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry,
marital or familial status, gender, affectional or sexual orientation,
disability, age or number of children, to housing units which are being
marketed by a developer, sponsor or owner of affordable housing. The
Affirmative Marketing Plan is also intended to target those potentially
eligible persons who are least likely to apply for affordable units in that
region. It is a continuing program that directs all marketing activities
toward COAH Housing Region 3 and covers the period of deed
restriction.
C. The administrative agent designated by the Township of Cedar Grove
shall assure the affirmative marketing of all affordable units consistent
with the Affirmative Marketing Plan for the Township.
D. In implementing the Affirmative Marketing Plan, the administrative
agent shall provide a list of counseling services to low- and moderateincome
applicants on subjects such as budgeting, credit issues,
mortgage qualification, rental lease requirements, and landlord/tenant
law.
E. The affirmative marketing process for available affordable units shall
begin at least four months prior to the expected date of occupancy.
F. The costs of advertising and affirmative marketing of the affordable
units shall be the responsibility of the developer, sponsor or owner,
unless otherwise determined or agreed to by the Township of Cedar
Grove.
§ 80-7 YOUTH ADVISORY COMMITTEE § 80-9
75:177
§ 80-9. Occupancy standards.
§ 80-10. Control periods for restricted ownership units and
enforcement mechanisms.
A. In referring certified households to specific restricted units, to the
extent feasible, and without causing an undue delay in occupying the
unit, the administrative agent shall strive to:
(1) Provide an occupant for each bedroom;
(2) Provide children of different sex with separate bedrooms; and
(3) Prevent more than two persons from occupying a single bedroom.
B. Additional provisions related to occupancy standards (if any) shall be
provided in the municipal operating manual.
A. Control periods for restricted ownership units shall be in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5, as may be amended and supplemented, and
each restricted ownership unit shall remain subject to the requirements
of this chapter until the Township of Cedar Grove elects to release the
unit from such requirements, however, and prior to such an election, a
restricted ownership unit must remain subject to the requirements of
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented, for at least
30 years.
B. The affordability control period for a restricted ownership unit shall
commence on the date the initial certified household takes title to the
unit.
C. Prior to the issuance of the initial certificate of occupancy for a
restricted ownership unit and upon each successive sale during the
period of restricted ownership, the administrative agent shall
determine the restricted price for the unit and shall also determine the
nonrestricted, fair market value of the unit based on either an appraisal
or the unit's equalized assessed value.
D. At the time of the first sale of the unit, the purchaser shall execute and
deliver to the administrative agent a recapture note obligating the
purchaser (as well as the purchaser's heirs, successors and assigns) to
repay, upon the first nonexempt sale after the unit's release from the
requirements of this chapter, an amount equal to the difference
between the unit's nonrestricted fair market value and its restricted
price, and the recapture note shall be secured by a recapture lien
evidenced by a duly recorded mortgage on the unit.
E. The affordability controls set forth in this chapter shall remain in effect
despite the entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure with
respect to restricted ownership units.
F. A restricted ownership unit shall be required to obtain a continuing
certificate of occupancy or a certified statement from the Construction
§ 80-9 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 80-10
75:178
§ 80-11. Price restrictions for restricted ownership units,
homeowners' association fees and resale prices.
Price restrictions for restricted ownership units shall be in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented, including:
§ 80-12. Buyer income eligibility.
§ 80-13. Limitations on indebtedness secured by ownership unit;
subordination.
Official stating that the unit meets all code standards upon the first
transfer of title that follows the expiration of the applicable minimum
control period provided under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5(a), as may be amended
and supplemented.
A. The initial purchase price for a restricted ownership unit shall be
approved by the administrative agent.
B. The administrative agent shall approve all resale prices, in writing and
in advance of the resale, to assure compliance with the foregoing
standards.
C. The method used to determine the condominium association fee
amounts and special assessments shall be indistinguishable between
the low- and moderate-income unit owners and the market unit owners.
D. The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
administrative agent to increase the maximum sales price for the unit
on the basis of capital improvements. Eligible capital improvements
shall be those that render the unit suitable for a larger household or the
addition of a bathroom.
A. Buyer income eligibility for restricted ownership units shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and
supplemented, such that low-income ownership units shall be reserved
for households with a gross household income less than or equal to 50%
of median income, and moderate-income ownership units shall be
reserved for households with a gross household income less than 80%
of median income.
B. The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted ownership unit when the household is a low-income
household or a moderate-income household, as applicable to the unit,
and the estimated monthly housing cost for the particular unit
(including principal, interest, taxes, homeowner and private mortgage
insurance and condominium or homeowners' association fees, as
applicable) does not exceed 33% of the household's certified monthly
income.
A. Prior to incurring any indebtedness to be secured by a restricted
ownership unit, the administrative agent shall determine, in writing,
§ 80-10 YOUTH ADVISORY COMMITTEE § 80-13
75:179
§ 80-14. Control periods for restricted rental units.
§ 80-15. Price restrictions for rental units; leases.
that the proposed indebtedness complies with the provisions of this
section.
B. With the exception of original purchase money mortgages, during a
control period neither an owner nor a lender shall at any time cause or
permit the total indebtedness secured by a restricted ownership unit to
exceed 95% of the maximum allowable resale price of that unit, as such
price is determined by the administrative agent in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6(b).
A. Control periods for restricted rental units shall be in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.11, as may be amended and supplemented, and each
restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the requirements of this
chapter until the Township of Cedar Grove elects to release the unit
from such requirements pursuant to action taken in compliance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented, and prior to
such an election, a restricted rental unit must remain subject to the
requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and
supplemented, for at least 30 years.
B. Deeds of all real property that include restricted rental units shall
contain deed restriction language. The deed restriction shall have
priority over all mortgages on the property, and the deed restriction
shall be filed by the developer or seller with the records office of the
County of Essex. A copy of the filed document shall be provided to the
administrative agent within 30 days of the receipt of a certificate of
occupancy.
C. A restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the affordability controls
of this chapter, despite the occurrence of any of the following events:
(1) Sublease or assignment of the lease of the unit;
(2) Sale or other voluntary transfer of the ownership of the unit; or
(3) The entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure.
A. A written lease shall be required for all restricted rental units, except
for units in an assisted living residence, and tenants shall be
responsible for security deposits and the full amount of the rent as
stated on the lease. A copy of the current lease for each restricted
rental unit shall be provided to the administrative agent.
B. No additional fees or charges shall be added to the approved rent
(except, in the case of units in an assisted living residence, to cover the
customary charges for food and services) without the express written
approval of the administrative agent.
§ 80-13 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 80-15
75:180
§ 80-16. Tenant income eligibility.
C. Application fees (including the charge for any credit check) shall not
exceed 5% of the monthly rent of the applicable restricted unit and shall
be payable to the administrative agent to be applied to the costs of
administering the controls applicable to the unit as set forth in this
chapter.
A. Tenant income eligibility shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.13, as may be amended and supplemented, and shall be
determined as follows:
(1) Very-low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than or equal to 30% of median
income.
(2) Low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with a
gross household income less than or equal to 50% of median
income.
(3) Moderate-income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than 80% of median income.
B. The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted rental unit when the household is a very-low-income
household, low-income household or a moderate-income household, as
applicable to the unit, and the rent proposed for the unit does not
exceed 35% (40% for age-restricted units) of the household's eligible
monthly income as determined pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.16, as may
be amended and supplemented; provided, however, that this limit may
be exceeded if one or more of the following circumstances exists:
(1) The household currently pays more than 35% (40% for households
eligible for age-restricted units) of its gross household income for
rent, and the proposed rent will reduce its housing costs;
(2) The household has consistently paid more than 35% (40% for
households eligible for age-restricted units) of eligible monthly
income for rent in the past and has proven its ability to pay;
(3) The household is currently in substandard or overcrowded living
conditions;
(4) The household documents the existence of assets with which the
household proposes to supplement the rent payments; or
(5) The household documents proposed third-party assistance from an
outside source such as a family member in a form acceptable to the
administrative agent and the owner of the unit.
C. The applicant shall file documentation sufficient to establish the
existence of the circumstances in Subsection B(1) through (5) above
§ 80-15 YOUTH ADVISORY COMMITTEE § 80-16
75:181
§ 80-17. Administration.
with the administrative agent, who shall counsel the household on
budgeting.
A. The position of Municipal Housing Liaison ("MHL") for the Township of
Cedar Grove is established by this section. The governing body of the
Township shall make the actual appointment of the MHL by means of a
resolution.
(1) The MHL must be either a full-time or part-time employee of the
Township of Cedar Grove.
(2) The person appointed as the MHL must be reported to COAH for
approval.
(3) The MHL must meet all COAH requirements for qualifications,
including initial and periodic training.
(4) The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight
and administration of the affordable housing program for the
Township of Cedar Grove, including the following responsibilities
which may not be contracted out to the administrative agent:
(a) Serving as the municipality's primary point of contact for all
inquiries from the state, affordable housing providers,
administrative agents and interested households;
(b) The implementation of the Affirmative Marketing Plan and
affordability controls;
(c) When applicable, supervising any contracting administrative
agent;
(d) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in the Township of
Cedar Grove's Fair Share Plan;
(e) Compiling, verifying and submitting annual reports as required
by COAH;
(f) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
administrative agents, as applicable; and
(g) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring and affirmative marketing as
offered or approved by COAH.
B. The Township of Cedar Grove shall designate by resolution, subject to
the approval of COAH, one or more administrative agents to administer
newly constructed affordable units in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:96,
N.J.A.C. 5:97 and UHAC.
C. An operating manual shall be provided by the administrative agent(s) to
be adopted by resolution of the governing body and subject to approval
§ 80-16 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 80-17
75:182
§ 80-18. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
of COAH. The operating manuals shall be available for public inspection
in the office of the Township Clerk and in the office(s) of the
administrative agent(s).
D. Duties.
(1) The administrative agent shall perform the duties and
responsibilities of an administrative agent as are set forth in UHAC
and which are described in full detail in the operating manual,
including those set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.14, 5:80-26.16 and
5:80-26.18 thereof, which includes:
(a) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring, and affirmative marketing as
offered or approved by COAH;
(b) Affirmative marketing;
(c) Household certification;
(d) Affordability controls;
(e) Records retention;
(f) Resale and re-rental;
(g) Processing requests from unit owners; and
(h) Enforcement, though the ultimate responsibility for retaining
controls on the units rests with the municipality.
(2) The administrative agent shall have authority to take all actions
necessary and appropriate to carry out its responsibilities
hereunder.
A. Upon the occurrence of a breach of any of the regulations governing the
affordable unit by an owner, developer or tenant, the municipality shall
have all remedies provided at law or equity, including but not limited to
foreclosure, tenant eviction, municipal fines, a requirement for
household recertification, acceleration of all sums due under a
mortgage, recoupment of any funds from a sale in the violation of the
regulations, injunctive relief to prevent further violation of the
regulations, entry on the premises, and specific performance.
B. After providing written notice of a violation to an owner, developer or
tenant of a low- or moderate-income unit and advising the owner,
developer or tenant of the penalties for such violations, the municipality
may take the following action against the owner, developer or tenant for
any violation that remains uncured for a period of 60 days after service
of the written notice:
§ 80-17 YOUTH ADVISORY COMMITTEE § 80-18
75:183
(1) The Township may file a court action pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:58-11
alleging a violation, or violations, of the regulations governing the
affordable housing unit. If the owner, developer or tenant is found
by the court to have violated any provision of the regulations
governing affordable housing units, the owner, developer or tenant
shall be subject to one or more of the following penalties, at the
discretion of the court:
(a) A fine of not more than $2,000 or imprisonment for a period
not to exceed 90 days, or both. Each and every day that the
violation continues or exists shall be considered a separate and
specific violation of these provisions and not as a continuing
offense.
(b) In the case of an owner who has rented his or her low- or
moderate-income unit in violation of the regulations governing
affordable housing units, payment into the Township of Cedar
Grove Affordable Housing Trust Fund of the gross amount of
rent illegally collected.
(c) In the case of an owner who has rented his or her low- or
moderate-income unit in violation of the regulations governing
affordable housing units, payment of an innocent tenant's
reasonable relocation costs, as determined by the court.
(2) The Township may file a court action in the Superior Court seeking
a judgment, which would result in the termination of the owner's
equity or other interest in the unit, in the nature of a mortgage
foreclosure. Any judgment shall be enforceable as if the same were
a judgment of default of the first purchase money mortgage and
shall constitute a lien against the low- and moderate-income unit.
C. Such judgment shall be enforceable, at the option of the municipality,
by means of an execution sale by the Sheriff, at which time the low- and
moderate-income unit of the violating owner shall be sold at a sale price
which is not less than the amount necessary to fully satisfy and pay off
any first purchase money mortgage and prior liens and the costs of the
enforcement proceedings incurred by the municipality, including
attorney's fees. The violating owner shall have the right to possession
terminated as well as the title conveyed pursuant to the Sheriff's sale.
D. The proceeds of the Sheriff's sale shall first be applied to satisfy the first
purchase money mortgage lien and any prior liens upon the low- and
moderate-income unit. The excess, if any, shall be applied to reimburse
the municipality for any and all costs and expenses incurred in
connection with either the court action resulting in the judgment of
violation or the Sheriff's sale. In the event that the proceeds from the
Sheriff's sale are insufficient to reimburse the municipality in full as
aforesaid, the violating owner shall be personally responsible for and to
the extent of such deficiency, in addition to any and all costs incurred by
the municipality in connection with collecting such deficiency. In the
§ 80-18 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 80-18
75:184
§ 80-19. Appeals.
Appeals from all decisions of an administrative agent designated pursuant
to this article shall be filed, in writing, with the Executive Director of COAH.
event that a surplus remains after satisfying all of the above, such
surplus, if any, shall be placed in escrow by the municipality for the
owner and shall be held in such escrow for a maximum period of two
years or until such earlier time as the owner shall make a claim with the
municipality for such. Failure of the owner to claim such balance within
the two-year period shall automatically result in a forfeiture of such
balance to the municipality. Any interest accrued or earned on such
balance while being held in escrow shall belong to and shall be paid to
the municipality, whether such balance shall be paid to the owner or
forfeited to the municipality.
E. Foreclosure by the Township due to violation of the regulations
governing affordable housing units shall not extinguish the restrictions
of the regulations governing affordable housing units as the same apply
to the low- and moderate-income unit. Title shall be conveyed to the
purchaser at the Sheriff's sale, subject to the restrictions and provisions
of the regulations governing the affordable housing unit. The owner
determined to be in violation of the provisions of this plan and from
whom title and possession were taken by means of the Sheriff's sale
shall not be entitled to any right of redemption.
F. If there are no bidders at the Sheriff's sale, or if insufficient amounts
are bid to satisfy the first purchase money mortgage and any prior liens,
the municipality may acquire title to the low- and moderate-income unit
by satisfying the first purchase money mortgage and any prior liens and
crediting the violating owner with an amount equal to the difference
between the first purchase money mortgage and any prior liens and
costs of the enforcement proceedings, including legal fees and the
maximum resale price for which the low- and moderate-income unit
could have been sold under the terms of the regulations governing
affordable housing units. This excess shall be treated in the same
manner as the excess which would have been realized from an actual
sale as previously described.
G. Failure of the low- and moderate-income unit to be either sold at the
Sheriff's sale or acquired by the municipality shall obligate the owner to
accept an offer to purchase from any qualified purchaser which may be
referred to the owner by the municipality, with such offer to purchase
being equal to the maximum resale price of the low- and moderateincome
unit as permitted by the regulations governing affordable
housing units.
H. The owner shall remain fully obligated, responsible and liable for
complying with the terms and restrictions of governing affordable
housing units until such time as title is conveyed from the owner.
§ 80-18 YOUTH ADVISORY COMMITTEE § 80-20
75:185
§ 80-20. Amendments.
The Township of Cedar Grove specifically acknowledges the potential need
for amendments to this article to reflect any changes in the statutes,
regulations or other laws governing affordable housing within the
Township, and reserves the right to make any such amendment.
§ 80-20 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 80-20
75:186
ARTICLE II
Additional Fair Share Provisions
[Adopted 4-1-2019 by Ord. No. 19-839]
§ 80-21. Monitoring and reporting requirements.
The Township of Cedar Grove shall comply with the following monitoring
and reporting requirements regarding the status of the implementation of
its Housing Element and Fair Share Plan:
A. Beginning on April 1, 2019, and on every anniversary of that date
through April 1, 2025, the Township shall provide annual reporting of
its Affordable Housing Trust Fund activity to the New Jersey
Department of Community Affairs, Council on Affordable Housing, or
Local Government Services, or other entity designated by the State of
New Jersey, with a copy provided to Fair Share Housing Center (FSHC)
and posted on the municipal website, using forms developed for this
purpose by the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs (NJDCA),
Council on Affordable Housing (COAH), or Local Government Services
(NJLGS) The reporting shall include an accounting of all Affordable
Housing Trust Fund activity, including the source and amount of funds
collected and the amount and purpose for which any funds have been
expended.
B. Beginning on April 1, 2019, and on every anniversary of that date
through April 1, 2025, the Township shall provide annual reporting of
the status of all affordable housing activity within the municipality
through posting on the municipal website, with a copy of such posting
provided to Fair Share Housing Center, using forms previously
developed for this purpose by COAH or any other forms endorsed by the
Special Master and FSHC.
C. By July 1, 2020, as required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-313, the
Township will post on its municipal website, with a copy provided to
FSHC, a status report as to its implementation of its Plan and an
analysis of whether any unbuilt sites or unfulfilled mechanisms
continue to present a realistic opportunity and whether any
mechanisms to meet unmet need should be revised or supplemented.
Such posting shall invite any interested party to submit comments to
the municipality, with a copy to FSHC, regarding whether any sites no
longer present a realistic opportunity and should be replaced and
whether any mechanisms to meet unmet need should be revised or
supplemented. Any interested party may by motion request a hearing
before the court regarding these issues.
D. By March 1, 2020, and every third year thereafter, as required by
N.J.S.A. 52:27D- 329.1, the Township will post on its municipal website,
with a copy provided to FSHC, a status report as to its satisfaction of its
very-low-income requirements, including its family very-low-income
requirements. Such posting shall invite any interested party to submit
comments to the municipality and FSHC on the issue of whether the
§ 80-21 YOUTH ADVISORY COMMITTEE § 80-21
75:187
§ 80-22. Definitions.
The following terms when used in this article shall have the meanings given
in this section:
ACT — The Fair Housing Act of 1985, P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301
et seq.).
ADAPTABLE — Constructed in compliance with the technical design
standards of the Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity designated by the Township to
administer affordable units in accordance with this article, N.J.A.C. 5:93,47
and UHAC (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26).
AFFIRMATIVE MARKETING — A regional marketing strategy designed
to attract buyers and/or renters of affordable units pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.15.
AFFORDABILITY AVERAGE — The average percentage of median income
at which new restricted units in an affordable housing development are
affordable to low- and moderate-income households.
AFFORDABLE — A sales price or rent level that is within the means of a lowor
moderate- income household as defined within N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4,48 and,
in the case of an ownership unit, that the sales price for the unit conforms
to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6, as may be amended and
supplemented, and, in the case of a rental unit, that the rent for the
unit conforms to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.12, as may be
amended and supplemented.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included in
or approved pursuant to the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan or
otherwise intended to address the Township's fair share obligation, and
includes, but is not limited to, an inclusionary development, a municipal
construction project or a 100% affordable housing development.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROGRAM(S) — Any mechanism in a municipal
Fair Share Plan prepared or implemented to address a municipality's fair
share obligation.
AFFORDABLE UNIT — A housing unit proposed or created pursuant to
the Act and approved for crediting by the court and/or funded through an
affordable housing trust fund.
AGE-RESTRICTED UNIT — A housing unit designed to meet the needs
of, and exclusively for, the residents of an age-restricted segment of the
population such that:
municipality has complied with its very-low-income and family very-lowincome
housing obligations.
47.Editor's Note: The regulations in N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired October 16, 2016.
48.Editor's Note: The regulations in N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired October 16, 2016.
§ 80-21 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 80-22
75:188
AGENCY — The New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency
established by P.L. 1983, c. 530 (N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1 et seq.).
ALTERNATIVE LIVING ARRANGEMENT — A structure in which households
live in distinct bedrooms, yet share kitchen and plumbing facilities, central
heat and common areas. Alternative living arrangements include, but are
not limited to: transitional facilities for the homeless; Class A, B, C, D and
E boarding homes as regulated by the State of New Jersey Department
of Community Affairs; residential health care facilities as regulated by the
New Jersey Department of Health; group homes for the developmentally
disabled and mentally ill as licensed and/or regulated by the New Jersey
Department of Human Services; and congregate living arrangements.
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE — A facility that is licensed by the New
Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services to provide apartment-style
housing and congregate dining and to assure that assisted living services
are available when needed for four or more adult persons unrelated to the
proprietor and that offers units containing, at a minimum, one unfurnished
room, a private bathroom, a kitchenette and a lockable door on the unit
entrance.
CERTIFIED HOUSEHOLD — A household that has been certified by an
administrative agent as a low-income household or moderate-income
household.
COAH — The Council on Affordable Housing, as established by the New
Jersey Fair Housing Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.).
DCA — The State of New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
DEFICIENT HOUSING UNIT — A housing unit with health and safety code
violations that requires the repair or replacement of a major system. A
major system includes weatherization, roofing, plumbing (including wells),
heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including septic systems), lead paint
abatement and/or load-bearing structural systems.
DEVELOPER — Any person, partnership, association, company or
corporation that is the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or any
land included in a proposed development, including the holder of an option
to contract to purchase, or other person having an enforceable proprietary
interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
All the residents of the development wherein the unit is situated are 62
years of age or older; or
A.
At least 80% of the units are occupied by one person who is 55 years of
age or older; or
B.
The development has been designated by the Secretary of the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development as "housing for older
persons" as defined in Section 807(b)(2) of the Fair Housing Act, 42
U.S.C. § 3607.
C.
§ 80-22 YOUTH ADVISORY COMMITTEE § 80-22
75:189
relocation, or enlargement of any use or change in the use of any building
or other structure, or of any mining, excavation or landfill, and any use or
change in the use of any building or other structure, or land or extension
of use of land, for which permission may be required pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
INCLUSIONARY DEVELOPMENT — A development containing both
affordable units and market rate units. This term includes, but is not limited
to: new construction, the conversion of a nonresidential structure to
residential use and the creation of new affordable units through the gut
rehabilitation or reconstruction of a vacant residential structure.
LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income equal to 50% or less of the regional median household
income by household size.
LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a low-income
household.
MAJOR SYSTEM — The primary structural, mechanical, plumbing,
electrical, fire protection, or occupant service components of a building
which include but are not limited to weatherization, roofing, plumbing
(including wells), heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including septic
systems), lead paint abatement and load-bearing structural systems.
MARKET-RATE UNITS — Housing not restricted to low- and moderateincome
households that may sell or rent at any price.
MEDIAN INCOME — The median income by household size for the
applicable housing region, as adopted annually by COAH or a successor
entity approved by the court.
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross
annual household income in excess of 50% but less than 80% of the regional
median household income by household size.
MODERATE-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a
moderate-income household.
NONEXEMPT SALE — Any sale or transfer of ownership other than the
transfer of ownership between husband and wife; the transfer of ownership
between former spouses ordered as a result of a judicial decree of divorce
or judicial separation, but not including sales to third parties; the transfer of
ownership between family members as a result of inheritance; the transfer
of ownership through an executor's deed to a class A beneficiary and the
transfer of ownership by court order.
RANDOM SELECTION PROCESS — A process by which currently incomeeligible
households are selected for placement in affordable housing units
such that no preference is given to one applicant over another except for
purposes of matching household income and size with an appropriately
priced and sized affordable unit (e.g., by lottery).
REGIONAL ASSET LIMIT — The maximum housing value in each housing
region affordable to a four-person household with an income at 80% of
§ 80-22 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 80-22
75:190
the regional median as defined by duly adopted regional income limits
published annually by COAH or a successor entity.
REHABILITATION — The repair, renovation, alteration or reconstruction of
any building or structure, pursuant to the Rehabilitation Subcode, N.J.A.C.
5:23-6.
RENT — The gross monthly cost of a rental unit to the tenant, including the
rent paid to the landlord, as well as an allowance for tenant-paid utilities
computed in accordance with allowances published by DCA for its Section
8 program. In assisted living residences, rent does not include charges for
food and services.
RESTRICTED UNIT — A dwelling unit, whether a rental unit or an
ownership unit, that is subject to the affordability controls of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1, as amended and supplemented, but does not include a marketrate
unit financed under UHORP or MONI.
UHAC — The Uniform Housing Affordability Controls set forth in N.J.A.C.
5:80-26 et seq.
VERY-LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income equal to 30% or less of the regional median household
income by household size.
VERY-LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a verylow-
income household.
WEATHERIZATION — Building insulation (for attic, exterior walls and crawl
space), siding to improve energy efficiency, replacement storm windows,
replacement storm doors, replacement windows and replacement doors,
and is considered a major system for purposes of a rehabilitation program.
§ 80-23. Applicability.
A. The provisions of this article shall apply to all affordable housing
developments and affordable housing units that currently exist and that
are proposed to be created within the Township of Cedar Grove
pursuant to the Township's most recently adopted Housing Element and
Fair Share Plan.
B. Moreover, this article shall apply to all developments that contain lowand
moderate-income housing units, including any currently
unanticipated future developments that will provide low- and moderateincome
housing units, and also including projects funded with lowincome
housing tax credits.
C. Any property in the Township of Cedar Grove that is currently zoned for
nonresidential uses and subsequently receives a zoning change or use
variance or approval of a redevelopment plan to permit residential
development, or that is currently zoned for residential uses and
receives a zoning change or density variance or approval of a
redevelopment plan to permit higher density residential development,
provided such density is at least twice the density previously permitted,
§ 80-22 YOUTH ADVISORY COMMITTEE § 80-23
75:191
§ 80-24. Alternative living arrangements.
§ 80-25. Phasing schedule for inclusionary zoning.
In inclusionary developments, the following schedule for the issuance of
certificates of occupancy for the required affordable housing units relative
to the issuance of certificates of occupancy for the permitted market units
shall be followed:
Maximum Percentage of Market-
Rate Units Completed
(COs Issued)
Minimum Percentage of Lowand
Moderate-Income Units
Completed
(COs Issued)
25 0
25+1 10
50 50
shall provide an affordable housing set-aside of 15% if the affordable
units will be for rent and 20% if the affordable units will be for sale.
No property shall be subdivided so as to avoid compliance with this
requirement. Moreover, this provision governs municipal actions only
and shall not entitle any property owner or developer to such action by
the Township. All affordable units created pursuant to this paragraph
shall be governed by the provisions of this article.
A. The administration of an alternative living arrangement shall be in
compliance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.849 and UHAC, with the following
exceptions:
(1) Affirmative marketing (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15), provided, however,
that the units or bedrooms may be affirmatively marketed by the
provider in accordance with an alternative plan approved by the
court;
(2) Affordability average and bedroom distribution (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3).
B. With the exception of units established with capital funding through a
twenty-year operating contract with the Department of Human
Services, Division of Developmental Disabilities, alternative living
arrangements shall have at least thirty-year controls on affordability in
accordance with UHAC, unless an alternative commitment is approved
by the court.
C. The service provider for the alternative living arrangement shall act as
the administrative agent for the purposes of administering the
affirmative marketing and affordability requirements for the alternative
living arrangement.
49.Editor's Note: The regulations in N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired October 16, 2016.
§ 80-23 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 80-25
75:192
Maximum Percentage of Market-
Rate Units Completed
(COs Issued)
Minimum Percentage of Lowand
Moderate-Income Units
Completed
(COs Issued)
75 75
90 100
§ 80-26. New construction.
A. Low/moderate split and bedroom distribution of affordable housing
units.
(1) The fair share obligation shall be divided equally between low- and
moderate-income units, except that, where there is an odd number
of affordable housing units, the extra unit shall be a low-income
unit. At least 13% of all restricted rental units shall be very-lowincome
units (affordable to a household earning 30% or less of
regional median income by household size). The very-low-income
units shall be counted as part of the required number of low-income
units within the development.
(2) In each affordable development, at least 50% of the restricted units
within each bedroom distribution shall be very-low- or low-income
units.
(3) Affordable developments that are not age-restricted shall be
structured in conjunction with realistic market demands such that:
(a) The combined number of efficiency and one-bedroom units
shall be no greater than 20% of the total low- and moderateincome
units;
(b) At least 30% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
two-bedroom units;
(c) At least 20% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
three-bedroom units; and
(d) The remaining units may be allocated among two- and threebedroom
units at the discretion of the developer.
(4) Affordable developments that are age-restricted shall be structured
such that the number of bedrooms shall equal the number of agerestricted
low- and moderate-income units within the inclusionary
development. This standard may be met by having all one-bedroom
units or by having a two-bedroom unit for each efficiency unit.
B. Accessibility requirements. The first floor of all restricted townhouse
dwelling units and all restricted units in all other multistory buildings
§ 80-25 YOUTH ADVISORY COMMITTEE § 80-26
75:193
shall be subject to the technical design standards of the Barrier Free
Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, and the following:
(1) All restricted townhouse dwelling units and all restricted units in
other multistory buildings in which a restricted dwelling unit is
attached to at least one other dwelling unit shall have the following
features:
(a) An adaptable toilet and bathing facility on the first floor.
(b) An adaptable kitchen on the first floor.
(c) An interior accessible route of travel on the first floor.
(d) An adaptable room that can be used as a bedroom, with a door
or the casing for the installation of a door, on the first floor.
(e) If not all of the foregoing requirements in Subsection B(1)(a)
through (d) can be satisfied, then an interior accessible route
of travel must be provided between stories within an individual
unit, but if all of the terms of Subsection B(1)(a) through (d)
above have been satisfied, then an interior accessible route of
travel shall not be required between stories within an
individual unit.
(f) An accessible entranceway as set forth at P.L. 2005, c. 350
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-311a et seq.) and the Barrier Free Subcode,
N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, or evidence that Cedar Grove has collected
funds from the developer sufficient to make 10% of the
adaptable entrances in the development accessible:
[1] Where a unit has been constructed with an adaptable
entrance, upon the request of a disabled person who is
purchasing or will reside in the dwelling unit, an
accessible entrance shall be installed.
[2] To this end, the builder of restricted units shall deposit
funds within the Township of Cedar Grove's Affordable
Housing Trust Fund sufficient to install accessible
entrances in 10% of the affordable units that have been
constructed with adaptable entrances.
[3] The funds deposited under Subsection B(1)(f)[2] above
shall be used by the Township of Cedar Grove for the sole
purpose of making the adaptable entrance of an affordable
unit accessible when requested to do so by a person with a
disability who occupies or intends to occupy the unit and
requires an accessible entrance.
[4] The developer of the restricted units shall submit a design
plan and cost estimate to the Construction Official of the
Township of Cedar Grove for the conversion of adaptable
to accessible entrances.
§ 80-26 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 80-26
75:194
[5] Once the Construction Official has determined that the
design plan to convert the unit entrances from adaptable
to accessible meet the requirements of the Barrier Free
Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, and that the cost estimate of
such conversion is reasonable, payment shall be made to
the Township's Affordable Housing Trust Fund in care of
the Township Treasurer who shall ensure that the funds
are deposited into the Affordable Housing Trust Fund and
appropriately earmarked.
(2) Full compliance with the foregoing provisions shall not be required
where an entity can demonstrate that it is "site impracticable" to
meet the requirements. Determinations of site impracticability
shall be in compliance with the Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C.
5:23-7.
C. Design.
(1) In inclusionary developments, to the extent possible, low- and
moderate-income units shall be integrated with the market units.
(2) In inclusionary developments, low- and moderate-income units
shall have access to all of the same common elements and facilities
as the market units.
D. Maximum rents and sales prices.
(1) In establishing rents and sales prices of affordable housing units,
the administrative agent shall follow the procedures set forth in
UHAC, utilizing the most recently published regional weighted
average of the uncapped Section 8 income limits published by HUD
and using calculation procedures approved by the court.
(2) The maximum rent for restricted rental units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households earning
no more than 60% of median income, and the average rent for
restricted rental units shall be affordable to households earning no
more than 52% of median income.
(3) The developers and/or municipal sponsors of restricted rental units
shall establish at least one rent for each bedroom type for both lowincome
and moderate-income units, provided that at least 13% of
all low- and moderate-income rental units shall be affordable to
very-low-income households, which very-low-income units shall be
part of the low-income requirement.
(4) The maximum sales price of restricted ownership units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households earning
no more than 70% of median income, and each affordable
development must achieve an affordability average of 55% for
restricted ownership units; in achieving this affordability average,
moderate-income ownership units must be available for at least
§ 80-26 YOUTH ADVISORY COMMITTEE § 80-26
75:195
three different sales prices for each bedroom type, and low-income
ownership units must be available for at least two different sales
prices for each bedroom type.
(5) In determining the initial sales prices and rent levels for
compliance with the affordability average requirements for
restricted units other than assisted living facilities and agerestricted
developments, the following standards shall be used:
(a) A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
(b) A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one-and-one-halfperson
household;
(c) A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a three-person
household;
(d) A three-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a four-and-one-halfperson
household; and
(e) A four-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a six-person
household.
(6) In determining the initial sales prices and rents for compliance with
the affordability average requirements for restricted units in
assisted living facilities and age-restricted developments, the
following standards shall be used:
(a) A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
(b) A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one-and-one-halfperson
household; and
(c) A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a two-person
household or to two one-person households.
(7) The initial purchase price for all restricted ownership units shall be
calculated so that the monthly carrying cost of the unit, including
principal and interest (based on a mortgage loan equal to 95% of
the purchase price and the Federal Reserve H.15 rate of interest),
taxes, homeowner and private mortgage insurance and
condominium or homeowner association fees do not exceed 28% of
the eligible monthly income of the appropriate size household as
determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be amended and
supplemented; provided, however, that the price shall be subject to
the affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may
be amended and supplemented.
(8) The initial rent for a restricted rental unit shall be calculated so as
not to exceed 30% of the eligible monthly income of the appropriate
size household, including an allowance for tenant-paid utilities, as
determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be amended and
supplemented; provided, however, that the rent shall be subject to
§ 80-26 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 80-26
75:196
§ 80-27. Utilities.
§ 80-28. Occupancy standards.
In referring certified households to specific restricted units, the
administrative agent shall, to the extent feasible and without causing an
undue delay in the occupancy of a unit, strive to:
§ 80-29. Control periods for restricted ownership units and
enforcement mechanisms.
the affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may
be amended and supplemented.
(9) The price of owner-occupied low- and moderate-income units may
increase annually based on the percentage increase in the regional
median income limit for each housing region. In no event shall the
maximum resale price established by the administrative agent be
lower than the last recorded purchase price.
(10) The rents of very-low-, low- and moderate-income units may be
increased annually based on the permitted percentage increase in
the Housing Consumer Price Index for the Northeast Urban Area.
This increase shall not exceed 9% in any one year. Rent increases
for units constructed pursuant to low-income housing tax credit
regulations shall be indexed pursuant to the regulations governing
low- income housing tax credits.
A. Affordable units shall utilize the same type of heating source as market
units within an inclusionary development.
B. Tenant-paid utilities included in the utility allowance shall be set forth
in the lease and shall be consistent with the utility allowance approved
by HUD for the Section 8 program.
A. Provide an occupant for each bedroom;
B. Provide children of different sexes with separate bedrooms;
C. Provide separate bedrooms for parents and children; and
D. Prevent more than two persons from occupying a single bedroom.
A. Control periods for newly constructed restricted ownership units shall
be in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5, except as modified by the
terms of the settlement agreement between the Township of Cedar
Grove and Fair Share Housing Center (FSHC), as said settlement
agreement may be further amended and supplemented, and each newly
constructed restricted ownership unit shall remain subject to the
requirements of this article for a period of at least 50 years, until Cedar
Grove takes action to release the unit from such requirements; prior to
such action, a restricted ownership unit must remain subject to the
§ 80-26 YOUTH ADVISORY COMMITTEE § 80-29
75:197
§ 80-30. Price restrictions for restricted ownership units,
homeowner association fees and resale prices.
Price restrictions for restricted ownership units shall be in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented, including:
requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, except as modified by the terms of
the settlement agreement between the Township of Cedar Grove and
Fair Share Housing Center (FSHC), as said settlement agreement may
be further amended and supplemented.
B. The affordability control period for a restricted ownership unit shall
commence on the date the initial certified household takes title to the
unit.
C. Prior to the issuance of the initial certificate of occupancy for a
restricted ownership unit and upon each successive sale during the
period of restricted ownership, the administrative agent shall
determine the restricted price for the unit and shall also determine the
nonrestricted, fair market value of the unit based on either an appraisal
or the unit's equalized assessed value without the restrictions in place.
D. At the time of the initial sale of the unit, the initial purchaser shall
execute and deliver to the administrative agent a recapture note
obligating the purchaser (as well as the purchaser's heirs, successors
and assigns) to repay, upon the first nonexempt sale after the unit's
release from the restrictions set forth in this article, an amount equal to
the difference between the unit's nonrestricted fair market value and its
restricted price, and the recapture note shall be secured by a recapture
lien evidenced by a duly recorded mortgage on the unit.
E. The affordability controls set forth in this article shall remain in effect
despite the entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure with
respect to restricted ownership units.
F. A restricted ownership unit shall be required to obtain a continuing
certificate of occupancy or a certified statement from the Construction
Official stating that the unit meets all Code standards upon the first
transfer of title following the removal of the restrictions provided under
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5(a), as may be amended and supplemented.
A. The initial purchase price for a restricted ownership unit shall be
approved by the administrative agent.
B. The administrative agent shall approve all resale prices, in writing and
in advance of the resale, to assure compliance with the foregoing
standards.
C. The master deeds of inclusionary developments shall provide no
distinction between the condominium or homeowner association fees
and special assessments paid by low- and moderate-income purchasers
and those paid by market purchasers.
§ 80-29 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 80-30
75:198
§ 80-31. Buyer income eligibility.
§ 80-32. Limitations on indebtedness secured by ownership unit;
subordination.
D. The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
administrative agent to increase the maximum sales price for the unit
on the basis of approved capital improvements. Eligible capital
improvements shall be those that render the unit suitable for a larger
household or the addition of a bathroom. See § 80-33.
A. Buyer income eligibility for restricted ownership units shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and
supplemented, such that low-income ownership units shall be reserved
for households with a gross household income less than or equal to 50%
of median income and moderate-income ownership units shall be
reserved for households with a gross household income less than 80%
of median income.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the administrative agent may, upon
approval by the Township Council, and subject to the court's approval,
permit a moderate-income purchaser to buy a low-income unit if and
only if the administrative agent can demonstrate that there is an
insufficient number of eligible low-income purchasers in the housing
region to permit prompt occupancy of the unit and all other reasonable
efforts to attract a low-income purchaser, including pricing and
financing incentives, have failed. Any such low-income unit that is sold
to a moderate-income household shall retain the required pricing and
pricing restrictions for a low-income unit.
C. A certified household that purchases a restricted ownership unit must
occupy it as the certified household's principal residence and shall not
lease the unit; provided, however, that the administrative agent may
permit the owner of a restricted ownership unit, upon application and a
showing of hardship, to lease the restricted unit to another certified
household for a period not to exceed one year.
D. The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted ownership unit when the household is a low-income
household or a moderate-income household, as applicable to the unit,
and the estimated monthly housing cost for the particular unit
(including principal, interest, taxes, homeowner and private mortgage
insurance and condominium or homeowner association fees, as
applicable) does not exceed 33% of the household's eligible monthly
income.
A. Prior to incurring any indebtedness to be secured by a restricted
ownership unit, the owner shall apply to the administrative agent for a
determination in writing that the proposed indebtedness complies with
the provisions of this section, and the administrative agent shall issue
such determination prior to the owner incurring such indebtedness.
§ 80-30 YOUTH ADVISORY COMMITTEE § 80-32
75:199
§ 80-33. Capital improvements to ownership units.
§ 80-34. Control periods for restricted rental units.
B. With the exception of first purchase money mortgages, neither an
owner nor a lender shall at any time cause or permit the total
indebtedness secured by a restricted ownership unit to exceed 95% of
the maximum allowable resale price of the unit, as such price is
determined by the administrative agent in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.6(b).
A. The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
administrative agent to increase the maximum sales price for the unit
on the basis of capital improvements made since the purchase of the
unit. Eligible capital improvements shall be those that render the unit
suitable for a larger household or that add an additional bathroom. In
no event shall the maximum sales price of an improved housing unit
exceed the limits of affordability for the larger household.
B. Upon the resale of a restricted ownership unit, all items of property that
are permanently affixed to the unit or were included when the unit was
initially restricted (for example, refrigerator, range, washer, dryer,
dishwasher, wall-to-wall carpeting) shall be included in the maximum
allowable resale price. Other items may be sold to the purchaser at a
reasonable price that has been approved by the administrative agent at
the time of the signing of the agreement to purchase. The purchase of
central air conditioning installed subsequent to the initial sale of the
unit and not included in the base price may be made a condition of the
unit resale, provided the price, which shall be subject to ten-year,
straight-line depreciation, has been approved by the administrative
agent. Unless otherwise approved by the administrative agent, the
purchase of any property other than central air conditioning shall not
be made a condition of the unit resale. The owner and the purchaser
must personally certify at the time of closing that no unapproved
transfer of funds for the purpose of selling and receiving property has
taken place at the time of or as a condition of resale.
A. Control periods for newly constructed restricted rental units shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.11, except as modified by the terms of
the settlement agreement between the Township of Cedar Grove and
Fair Share Housing Center (FSHC), as such settlement agreement may
be further amended and supplemented, and each newly constructed
restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the requirements of this
article for a period of at least 50 years, until Cedar Grove takes action
to release the unit from such requirements. Prior to such action, a
restricted rental unit must remain subject to the requirements of
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, except as modified by the terms of the settlement
agreement between the Township of Cedar Grove and Fair Share
Housing Center (FSHC), as such settlement agreement may be further
amended and supplemented.
§ 80-32 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 80-34
75:200
§ 80-35. Rent restrictions for rental units; leases.
§ 80-36. 100% Affordable projects.
All 100% affordable projects, including projects funded through low-income
housing tax credits, shall comply with the Uniform Housing Affordability
Controls, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et. seq., except as modified by the terms of
the settlement agreement executed between the Township of Cedar Grove
and Fair Share Housing Center (FSHC), as such settlement agreement may
be further amended and supplemented. All such projects shall be required
to have an initial thirty-year affordability control period plus a fifteen-year
extended use period.
B. Deeds of all real property that include restricted rental units shall
contain deed restriction language. The deed restriction shall have
priority over all mortgages on the property, and the deed restriction
shall be filed by the developer or seller with the records office of the
County of Essex. A copy of the filed document shall be provided to the
administrative agent within 30 days of the receipt of a certificate of
occupancy.
C. A restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the affordability controls
of this article despite the occurrence of any of the following events:
(1) Sublease or assignment of the lease of the unit;
(2) Sale or other voluntary transfer of the ownership of the unit; or
(3) The entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure on the
property containing the unit.
A. A written lease shall be required for all restricted rental units and
tenants shall be responsible for security deposits and the full amount of
the rent as stated on the lease. A copy of the current lease for each
restricted rental unit shall be provided to the administrative agent.
B. No additional fees or charges shall be added to the approved rent
(except, in the case of units in an assisted living residence, to cover the
customary charges for food and services) without the express written
approval of the administrative agent.
C. Application fees (including the charge for any credit check) shall not
exceed 5% of the monthly rent of the applicable restricted unit and shall
be payable to the administrative agent to be applied to the costs of
administering the controls applicable to the unit as set forth in this
article.
D. No rent control ordinance or other pricing restriction shall be
applicable to either the market units or the affordable units in any
development in which at least 15% of the total number of dwelling units
are restricted rental units in compliance with this article.
§ 80-34 YOUTH ADVISORY COMMITTEE § 80-37
75:201
§ 80-37. Tenant income eligibility.
§ 80-38. Municipal housing liaison.
A. Tenant income eligibility shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.13, as may be amended and supplemented, and shall be
determined as follows:
(1) Very-low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than or equal to 30% of the regional
median household income by household size.
(2) Low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with a
gross household income less than or equal to 50% of the regional
median household income by household size.
(3) Moderate-income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than 80% of the regional median
household income by household size.
B. The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted rental unit when the household is a very-low-income
household, low-income household or a moderate- income household, as
applicable to the unit, and the rent proposed for the unit does not
exceed 35% (40% for age-restricted units) of the household's eligible
monthly income as determined pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.16, as may
be amended and supplemented; provided, however, that this limit may
be exceeded if one or more of the following circumstances exists:
(1) The household currently pays more than 35% (40% for households
eligible for age-restricted units) of its gross household income for
rent, and the proposed rent will reduce its housing costs;
(2) The household has consistently paid more than 35% (40% for
households eligible for age-restricted units) of eligible monthly
income for rent in the past and has proven its ability to pay;
(3) The household is currently in substandard or overcrowded living
conditions;
(4) The household documents the existence of assets with which the
household proposes to supplement the rent payments; or
(5) The household documents reliable anticipated third-party
assistance from an outside source such as a family member in a
form acceptable to the administrative agent and the owner of the
unit.
C. The applicant shall file documentation sufficient to establish the
existence of the circumstances in Subsections A and B above with the
administrative agent, who shall counsel the household on budgeting.
§ 80-37 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 80-38
75:202
A. There is hereby created the position of municipal housing liaison. The
municipal housing liaison shall be responsible for oversight and
administration of the affordable housing program for Cedar Grove,
including the following responsibilities which may not be contracted
out to the administrative agent:
(1) Serving as Cedar Grove's primary point of contact for all inquiries
from the state, affordable housing providers, administrative agents
and interested households;
(2) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in Cedar Grove's Fair
Share Plan;
(3) Compiling, verifying, submitting and posting all monitoring reports
as required by the court and by this article;
(4) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
administrative agents, as needed; and
(5) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring and affirmative marketing at least
annually and more often as needed.
B. The Township of Cedar Grove shall appoint a specific municipal
employee to serve as a municipal housing liaison responsible for
overseeing the Township's affordable housing program, including
overseeing the administration of affordability controls on the affordable
units and the affirmative marketing of available affordable units in
accordance with the Township's affirmative marketing plan; fulfilling
monitoring and reporting requirements; and supervising administrative
agent(s). Cedar Grove shall adopt an ordinance creating the position of
municipal housing liaison and a resolution appointing the person to
fulfill the position of municipal housing liaison. The municipal housing
liaison shall be appointed by the governing body and may be a full- or
part-time municipal employee. The municipal housing liaison shall be
approved by the court and shall be duly qualified through a training
program sponsored by Affordable Housing Professionals of New Jersey
before assuming the duties of municipal housing liaison.
C. Subject to the approval of the court, the Township of Cedar Grove shall
designate one or more administrative agent(s) to administer and to
affirmatively market the affordable units constructed in the Township in
accordance with this article. An operating manual for each affordable
housing program shall be provided by the administrative agent(s) to be
adopted by resolution of the governing body and subject to approval of
the court. The operating manual(s) shall be available for public
inspection in the office of the Township Clerk, in the office of the
municipal housing liaison, and in the office(s) of the administrative
agent(s). The municipal housing liaison shall supervise the work of the
administrative agent(s).
§ 80-38 YOUTH ADVISORY COMMITTEE § 80-39
75:203
§ 80-39. Administrative agent.
An administrative agent shall be an independent entity serving under
contract to and reporting to the municipality. The fees of the administrative
agent shall be paid by the owners of the affordable units for which the
services of the administrative agent are required. The administrative agent
shall perform the duties and responsibilities of an administrative agent
as set forth in UHAC, including those set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.14,
5:80-26.16 and 5:80-26.18, which includes:
A. Affirmative marketing:
(1) Conducting an outreach process to affirmatively market affordable
housing units in accordance with the affirmative marketing plan of
the Township of Cedar Grove and the provisions of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.15; and
(2) Providing counseling or contracting to provide counseling services
to low- and moderate-income applicants on subjects such as
budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental lease
requirements, and landlord/tenant law.
B. Household certification:
(1) Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on interviews
with interested households;
(2) Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient documentation of
gross income and assets upon which to base a determination of
income eligibility for a low- or moderate-income unit;
(3) Providing written notification to each applicant as to the
determination of eligibility or noneligibility;
(4) Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units execute a
certificate substantially in the form, as applicable, of either the
ownership or rental certificates set forth in Appendices J and K of
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.;
(5) Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible applicant
households living in the housing region and eligible applicant
households with members working in the housing region where the
units are located;
(6) Employing a random selection process as provided in the
affirmative marketing plan of the Township of Cedar Grove when
referring households for certification to affordable units; and
(7) Notifying the following entities of the availability of affordable
housing units in the Township of Cedar Grove: Fair Share Housing
Center; the New Brunswick, Plainfield Area, Perth Amboy and
Metuchen/Edison branches of the NAACP; and the Latino Action
Network.
§ 80-39 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 80-39
75:204
C. Affordability controls:
(1) Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed restrictions
and mortgages for recording at the time of conveyance of title of
each restricted unit;
(2) Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for its
control period, including the recorded deed with restrictions,
recorded mortgage and note, as appropriate;
(3) Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and cancellation
of the mortgage note are effectuated and properly filed with the
Essex County Register of Deeds or Essex County Clerk's office after
the termination of the affordability controls for each restricted unit;
(4) Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and
(5) Ensuring the issuance of continuing certificates of occupancy or
certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10.
D. Resales and re-rentals:
(1) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of communicating
information between owners and the administrative agent
regarding the availability of restricted units for resale or re-rental;
and
(2) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of communicating
information to low- (or very-low-) and moderate-income households
regarding the availability of restricted units for resale or re-rental.
E. Processing requests from unit owners:
(1) Reviewing and approving requests for determination from owners
of restricted units who wish to take out home equity loans or
refinance during the term of their ownership that the amount of
indebtedness to be incurred will not violate the terms of this
article;
(2) Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices from
owners of restricted units who wish to make capital improvements
to the units that would affect the selling price, such authorizations
to be limited to those improvements resulting in additional
bedrooms or bathrooms and the depreciated cost of central air
conditioning systems;
(3) Notifying the municipality of an owner's intent to sell a restricted
unit; and
(4) Making determinations on requests by owners of restricted units
for hardship waivers.
F. Enforcement:
§ 80-39 YOUTH ADVISORY COMMITTEE § 80-39
75:205
§ 80-40. Affirmative marketing requirements.
(1) Securing annually from the municipality a list of all affordable
housing units for which tax bills are mailed to absentee owners,
and notifying all such owners that they must either move back to
their unit or sell it;
(2) Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted units, at
the earliest point of contact in the processing of the project or
development, written acknowledgement of the requirement that no
restricted unit can be offered, or in any other way committed, to
any person, other than a household duly certified to the unit by the
administrative agent;
(3) Posting annually, in all rental properties (including two-family
homes), a notice as to the maximum permitted rent together with
the telephone number of the administrative agent where
complaints of excess rent or other charges can be made;
(4) Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable dwelling units,
reminding them of the notices and requirements outlined in
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4;
(5) Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent payments to the
municipality's Affordable Housing Trust Fund; and
(6) Creating and publishing a written operating manual for each
affordable housing program administered by the administrative
agent, to be approved by the Township Council and the court,
setting forth procedures for administering the affordability
controls.
G. Additional responsibilities:
(1) The administrative agent shall have the authority to take all actions
necessary and appropriate to carry out its responsibilities
hereunder.
(2) The administrative agent shall prepare monitoring reports for
submission to the municipal housing liaison in time to meet the
court-approved monitoring and reporting requirements in
accordance with the deadlines set forth in this article.
(3) The administrative agent shall attend continuing education
sessions on affordability controls, compliance monitoring, and
affirmative marketing at least annually and more often as needed.
A. The Township of Cedar Grove shall adopt by resolution an affirmative
marketing plan, subject to approval of the court, which is compliant
with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15, as may be amended and supplemented.
B. The affirmative marketing plan is a regional marketing strategy
designed to attract buyers and/or renters of all majority and minority
§ 80-39 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 80-40
75:206
groups, regardless of race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry,
marital or familial status, gender, affectional or sexual orientation,
disability, age or number of children to housing units which are being
marketed by a developer, sponsor or owner of affordable housing.
The affirmative marketing plan is intended to target those potentially
eligible persons who are least likely to apply for affordable units in
that region. It is a continuing program that directs marketing activities
toward Housing Region 3 and is required to be followed throughout the
period of restriction.
C. The affirmative marketing plan shall provide a regional preference for
all households that live and/or work in Housing Region 3, comprised of
Essex, Somerset, and Hunterdon counties.
D. The municipality has the ultimate responsibility for adopting the
affirmative marketing plan and for the proper administration of the
affirmative marketing program, including initial sales and rentals and
resales and re-rentals. The administrative agent designated by the
Township of Cedar Grove shall implement the affirmative marketing
plan to assure the affirmative marketing of all affordable units.
E. In implementing the affirmative marketing plan, the administrative
agent shall provide a list of counseling services to low- and moderateincome
applicants on subjects such as budgeting, credit issues,
mortgage qualification, rental lease requirements, and landlord/tenant
law.
F. The affirmative marketing plan shall describe the media to be used in
advertising and publicizing the availability of housing. In implementing
the affirmative marketing plan, the administrative agent shall consider
the use of language translations where appropriate.
G. The affirmative marketing process for available affordable units shall
begin at least four months 120 days prior to the expected date of
occupancy.
H. Applications for affordable housing shall be available in several
locations, including, at a minimum, the County Administration Building
and/or the County Library for each county within the housing region;
the municipal administration building and the municipal library in the
municipality in which the units are located; and the developer's rental
office. Applications shall be mailed to prospective applicants upon
request.
I. In addition to other affirmative marketing strategies, the administrative
agent shall provide specific notice of the availability of affordable
housing units in Cedar Grove, and copies of the application forms, to
the following entities: Fair Share Housing Center (510 Park Boulevard,
Cherry Hill, NJ 08002); the New Jersey State Conference of the NAACP;
the Latino Action Network (P.O. Box 943, Freehold, NJ 07728); East
Orange NAACP (P.O. Box 1127, East Orange, NJ 07019), Newark
NAACP (P.O. Box 1262, Newark, NJ 07101), Morris County NAACP (P.O.
§ 80-40 YOUTH ADVISORY COMMITTEE § 80-40
75:207
§ 80-41. Enforcement of affordable housing regulations.
Box 2256, Morristown, NJ 07962), Elizabeth NAACP (P.O. Box 6732,
Elizabeth, NJ 07206) and the Supportive Housing Association.
J. The costs of advertising and affirmative marketing of the affordable
units shall be the responsibility of the developer, sponsor or owner.
A. Upon the occurrence of a breach of any of the regulations governing an
affordable unit by an owner, developer or tenant, the municipality shall
have all remedies provided at law or equity, including but not limited to
foreclosure, tenant eviction, a requirement for household
recertification, acceleration of all sums due under a mortgage,
recuperation of any funds from a sale in violation of the regulations,
injunctive relief to prevent further violation of the regulations, entry on
the premises, and specific performance.
B. After providing written notice of a violation to an owner, developer or
tenant of a low- or moderate-income unit and advising the owner,
developer or tenant of the penalties for such violations, the municipality
may take the following action(s) against the owner, developer or tenant
for any violation that remains uncured for a period of 60 days after
service of the written notice:
(1) The municipality may file a court action pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2A:58-11 alleging a violation or violations of the regulations
governing the affordable housing unit. If the owner, developer or
tenant is adjudged by the court to have violated any provision of the
regulations governing affordable housing units, the owner,
developer or tenant shall be subject to one or more of the following
penalties, at the discretion of the court:
(a) A fine of not more than $500 per day or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed 90 days, or both, provided that each and
every day that the violation continues or exists shall be
considered a separate and specific violation of these provisions
and not a continuation of the initial offense.
(b) In the case of an owner who has rented a low- or moderateincome
unit in violation of the regulations governing affordable
housing units, payment into the Township of Cedar Grove
Affordable Housing Trust Fund of the gross amount of rent
illegally collected.
(c) In the case of an owner who has rented a low- or moderateincome
unit in violation of the regulations governing affordable
housing units, payment of an innocent tenant's reasonable
relocation costs, as determined by the court.
(2) The municipality may file a court action in the Superior Court
seeking a judgment that would result in the termination of the
owner's equity or other interest in the unit, in the nature of a
§ 80-40 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 80-41
75:208
mortgage foreclosure. Any such judgment shall be enforceable as
if the same were a judgment of default of the first purchase money
mortgage and shall constitute a lien against the low- or moderateincome
unit.
(a) The judgment shall be enforceable, at the option of the
municipality, by means of an execution sale by the Sheriff, at
which time the low- and moderate-income unit of the violating
owner shall be sold at a sale price which is not less than the
amount necessary to fully satisfy and pay off any first purchase
money mortgage and prior liens and the costs of the
enforcement proceedings incurred by the municipality,
including attorney's fees. The violating owner shall have his
right to possession terminated as well as his title conveyed
pursuant to the Sheriff's sale.
(b) The proceeds of the Sheriff's sale shall first be applied to
satisfy the first purchase money mortgage lien and any prior
liens upon the low- and moderate-income unit. The excess, if
any, shall be applied to reimburse the municipality for any and
all costs and expenses incurred in connection with either the
court action resulting in the judgment of violation or the
Sheriff's sale. In the event that the proceeds from the Sheriff's
sale are insufficient to reimburse the municipality in full as
aforesaid, the violating owner shall be personally responsible
for the full extent of such deficiency, in addition to any and all
costs incurred by the municipality in connection with collecting
such deficiency. In the event that a surplus remains after
satisfying all of the above, such surplus, if any, shall be placed
in escrow by the municipality for the owner and shall be held in
such escrow for a maximum period of two years or until such
earlier time as the owner shall make a claim with the
municipality for such. Failure of the owner to claim such
balance within the two-year period shall automatically result in
a forfeiture of such balance to the municipality. Any interest
accrued or earned on such balance while being held in escrow
shall belong to and shall be paid to the municipality, whether
such balance shall be paid to the owner or forfeited to the
municipality.
(c) Foreclosure by the municipality due to violation of the
regulations governing affordable housing units shall not
extinguish the restrictions of the regulations governing
affordable housing units as the same apply to the low- and
moderate-income unit. Title shall be conveyed to the purchaser
at the Sheriff's sale, subject to the restrictions and provisions
of the regulations governing the affordable housing unit. The
owner determined to be in violation of the provisions of this
plan and from whom title and possession were taken by means
§ 80-41 YOUTH ADVISORY COMMITTEE § 80-41
75:209
§ 80-42. Appeals.
Appeals from all decisions of an administrative agent appointed pursuant to
this article shall be filed in writing with the court.
of the Sheriff's sale shall not be entitled to any right of
redemption.
(d) If there are no bidders at the Sheriff's sale, or if insufficient
amounts are bid to satisfy the first purchase money mortgage
and any prior liens, the municipality may acquire title to the
low- and moderate-income unit by satisfying the first purchase
money mortgage and any prior liens and crediting the violating
owner with an amount equal to the difference between the first
purchase money mortgage and any prior liens and costs of the
enforcement proceedings, including legal fees and the
maximum resale price for which the low- and moderate-income
unit could have been sold under the terms of the regulations
governing affordable housing units. This excess shall be
treated in the same manner as the excess which would have
been realized from an actual sale as previously described.
(e) Failure of the low- and moderate-income unit to be either sold
at the Sheriff's sale or acquired by the municipality shall
obligate the owner to accept an offer to purchase from any
qualified purchaser which may be referred to the owner by the
municipality, with such offer to purchase being equal to the
maximum resale price of the low- and moderate-income unit as
permitted by the regulations governing affordable housing
units.
(f) The owner shall remain fully obligated, responsible and liable
for complying with the terms and restrictions of governing
affordable housing units until such time as title is conveyed
from the owner.
§ 80-41 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 80-42
75:210
Chapter 81
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees for burglar alarms — See Ch.
119, 119-3C(6).
Exception from noise regulations — See Ch.
176.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
General power to adopt police
ordinances — See N.J.S.A. 40:69A-29.
§ 81-1. Legislative findings.
The Township Council of the Township of Cedar Grove finds that the
existence within the Township of external audible alarm systems which
do not contain automatic shutoff systems permits the continuing emission
of loud alarm signals without termination and that, in the event of
unavailability of those able to control and terminate the alarm, persons
in the vicinity are exposed to these loud noises for lengthy and indefinite
periods without means of obtaining relief; that this condition is inimical to
the public health and welfare and to the well-being of persons within the
Township; and that lengthy emission of alarm signals is not necessary to
the legitimate purposes of the property owner or occupant. The Township
Council further finds that many residents and commercial entities have
installed burglar, fire and other warning devices within their residence or
buildings, and that false alarms from said devices requiring a response
cause unnecessary expense and the unproductive diversion of personnel
and equipment from their public safety function within the Township.
§ 81-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations concerning the
operation and maintenance of certain alarm systems within the Township of
Cedar Grove and to provide penalties for violations of any of the provisions
set forth herein.
§ 81-3. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
ALARM CONSOLE — The control panels in police headquarters giving
alarm indications and locations.
ALARM DEVICE — Any type of alarm-actuating equipment which provides
warning of intrusion, fire, smoke, burglary, flood, or like peril, including a
direct alarm, dial alarm or local alarm.
§ 80-42 ALARM SYSTEMS § 81-3
81:211
ALARM SYSTEM — The installation in or on one or more buildings of one or
more alarm devices.
DIAL ALARM — That type of device which employs an automatic dialing
system, precoded, to connect with a telephone in police headquarters.
DIRECT ALARM — An alarm device which has a direct line to an alarm
console.
FALSE ALARM — The activation of an alarm system where an emergency
does not exist. False alarms will not include: activations caused by public
utility interruptions where such interruptions have been reported to the
police; or those activations caused by a natural disaster or a malfunction
of the Police Department equipment; or those activations caused by testing
or repair of the system, provided that the Police Department has been
notified before such tests or repairs commence; for an activation which is
immediately followed by a telephone call to the Police Department from
the owner, or the owner's agent, properly notifying the police that the
activated alarm signal is to be disregarded.[Amended 10-1-1984 by Ord.
No. 84-226]
LOCAL ALARM — Any alarm device, other than a direct alarm or dial alarm,
which when activated, produces an external emergency signal.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership or corporation, limited
partnership, association, business, club or organization.
§ 81-4. Testing and repairs.
All persons responsible for an alarm system within the Township shall notify
the Police Department before tests or repairs of the system commence and
after completion of the same.
§ 81-5. Required information.
All persons that own, maintain or have on their property an alarm system
within the Township shall notify the Police Department, in writing and
on forms available at police headquarters, of the location of any alarm
device so owned or operated, the type of device, the name and address and
telephone number of at least two persons who can be reached in case of an
emergency or malfunction of the alarm device in order that the device can
be shut off or temporarily disconnected. In the event of any change in the
provided information, the person responsible for the device shall submit to
the Police Department, in writing, such revised information within 30 days
of any such change.
§ 81-6. Direct alarms.
Any connection to the police alarm console shall be of a type inspected and
approved by the contractor servicing the police alarm console at the time of
installation of the alarm device. It is the responsibility of the person causing
the alarm device to be installed to arrange with the approved contractor the
connection fees and charges shall be available at police headquarters. The
§ 81-3 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 81-6
81:212
Township of Cedar Grove and the Cedar Grove Board of Education shall not
be charged with console connection or console maintenance fees.
§ 81-7. Dial alarms.
All dial alarms shall conform with the following:
§ 81-8. Local alarms.
All external audible alarms shall be equipped with a timing device that will
automatically silence the external audible alarm within 15 minutes after it
is activated.
A. Dial alarms shall be coded to select a special number assigned by the
Police Department. No such device shall dial any other telephone
number on the police switchboard.
B. Prerecorded messages must be approved by the Chief of Police, or his
designee, as to content, clarity, length and the number of times the
message is to be repeated.
C. The device shall be provided with an automatic line seizure feature in
the event that the assigned telephone line is busy with another call.
D. All such devices shall be capable of being disconnected by the owner to
permit a call to the police switchboard in the event of a false alarm.
E. All components of such equipment must be maintained, by the owner or
operator, in good repair.
F. The owner or operator shall pay to the Township of Cedar Grove a fee to
be established annually by resolution of the Township Council sufficient
to amortize the cost of the special telephone line or lines required by
these devices. Such fee shall be paid not later than January 15 for each
calendar year or any part thereof. In the event that installation of the
system is made during a calendar year, payment of the fee shall be
made at or before time of installation and shall be prorated on a
monthly basis.
G. In the event that a person responsible for such device fails to comply
with the requirements of this section relating to dial alarms, the Chief
of Police, or his designee, shall issue a written demand to the person
responsible for such device that the above requirements be complied
with. Such demand shall specify the areas of noncompliance. Failure of
such person to comply with such demand within 10 days of the mailing
of such written notification shall be deemed a violation of this chapter,
for which such person shall pay a penalty of $5 for each day of
noncompliance after such ten-day period.
§ 81-6 ALARM SYSTEMS § 81-9
81:213
§ 81-9. False alarms. [Amended 10-1-1984 by Ord. No. 84-226]
The Police Department shall cause a record to be made of all false alarms.
In any calendar year, the following penalties shall apply to the person
responsible for any alarm device:
§ 81-10. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to alarm systems placed in service
prior to or subsequent to the effective date of this chapter; provided,
however, that the owners or operators of existing alarm devices shall have
30 days from the effective date of this chapter to provide to the Police
Department the information required by this chapter and shall have 120
days from the effective date of this chapter to equip any nonconforming
audible alarm device with the automatic silencing mechanism required.
§ 81-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-1-1984 by Ord. No.
84-226]
This chapter shall be enforceable in the Municipal Court of the Township
of Cedar Grove. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter,
except those providing for a specific penalty, shall, for each offense, be
subject to a fine of not more than $1,000. Each incident shall be considered
a separate violation.
A. For the first and second false alarms, a written warning shall be issued.
B. For the third and fourth false alarm, there shall be imposed a fine of $35
for each such false alarm. [Amended 4-21-2003 by Ord. No. 03-591]
C. For the fifth through ninth false alarms, there shall be imposed a fine of
$100 for each such false alarm. For the tenth and subsequent false
alarms, there shall be imposed a fine of $150 for each such false alarm.
In addition, an investigation shall be conducted by the Police
Department as to the cause of such continued false alarms, and upon a
finding by the Police Department that there has been abuse or neglect
in the operation or maintenance of any such alarm system and a failure
to take remedial steps to avoid false alarms, the Chief of Police, or his
designee, may require that the alarm device, in the event of a direct
alarm or dial alarm, be disconnected from police headquarters for a
limited or permanent time. No such disconnection shall be made
without giving the owner or operator of the alarm device at least 10
days notice, in writing, of such intended disconnection, in order to allow
such person to appeal such determination to the Township Council in
order to show cause why such action should not be taken. In the event
that such appeal is filed with the Township Council within such ten-day
period, in writing, the Township Council shall hold a public hearing with
reference to the matter, and no disconnection shall be made until the
appeal is decided by that body. [Amended 4-21-2003 by Ord. No.
03-591]
§ 81-9 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 81-11
81:214
Chapter 83
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Reducing alcoholism and drug abuse — See
Ch. 45.
Alcohol-free activities for youth — See Ch. 75.
Places of amusement — See Ch. 88.
Cigarette vending machines — See Ch. 117.
Food-handling establishments — See Ch. 142.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 179.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 188.
Alcohol in recreation areas — See Ch. 205.
Alcohol on public streets — See Ch. 230, Art.
VI
Service of alcohol at sidewalk cafes — See Ch.
230, Art. VII, § 230-55O.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Alcoholic beverages generally — See N.J.S.A.
33:1-1 et seq.
Issuance of licenses — See N.J.S.A. 33:1-19.
§ 83-1. License-issuing authority; conditions of license.
§ 83-2. License classes. [Amended 10-4-1954]
§ 83-3. Number of licenses to be issued. [Amended 11-19-1951;
10-4-1954; 3-20-1967 by Ord. No. 67-7]
The maximum number of plenary retail consumption, plenary retail
distribution and club licenses to be granted and issued under this chapter
shall be as follows:
A. The Township Council shall constitute the issuing authority for the
granting of all licenses under this chapter.
B. The Township Clerk is authorized to issue a license after the license has
been approved by the Township Council.
C. All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the rules
and regulations, terms and conditions herein set forth.
A. The classes of licenses to be issued by the Township are hereby fixed as
follows:
(1) Plenary retail consumption licenses.
(2) Plenary retail distribution licenses.
(3) Club licenses.
B. No other class of license shall be granted.
§ 81-11 ALARM SYSTEMS § 83-3
81:215
§ 83-4. Fees. [Amended 10-4-1954; 6-3-1957; 5-19-1958; 5-4-1959;
4-18-1960; 12-18-1972 by Ord. No. 72-21; 11-19-1973 by Ord. No.
73-26; 3-1-1976 by Ord. No. 76-2; 3-19-1984 by Ord. No. 84-213]
§ 83-5. Application and notice requirements.
No license under this chapter shall be approved or issued except after
written application has been presented in such form and after such notice
as is required by Title 33 of the Annotated Statutes and the amendments
thereof and supplements thereto.
§ 83-6. Hours of sale. [Amended 12-6-1948; 9-7-1976 by Ord. No.
76-21]
No licensee shall sell, serve, deliver or allow, permit or suffer the sale,
service or delivery of any alcoholic beverage or allow, permit or suffer the
consumption of any alcoholic beverage on any licensed premises during the
following hours:
§ 83-7. Premises to be closed during hours when sales are
prohibited; exceptions. [Added 12-6-1948]
During the hours that sales are prohibited by § 83-6, the entire licensed
premises shall also be closed. This requirement shall not apply to: hotels,
restaurants as defined in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1t and clubs as defined in N.J.S.A.
33:1-12, Subdivision 5, and State Regulation No. 7.
A. Plenary retail consumption licenses: nine.
B. Plenary retail distribution licenses: two.
C. Club licenses: two.
A. The fee for each plenary retail consumption license shall be $2,002 per
annum. [Amended 10-20-1986 by Ord. No. 86-283; 2-4-1988 by
Ord. No. 88-306; 3-17-2014 by Ord. No. 14-766]
B. The fee for each plenary retail distribution license shall be $1,174 per
annum. [Amended 10-20-1986 by Ord. No. 86-283; 2-4-1988 by
Ord. No. 88-306; 3-17-2014 by Ord. No. 14-766]
C. The fee for each club license shall be $150 per annum.
A. On New Year's Day or Christmas Day, when it is a weekday, between the
hours of 5:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
B. On New Year's Day or Christmas Day, when it is a Sunday, between the
hours of 5:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon.
C. On other weekdays between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
D. On other Sundays between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 12:00 noon.
§ 83-3 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 83-8
81:216
§ 83-8. Dance halls in or adjoining alcoholic beverage
establishment. [Amended 12-6-1948]
All dance halls in which, or adjoining which, alcoholic beverages are sold
shall observe the closing hours and closing requirement set forth in §§ 83-6
and 83-7. The exception in favor of hotels, restaurants and clubs set forth in
§ 83-7 shall not apply to dance halls in such establishments.
§ 83-9. (Reserved)50
§ 83-10. Display of license.
All licenses granted pursuant to this chapter shall be displayed
conspicuously in the licensed premises.
§ 83-11. Restrictions on age of employees. [Amended 8-1-1938;
7-6-1961; 12-18-1972 by Ord. No. 72-20]
No licensee shall employ any person under 18 years as a bartender; nor
shall any licensee, except a retail licensee conducting a bona fide hotel or
public restaurant, employ any person under 18 as an entertainer, singer,
dancer, performer, actor, player in an orchestra or one engaging in any
performance or entertainment conducted in the licensed premises; nor
employ any person in violation of the labor laws or other statutes of this
state.
§ 83-12. (Reserved)51
§ 83-13. Service to certain persons prohibited. [Amended 1-9-1978
by Ord. No. 77-64]
No licensee shall sell, serve or deliver or allow, permit or suffer the sale,
service or delivery of any alcoholic beverages, directly or indirectly, to
any person under the age prescribed by law or state regulation for the
purchasing of alcoholic beverages, mental defective, habitual drunkard or
intoxicated person. No licensee shall permit any such persons to congregate
in or about the licensed premises.
§ 83-14. Service in private areas prohibited; exception. [Amended
7-6-1961]
No person shall be served in any back room or side room which is not open
to the use of the public generally; provided, however, that nothing in this
section shall be deemed to prohibit serving of alcoholic beverages in private
dining rooms of bona fide hotels and restaurants.
50.Editor's Note: Former § 83-9, Interior of premises to be open to public view, was repealed
12-6-2004 by Ord. No. 04-621.
51.Editor's Note: Former § 83-12, Restrictions on female employees, was repealed 12-6-2004
by Ord. No. 04-621.
§ 83-8 ALARM SYSTEMS § 83-15
81:217
§ 83-15. Regulation of conduct on premises.
The licensee shall maintain quiet and orderly premises and shall not permit
any immoral or indecent conduct or behavior within the licensed premises.
§ 83-16. Posting of chapter required.
A copy of this chapter shall be displayed conspicuously in the licensed
premises.
§ 83-17. Substitution of beverages prohibited. [Added 12-6-1948]
No licensee shall serve any alcoholic beverages other than that which is
ordered or substitute a nonalcoholic beverage when an alcoholic beverage
has been ordered.
§ 83-18. Intoxicated employees prohibited. [Added 12-6-1948]
No licensee shall allow, permit or suffer himself or any other person to
work in any capacity on the licensed premises while actually or apparently
intoxicated.
§ 83-19. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-17-1962; 7-30-1984
by Ord. No. 84-222; 10-23-2006 by Ord. No. 06-656]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000 or by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 86
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 83.
Places of amusement — See Ch. 88.
Bingo and raffles — See Ch. 97.
Golf courses and driving ranges — See Ch.
153.
Noise — See Ch. 176.
Controlled dangerous substances — See Ch.
179, Art. II.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 188.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Adoption of police ordinances — See N.J.S.A.
40:69A-29.
§ 83-15 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 86-1
86:218
§ 86-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
JUKEBOX — Any music-vending machine, contrivance or device which,
upon insertion of a coin, slug, token, plug, disk or key into any slot, crevice
or other opening or by the payment of any price, operates or may be
operated for the emission of songs, music or similar amusement.
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any machine which, upon the
insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disk, may be operated by the
public generally for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, whether
or not registering a score. It shall include such devices as marble machines,
pinball machines, skill ball, mechanical grab machines and all games,
operations or transactions similar thereto under whatever name they may
be indicated.
PERSON — Includes any person, within the definition of § 1-2, who owns
any jukebox or mechanical amusement device; the person in whose place
of business any such machine is placed for use by the public; the person
having control over such machine.
§ 86-2. License required.
Any person displaying for public patronage or keeping for operation any
jukebox or mechanical amusement device shall be required to obtain a
license issued by the Township Clerk as provided herein.
§ 86-3. Application procedure.
Application for a license shall be made in duplicate to the Township Clerk
upon a form to be supplied by the Township. The application shall contain
the following information:
§ 86-4. License required for each machine.
The applicant shall be required to acquire a license for each machine
secured, displayed or operated by him.
A. Name and address of the applicant, age, date and place of birth.
B. Prior convictions of applicant, if any.
C. Place where the machine or device is to be displayed or operated and
the business conducted at that place.
D. Description of the machine to be covered by the license, its mechanical
features, name of manufacturer and serial number.
§ 86-1 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 86-5
86:219
§ 86-5. Minimum age of applicant. [Amended 12-18-1972 by Ord.
No. 72-20]
No license shall be issued to any applicant unless he shall be at least 18
years of age.
§ 86-6. Investigation; reasons for denial of license.
§ 86-7. Appeals. [Added 1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 77-64]
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Township Clerk may appeal such
decision to the Township Council by notifying the Township Clerk of the
intent to appeal within 10 days of the applicant's receipt of such adverse
decision. The Township Council shall then schedule a hearing on such
appeal within 30 days of receipt of the notice to appeal, at which time the
applicant may present such evidence as be desires to establish his grounds
for appeal. Said appeal will be decided by majority vote of the Council and
this decision will be considered final.
§ 86-8. Fees. [Amended 1-7-1963; 2-4-1963; 8-4-1975 by Ord. No.
75-8]
A. One copy of the application shall be referred by the Township Clerk to
the Chief of Police. He shall investigate the location wherein it is
proposed to operate such machine, ascertain if the applicant is a person
of good moral character and either approve or disapprove the
application. No license shall be issued by the Township Clerk to any
applicant unless approved by the Chief of Police and the Township
Council.
B. No license shall be issued under this chapter to any person who shall
have been convicted of any crime or offense involving moral turpitude
or who shall have been convicted of the violation of any state law or
municipal ordinance involving gambling.
A. The annual license fee, payable in advance of issuance of the license,
for the privilege of operating or maintaining for operation each jukebox
or mechanical amusement device shall be: jukebox, $35 per machine;
mechanical amusement device, $200 per machine. A maximum of four
mechanical amusement devices will be permitted in each
establishment. [Amended 8-27-1979 by Ord. No. 79-102;
12-14-1981 by Ord. No. 81-168]
B. In any premises for which a retail liquor license under Chapter 1 of Title
33 of the Annotated Statutes of New Jersey is required, there shall be
permitted a maximum of one game or device from each of the following
categories: billiard or pool table; bowling or shuffleboard device. Any
such game or device located on said premises shall be subject to an
annual license fee of $50 for the first permit; $100 for the second
permit, except where the same is not coin-operated or for which no
charge is made for using, playing or operating said game or device.
§ 86-5 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 86-8
86:220
§ 86-9. Term of license.
Licenses issued under this chapter shall be for a term commencing on the
first day of January and expiring on December 31 of the year of issuance.
§ 86-10. Transfer of license.
§ 86-11. Display of license.
Each license shall be posted permanently and conspicuously at the location
of the machine in the premises wherein the device is to be operated or
maintained to be operated.
§ 86-12. Gambling devices prohibited.
Nothing in this chapter shall in any way be construed to authorize, license
or permit any gambling devices whatsoever or any mechanism that has
been or is judicially determined to be a gambling device or in any way
contrary to law.
§ 86-13. (Reserved)52
§ 86-14. Prohibited hours for use of jukeboxes.
No person shall permit the playing of any jukebox licensed under this
chapter during the following hours:
C. Payment of such license fee by any person enumerated in the definition
of "person" under § 86-1 shall be deemed a compliance with this
section.
A. A license shall not be transferable from person to person nor place to
place and shall be usable only by the place and by the person
designated in the license.
B. A license may be transferred from one machine or device to another
similar machine on application therefor to the Township Clerk and the
giving of a description and the serial number of the new machine or
device.
A. On New Year's Day or Christmas Day, between the hours of 5:00 a.m.
and 7:00 a.m.
B. On all other days, between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
52.Editor's Note: Former § 86-13, Minimum age of users of mechanical devices, was repealed
7-11-1977 by Ord. No. 77-55.
§ 86-8 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 86-15
86:221
§ 86-15. Restricted locations. [Amended 7-11-1977 by Ord. No.
77-55]
No person shall permit the playing of mechanical amusement devices within
200 feet of any church or public or parochial school.
§ 86-16. Revocation of license; hearing.
§ 86-17. Suspension of license pending revocation hearing. [Added
1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 77-64]
If the Township Clerk, in his discretion, determines that it is in the best
interests of the Township, he may immediately suspend any license pending
the revocation hearing provided for in § 86-16. Immediately upon receipt of
such notice of suspension, the licensee shall cease to operate any jukebox or
mechanical device and shall not operate such jukebox or mechanical device
until a final decision is rendered at the revocation hearing authorizing him
to do so.
§ 86-18. Seizure and destruction of machines used for gambling.
If the Chief of Police shall have reason to believe any mechanical
amusement device is used as a gambling device, such machine may be
seized by the police and impounded. If, upon trial of the licensee for
allowing it to be used as a gambling device, said licensee is found guilty,
such machine shall be destroyed by the police or other state or county
enforcement officers.
§ 86-19. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-17-1962; 7-30-1984
by Ord. No. 84-222; 10-23-2006 by Ord. No. 06-656]
A. Every license issued under this chapter is subject to the right, which is
hereby expressly reserved, to revoke the same should the licensee
directly or indirectly permit the operation of any jukebox or mechanical
device contrary to the provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance
of the Township or the laws of the state. Said license may be revoked by
the Township Council after a hearing, upon 10 days' written notice to
the licensee, if the licensee is found guilty of the violation charged. The
notice shall specify the ordinance or law violations with which the
licensee is charged. At such hearing, the licensee and his attorney may
present evidence or witnesses in his defense.
B. In addition, a license issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked or
suspended when any licensee, who is the owner of the property upon
which the licensed activity is conducted, has failed to pay the taxes due
on the property for at least three consecutive quarters. [Added
5-6-1991 by Ord. No. 91-383]
A. In addition to the revocation provided in § 86-16, any person who
violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000 or by imprisonment for a term
§ 86-15 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 86-19
86:222
Chapter 88
AMUSEMENT, PLACES OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement devices — See Ch. 86.
Bingo and raffles — See Ch. 97.
Curfew — See Ch. 122.
Filming — See Ch. 135.
Golf courses and driving ranges — See Ch.
153.
Noise — See Ch. 176.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 179.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 188.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Adoption of police ordinances — See N.J.S.A.
40:69A-29.
§ 88-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CABARET — A place where live musical or nonmusical entertainment is
presented in a restaurant or cafe which serves alcoholic beverages and
where no patron dancing or performing is permitted.[Amended 10-1-1979
by Ord. No. 79-111]
DANCE HALL — Premises in which musical entertainment and patron
dancing or performing is permitted as the primary activity at any time and
where admission is charged. Special private affairs and functions by local
charitable and governmental organizations (such as religious institutions,
municipal agencies, educational institutions, etc.) conducted on an irregular
basis (not more than once per month) shall not subject the premises or the
owner of the premises to licensing as a dance hall.[Amended 10-1-1979
by Ord. No. 79-111]
MISCELLANEOUS AMUSEMENT BUSINESSES — Premises in or upon
which all other types of entertainment or amusement businesses not
included within the definitions of "cabaret," "nightclub" or "dance hall" are
conducted and including, without limitation, the following traveling and
other shows; circuses; theatrical performances; motion-picture exhibitions;
concerts; skating rinks; bowling alleys; portable amusement rides; and any
not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
B. In addition to any other penalty, the license may be suspended or
revoked.
§ 86-19 AMUSEMENT, PLACES OF § 88-1
88:223
other types of amusements or entertainment where food and drink are
served.
NIGHTCLUB — Where patron dancing or performing is permitted to any
type of musical presentation, as an adjunct or secondary to the primary
business of the owner being conducted on the premises at any particular
time (such as restaurant, cafe, theater production, special private affairs,
etc.). [Amended 10-1-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111]
§ 88-2. License required.
No persons shall conduct, carry on, exhibit or promote any type of business
or activity defined in §88-1 of this chapter in any place, building, structure
or premises within the Township without first having obtained the
appropriate license(s) therefor as hereinafter provided.
§ 88-3. Contents of application.
A. Applications, in the form provided by the Township, for a license under
this chapter shall be filed with the Township Clerk at least 60 days prior
to the operation of any business or activity or the conduct of any
scheduled event regulated by this chapter.
B. The application shall set forth:
(1) The name and address of the individual applicant (licensee) or, if
the applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of each of
the partners. In the case of a corporate applicant, the names and
addresses of the corporate officers and the names and addresses of
each stockholder of record holding 10% or more stock interest in
said corporation.
(2) The kind of enterprise or business, set forth in §88-1 of this chapter,
to be conducted and the activity to be carried on for which a license
under this chapter is required and sought. If dance hall activities
are to be conducted on an exempt or irregular basis, a description
of the type of function, the expected patronage, how often the
affairs will be conducted and all other details of the excepted
activity.
(3) The location and description of the place or premises and building
or structure wherein or whereon the business or activity regulated
by this chapter is sought to be licensed or is to be conducted and
carried on.
(4) A plan showing the location on the premises of buildings or the
nature of the structure or conveyance in or upon which the
business will be conducted or carried on and the seating or other
patron capacity of any such building or other structure or
conveyance and designated areas for parking, including ingress
and egress, and what provisions will be made for adequate traffic
control and circulation on and off the premises and sanitary
§ 88-1 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 88-3
88:224
facilities. If a building is to be used, it shall comply with all
requirements of the Uniform Construction Code, Fire Prevention
Code, Health Code and Zoning Ordinance53 of the Township and all
laws of the state applicable thereto.
(5) In the case of cabarets, nightclubs and dance halls to be conducted
in a place where food and drink are served, the application shall
further set forth that a certificate of occupancy has been filed with
the Township Clerk, the number of exits and entrances, seating and
other patron capacity and the type of music and other
entertainment to be provided in the case of dance halls, specifying
with particularity the manner of reproduction of the music, the type
and description of any and all equipment to be utilized in the
musical reproductions and visual effects, the maximum decibel
reading on the A scale to be produced outside the building at the
nearest residential property line to said building and such other
information as may be required by applicable ordinances and
regulations of the Township, which may indicate that the granting
of such license shall not constitute a hazard to health, morals or the
safety of the public. [Amended 10-1-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111]
(6) In the case of bowling alleys, the application shall further set forth
the number of bowling alleys for which licenses are required and
the name of the person owning said place where said bowling alleys
are to be located and the name of the owner of the bowling alley
business.
(7) In the case of cabarets, nightclubs and dance halls, the application
shall include a site plan of the building and all contiguous land
areas to be provided by the owner for parking, specifically
indicating the size of each parking place and the number so
provided. In case of dance halls, the applicant shall provide onpremises
parking for the full desired capacity of the dance hall
during the conduct of said business or activity. Parking spaces
accommodating automobiles equal to 33 1/3% of the maximum
number of patrons to be admitted shall be deemed compliance.
Patron capacities shall not, however, exceed capacities prescribed
by the certificate of occupancy or other provisions of the Township
Code. Failure to restrict patron capacity to the parking spaces
available in its request for a dance hall license or failure to comply
with the restriction on patron capacity in the premises during any
dance hall activity shall be grounds for refusing to issue,
suspension or revocation of the dance hall license and a violation of
this chapter. [Amended 10-1-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111]
(8) The consent or agreement of the applicant to abide by all the
provisions, terms and conditions of this chapter and of any
amendments and supplements thereto.
53.Editor's Note: See Ch. 119, Construction Codes, Uniform; Ch. 137, Fire Prevention; Ch.
179, Nuisances, Public Health: and Ch. 268, Zoning.
§ 88-3 AMUSEMENT, PLACES OF § 88-4
88:225
§ 88-4. Issuance of license; grounds for denial.
The Township Clerk shall issue a license requested under this chapter only
after the license fee prescribed in §88-5 has been paid and the application
for a specific license shall have been approved by the Chief of Police and
Fire Inspection Bureau. In the case of the cabaret, nightclub and dance hall
licenses, the Clerk shall not issue such license until the Township Council
has approved the same after receiving reports from the Chief of Police,
Fire Inspection Bureau and such other municipal official who may have
jurisdiction over any element of the application. License approvals may be
withheld for the following reasons:
§ 88-5. Fees.
A. The premises where the business or activity regulated by this chapter is
to be conducted is unsafe or the manner in which the said business is to
be conducted renders the premises unsafe for such business or activity.
B. The individual applicant or any partner of a partnership applicant or
any stockholder of a corporate applicant holding 10% or more stock
interest in said corporation, manager or operator has been convicted of
a crime or is otherwise not of good moral character.
C. The applicant has violated any prior license requirement under this
chapter or any predecessor ordinance regulating similar activities.
D. The proposed business or activity shall require additional or unusual
policing or regulation by Township personnel beyond that normally
provided by the Township.
E. The business or activity proposed by the application is in any way
unlawful, is inherently detrimental to the health, morals and safety of
the public or produces an unfavorable or adverse effect upon the proper
operation of the community for the public good that cannot reasonably
be controlled by police and safety regulation. [Amended 10-1-1979 by
Ord. No. 79-111]
F. The application for a license fails to comply with any other requirement
of this chapter or other ordinance provisions of the Township or state
law.
G. There is a falsification in the application for license.
A. The fees for licenses under this chapter shall be as follows:
(1) Circuses: $150 per diem.
(2) Traveling and other shows: $100 per diem.
(3) Plays, exhibitions and concerts: $5 per diem.
(4) Theatrical performances, motion-picture exhibitions and skating
rinks: $250 per annum.
§ 88-4 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 88-5
88:226
§ 88-6. Term of license.
§ 88-7. License not transferable.
Licenses issued under this chapter shall not be transferable from person to
person or place to place.
§ 88-8. Display of license.
All licenses issued under this chapter shall be posted and displayed in
a conspicuous place, viewable by the public, upon the licensed premises
where the business or activity regulated by this chapter is conducted.
§ 88-9. Prohibited hours.
(5) Cabarets and entertainments in any place where food and drink are
served, the premises of which are not already licensed for
theatrical performances, nightclubs or as dance halls: $100 per
annum.
(6) Nightclubs which are not already licensed for theatrical
performances or as dance halls: $250 per annum.
(7) Dance halls: $250 for each six-month license period. A new
application shall be required for each license. [Amended
12-7-1981 by Ord. No. 81-167]
(8) Portable amusements rides, including but not limited to merry-gorounds,
miniature Ferris wheels and whips mounted on trucks: $10
per vehicle per annum.
(9) Bowling alleys, for each alley: $10 per annum.
(10) All other enterprises of amusement or entertainment not
specifically covered by the above: $100 per annum.
B. The Township Council may, in its discretion on application, authorize
the Township Clerk to waive the license fee herein indicated for any
activity governed by this chapter, provided that the applicant-licensee
has complied with all other provisions for the issuance of said license
and the whole net profits of the activity are to be devoted to a local
organization exclusively engaged in charitable or benevolent activities.
A. Licenses requiring the payment of an annual fee shall be issued for a
term of one year, commencing January 1 and terminating on December
31 of the year of issuance.
B. Licenses requiring the payment of a per diem fee shall be issued for the
time therein expressed.
C. Dance hall licenses shall be limited, when issued, to a term of six
months.
§ 88-5 AMUSEMENT, PLACES OF § 88-9
88:227
§ 88-10. Regulations for exhibition of motion pictures.54
A. No bowling alley shall be used or operated during the following hours:
(1) On Sundays between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 1:00 p.m.
(2) On weekdays and Saturdays between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and
7:00 a.m.
B. No dance hall shall be used or operated on Sunday between the hours
of 2:30 a.m. and 12:00 p.m.
A. The provisions of this section shall apply to any license issued pursuant
to this chapter to exhibit motion pictures and shall be subject to the
terms and conditions hereinafter set forth in this section, and every
applicant for such license in accepting the license agrees to abide by
and comply with the said terms and conditions.
B. The licensee shall be responsible for any disorder.
C. During the hours in which motion pictures or theatrical performances
are being conducted, no smoking shall be permitted in the auditorium
or any portion of the theater building except in the lobby and rest
rooms. Conspicuous "no smoking" signs must be prominently displayed
in the lobby and on each door leading to the auditorium, and a "no
smoking" notice must be flashed on the screen for a minimum of 15
seconds at least once before each performance.
D. Any police officer, fireman or the Building Inspector may enter such
place at any time to inspect the same and enforce any applicable law or
ordinance.
E. Any motion picture to be exhibited shall comply with the ratings or
schedules adopted by the motion-picture industry as to type of picture,
recommended viewing public and setting forth age groups for viewing
such pictures.
F. Where the age of the person applying for admission is not visibly
apparent as being above any restricted age, such person shall supply
proof of age and certify in writing as to his age, which certification shall
be dated and retained by the licensee for a period of 30 days and during
that time shall be subject to inspection by the Police Department of the
Township.
G. No motion picture shall be exhibited unless it is clearly indicated in the
advertisement thereof the type of picture to be shown as established by
the ratings or schedules of the motion-picture industry and for the age
group for which it is recommended.
H. No motion picture shall be exhibited without posting prominently in
front of the theater the classification of the type of film to be exhibited
54.Editor's Note: See Ch. 135, Filming.
§ 88-9 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 88-10
88:228
§ 88-11. Suspension or revocation of license.
as established by the ratings and schedules of the motion-picture
industry and for the age group for which it is recommended.
I. No preview of any film shall be shown or any scene or scenes from such
a film which is restricted to mature audiences on the same program
with a film recommended to a family audience as classified by the
ratings and schedules of the motion-picture industry.
J. It shall be unlawful for any person:
(1) To give his age falsely as 18 years of age or over for the purpose of
gaining admittance to an exhibition of a film restricted to a young
person of such age as classified by the ratings and schedules of the
motion-picture industry.
(2) To enter or remain in the viewing room of any theater where a film
is being exhibited which is restricted to a young person of such age.
(3) No person shall stand in any aisle or passageway or place any
obstruction or thing in any such aisle or passageway of any motionpicture
theater licensed thereunder.
(4) To sell, procure for or give any person a ticket to an exhibition of a
film restricted to such person.
(5) To make any false statements for the purpose of enabling any
young person to gain admittance to an exhibition of a film when
such film is restricted to a young person of such age.
K. Nothing in this section shall be construed to regulate public exhibitions
preempted by the Annotated Statutes of the State of New Jersey, as
amended.
L. Any person who violates any provision of this section and is subject to
prosecution in the Municipal Court shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to the penalty provided in §88-12 of this chapter. Any other
person who shall violate any provisions of this section and is not subject
to prosecution in the Municipal Court shall be punished in such other
courts of this state as shall have jurisdiction in accordance with the law.
A. Any license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked by
the Township Council of Cedar Grove by reason of the violation of the
terms of the license, failure to comply with the representation of
operations contained in the license application, falsification of the
license application, violation of any other ordinance of the Township or
statute of the State of New Jersey or upon any other grounds for which
a license may be denied. Where a license revocation or suspension is
proposed to the Township Council by any person, the Council shall
require a detailed statement of the reasons for such revocation or
suspension and shall direct the Chief of Police and the Fire Prevention
§ 88-10 AMUSEMENT, PLACES OF § 88-11
88:229
§ 88-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-30-1984 by Ord. No.
84-222; 10-23-2006 by Ord. No. 06-656]
§ 88-13. Billiard halls and pool halls prohibited.
Except as may be permitted in and by any other ordinance of the Township,
no person shall conduct, operate or maintain for commercial purposes any
premises, building or structure or part thereof for use as a pool or billiard
hall.
§ 88-14. Exception. [Added 3-6-2006 by Ord. No. 06-639]
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the use of karaoke within
establishments that may otherwise subject to this chapter in the Township,
and no license under § 88-2 hereof shall be required.
Bureau, or such other official of the Township who may have authority
with respect to the area of responsibility involved in the revocation
and suspension, to provide a detailed report to the Township Council
within 10 days thereof. Any licensee charged with a violation which may
subject his license to revocation or suspension shall have the right to
request a hearing to be held within 10 days thereafter to determine
whether his license shall be revoked or suspended. A decision of the
Township Council shall be rendered within 20 days of the time such
hearing is requested or, if no hearing is requested, within 10 days of
the receipt of reports from the Chief of Police, Fire Inspection Bureau
or other administrative agent.
B. In addition, a license issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked or
suspended when any licensee, who is the owner of the property upon
which the licensed business is conducted, has failed to pay the taxes
due on the property for at least three consecutive quarters. [Added
5-6-1991 by Ord. No. 91-383]
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000 or by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
B. In addition to any other penalty, the license may be suspended or
revoked.
§ 88-11 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 88-14
88:230
Chapter 91
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Advisory Health Council — See Ch. 31.
Noise by animals — See Ch. 176, § 176-8C.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 179.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 188.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Dogs generally — See N.J.S.A. 4:19-1 et seq.
Adoption of police ordinances — See N.J.S.A
40:69A-29.
Fees for dog licenses — See N.J.S.A.
4:19-15.12.
Kennels and pet shops — See N.J.S.A.
4:19-15.8.
§ 88-14 AMUSEMENT, PLACES OF § 88-14
88:231

ARTICLE I
Dogs
§ 91-1. Applicability.
This article shall be deemed to apply only to a dog which has attained the
age of seven months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
§ 91-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AT LARGE — A dog off the premises of the person owning or keeping or
harboring it and not securely fastened to a tether, leash, cord or chain or
the like, not to exceed eight feet in length, held by its owner or other person
capable of controlling said dog.
DOG — Any male or female dog, bitch or spayed bitch.
DOG OF LICENSING AGE — Any dog which has attained the age of seven
months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a dog shall include every
person having a right of property in such dog and every person who harbors
or has such dog in his keeping.
§ 91-3. License and registration tag required; tag to be secured to
dog.
Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog of licensing age in the
Township shall, in the month of January in each year, apply for and procure
from the Township Health Officer a license and official metal registration
tag for each such dog so owned, kept or harbored and shall place upon each
such dog a collar or harness with the registration tag securely fastened
thereto.
§ 91-4. Newly acquired dogs; dogs attaining licensing age.
The owner of any newly acquired dog of licensing age or of any dog which
attains licensing age shall apply for a license and registration tag for such
dog within 10 days after such acquisition or age attainment.
§ 91-5. Dogs brought into Township.
A. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Township
any dog licensed in another state for the current year and bearing a
registration tag and who shall keep the same or permit the same to be
kept within the Township for a period of more than 90 days shall
immediately apply for a license and registration tag for each such dog,
unless a license for such dog is not required under § 91-28.
§ 91-1 AMUSEMENT, PLACES OF § 91-5
88:233
§ 91-6. Acceptance of license and tags issued by other
municipalities.
Only one license and registration tag shall be required in any licensing
year for any dog owned in New Jersey, and such license and tag issued by
any other municipality of this state shall be accepted by the Township as
evidence of compliance with §§ 91-3 and 91-7.
§ 91-7. Fees. [Amended 10-6-1969 by Ord. No. 69-17; 2-7-1977 by
Ord. No. 77-38; 11-15-1979 by Ord. No. 79-115; 7-7-1980 by Ord.
No. 80-132; 5-5-2014 by Ord. No. 14-770]
The person applying for the license and registration tag or for an annual
renewal thereof shall pay to the Township Health Officer a fee of $12
spayed/neutered, $15 unspayed/unneutered for each dog license. Said
license/renewal and registration tag shall expire on January 31 of each year.
Persons who fail to obtain a license/renewal required within the time period
specified (by March 1) will be subject to a delinquent fee of $10 for each late
registration/renewal. There shall be a fee of $1 to replace any misplaced or
lost tag within a license period.
§ 91-8. Removal of tag without the consent of owner prohibited.
No person, except an officer in the performance of his duties, shall remove a
registration tag from the collar of any dog without the consent of the owner,
nor shall any person attach a registration tag to a dog for which it was not
issued.
§ 91-9. Dogs running at large prohibited.
No person owning, keeping, harboring or in control of any dog shall suffer
or permit such dog to run at large upon any public streets, public parks,
public buildings or other public places within the Township or on private
property without the permission of the owner of said property.
§ 91-10. Trespass on private property prohibited.
No person shall permit any dog in his care or under his control, whether or
not on a tether, leash, cord or chain or the like, to go upon the lawn, yard or
entrance walk or driveway of any private residence without the permission
of the owner thereof.
B. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Township
any unlicensed dog of licensing age and who shall keep the same or
permit the same to be kept within the Township for a period of more
than 10 days shall immediately apply for a license and registration tag
for each such dog, unless a license for such dog is not required under
§ 91-28.
§ 91-5 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 91-11
88:234
§ 91-11. Sanitary disposal of dog feces. [Amended 2-18-1980 by
Ord. No. 80-124; 9-11-2006 by Ord. No. 06-651]
Every person owning, keeping, harboring or in control of a dog shall be
responsible to immediately and properly pick up, remove and dispose of in
a sanitary manner all solid waste deposited by said dog on any property,
public or private, not owned or possessed by that person, including property
dedicated to public use, including without limitation parks, sidewalks,
easements, roadways or walking or riding paths. Any person who requires
the use of a disability assistance dog shall be exempt from the provisions of
this section while such animal is being used for that purpose.
§ 91-12. Enforcement officials. [Amended 9-11-2006 by Ord. No.
06-651]
The Township Manager may appoint, at such times and for such terms
as may from time to time be expedient, an Animal Warden whose duty it
shall be to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Nothing contained in this
section or in any other section of this chapter shall be construed as limiting
the duty or authority of the Chief of Police and of the members of the Police
Department, or of the local Board of Health, to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 91-13. Impoundment of dogs.
It shall be the duty of the Animal Warden and the members of the Police
Department to take into custody and impound or cause to be taken into
custody and impounded, and taken to suitable places determined by the
Township, the following:
§ 91-14. Notice of seizure; destruction of unredeemed dogs.
A. Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring said dog, which said Animal Warden or member of the Police
Department has reason to believe is a stray dog.
B. Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring said dog, without a current registration tag on his collar.
C. Any female dog in season off the premises of the owner or of the person
keeping or harboring said dog.
D. Any dog running at large in violation of § 91-9.
A. If any dog seized as provided in § 91-13 wears a collar or harness
having inscribed thereon or attached thereto the name and address of
any person, or a registration tag, or if the owner or the person keeping
or harboring said dog is otherwise known, the Animal Warden or the
Chief of Police shall forthwith serve or cause to be served on the person
whose address is given on the collar, or on the owner or the person
keeping or harboring said dog, if known, a notice in writing stating that
§ 91-11 AMUSEMENT, PLACES OF § 91-14
88:235
§ 91-15. Reports and records of destroyed dogs.
A report of all dogs disposed of pursuant to § 91-14 shall be promptly filed
with the Chief of Police, or any other person appointed by the Township
Manager for that purpose, who shall keep a proper and complete record in
a substantially bound book.
§ 91-16. Entry upon premises for seizure.
The Animal Warden and any member of the Police Department is authorized
to go upon any premises to seize for impounding any dog or dogs which he
may lawfully seize and impound when he is in immediate pursuit of such
dog or dogs, except upon the premises of the owner of the dog if said owner
is present and forbids the same.
the dog has been seized and will be liable to be disposed of or destroyed
if not claimed within seven days after the service of the notice.
B. The notice referred to in Subsection A of this section may be served
either by delivering it to the person on whom it is to be served or by
leaving it at the person's usual or last known place of abode or at the
address given on the collar or by forwarding it by post in a prepaid
letter addressed to that person at his usual or last known place of abode
or to the address given on the collar.
C. When any dog seized in accordance with § 91-13 has been detained for
seven days after notice, when notice can be given as above set forth, or
has been detained for seven days after seizure, when notice has not
been and cannot be given as above set forth, and if the owner or person
keeping or harboring said dog has not claimed said dog and paid all
expenses incurred by reason of its detention, including maintenance
not exceeding $1 per day, and if the dog is unlicensed at the time of the
seizure and the person keeping or harboring said dog has not produced
a license and registration tag for said dog, the Animal Warden or Chief
of Police may cause the dog to be destroyed in a manner causing as
little pain as possible. Any redemption of a dog pursuant to the
provisions of this section shall not be deemed to discharge or release
the owner thereof from the penalties prescribed in Article V hereof for
any violation of this chapter.
D. The preceding requirements of Subsections A, B and C of this section
shall not be deemed applicable when any dog seized and impounded,
pursuant to § 91-13, whether licensed or unlicensed, is or appears to be
suffering from rabies or is immediately dangerous to the public or has
been so badly injured that it cannot be moved or helped by veterinarian
care. In such case, the Animal Warden or any member of the Police
Department may forthwith cause said dog to be destroyed.
§ 91-14 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 91-17
88:236
§ 91-17. Interference with enforcement of officials prohibited.
No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with any person appointed as
Animal Warden or any officer of the Township or other duly authorized
agent in the performance of any duty authorized or empowered by this
chapter.
§ 91-17 AMUSEMENT, PLACES OF § 91-17
88:237

ARTICLE II
Cats
[Added 8-13-1990 by Ord. No. 90-36455]
§ 91-18. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY — Any person or agency designated or
certified by the State of New Jersey to enforce the provisions of this article,
appointed by the Township Manager if an employee or by the governing
body if a contract service.
CAT — Any member of the domestic feline species; male, female or altered.
CAT OF LICENSING AGE — Any cat which has attained the age of seven
months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a cat, shall include every
person having a right of property or custody in such cat and every person
who has such cat in his/her keeping or who harbors or maintains a cat or
knowingly permits a cat to remain on or about any premises occupied by
that person.
PERSON — Any individual, group of individuals, corporation, partnership,
organization, institution or combination thereof.
§ 91-19. Vaccination requirements.
No person shall own, keep, harbor or maintain any cat of licensing age
within the Township of Cedar Grove unless such cat is vaccinated against
rabies and the owner maintains a certificate of vaccination issued by a
licensed veterinarian. The provisions of this section shall not apply to cats
held for sale in a pet store, by a state or federal licensed research facility
or a veterinary establishment where cats are received or kept for diagnostic
or medical, surgical or other treatment. Any cat may be exempted from the
requirements of such vaccination for a specified period of time by the local
Board of Health upon presentation of a veterinarian's certificate stating that
because of any infirmity or other physical condition or regimen of therapy,
the inoculation of such cat shall be deemed inadvisable.
§ 91-20. License required.
Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a cat of licensing age shall
annually apply for and procure from the Department of Health of the
Township of Cedar Grove or other official designated by the governing body
a license and official registration tag with license number or a registration
sleeve for each cat so owned, kept or harbored and shall place upon such
cat a collar or other device with the license number securely fastened or
55.Editor's Note: This ordinance renumbered former Articles II, III and IV as Articles III, IV
and V, and renumbered §§ 91-18 through 91-24 as §§ 91-27 through 91-33, respectively.
§ 91-18 AMUSEMENT, PLACES OF § 91-20
88:239
displayed thereto. No person shall transfer any license tag or sleeve from
one cat to another, and no person shall own a cat which has received such a
transferred license tag or sleeve. This licensing requirement will not apply
to a nonresident keeping a cat within the Township of Cedar Grove for no
longer than 90 days.
§ 91-21. Application for license.
The following provisions shall apply to the licensing of cats:
A. The owner of any cat of licensing age at the time of the adoption of this
article shall make application for a license tag or sleeve for each such
cat within 90 days after the effective date of this article.
B. The owner of any newly acquired cat of licensing age or of any cat
which attains licensing age shall make application for a license for such
cat within 10 days after such acquisition or attainment of licensing age.
C. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Township of
Cedar Grove any cat licensed in another state for the current year and
bearing a registration tag or sleeve shall apply for a license and
registration tag or sleeve for each such cat within 90 days.
D. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Township of
Cedar Grove any unlicensed cat of licensing age shall within 10 days
apply for a license and registration tag or sleeve for each such cat
E. The application for a license shall state the breed, sex, age, color and
markings of the cat for which the license is sought and whether it is of a
long- or short-haired variety. Also, the name, street and post office
address of the owner shall be stated, as well as the address where the
cat shall be kept or harbored. Additionally, the Department of Health
may require such other information in the application form as it deems
appropriate. The application form shall be preserved for a period of
three years by the Department of Health.
F. License forms and official tags or sleeves shall be furnished by the
municipality and be numbered serially and shall bear the year of
issuance and the name of the municipality.
G. The Department of Health or other official designated by the
municipality to license cats shall not grant any license tag or sleeve for
any cat unless the owner thereof provides evidence that the cat to be
licensed has been inoculated with a rabies vaccine in accordance with
the requirements of this article or has been certified to be exempt as
provided in § 91-19.
H. No license shall issue for any cat if the owner has already obtained and
maintains a total of six licenses for dogs and/or cats, and no license
shall issue for any cat which is to be kept or harbored at an address
where there already exist six licensed dogs and/or cats. No person may
own, keep or harbor more than a total of six dogs and/or cats in the
§ 91-20 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 91-21
88:240
§ 91-21.1. Disposition of fees collected. [Added 3-1-1993 by Ord.
No. 93-415]
License fees and other moneys collected or received under the provisions
of this article shall be forwarded to the Treasurer of the municipality
and shall be placed in a special account separate from any of the other
accounts of the municipality and shall be used for the following purposes
only: collecting, keeping and disposing of cats liable to seizure, for local
prevention and control of rabies and providing anti-rabies treatment
programs and for administering the provisions of this article.
§ 91-22. Proof of license.
Proof of licensing shall be produced by any person owning, keeping,
maintaining or harboring a cat upon the request of any health official, police
officer, animal control officer or other authorized person.
Township of Cedar Grove at any one time. Notwithstanding anything
contained herein to the contrary, the restrictions on the number of dogs
and/or cats in this subsection shall not apply to any person who, at the
time of the adoption of this article, owns, keeps or harbors more than
a total of six dogs and/or cats in the Township of Cedar Grove, and
all such animals shall be licensed, provided that all such animals are
licensed within 90 days after the adoption of this article, and no license
for any new dog or cat shall be issued to any such person in the event
that the issuance of such license would exceed six in total, it being
the intent of this grandfathering provision to eliminate any hardship on
persons having more than six pets at the time of the adoption of the
article but also intending that the number be reduced to six or below by
attrition.
I. A license shall be issued after payment of a fee of $10 for each cat.
Persons who fail to obtain a license by September 30 shall pay an
additional delinquent fee of $10 for each cat, as well as be subject to
fine for failure to comply with the terms of this article. The fee for a
replacement license tag or sleeve for one which has been misplaced or
lost shall be $1. [Amended 9-17-1990; 9-20-1993 by Ord. No.
93-429; 5-5-2014 by Ord. No. 14-770]
J. The licensing year shall begin on September 1 of each year, and the
license or license renewal shall be required for each licensing year for
each cat subject to licensing.
K. Any valid New Jersey license tag or sleeve issued by a New Jersey
municipality shall be accepted by the Township of Cedar Grove as
compliance with this article. However, in the event that the license from
any such municipality expires, the owner must apply for a license in the
Township of Cedar Grove within 10 days of the date of such expiration.
§ 91-21 AMUSEMENT, PLACES OF § 91-23
88:241
§ 91-23. Interference with administration.
No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this article.
§ 91-24. Trespassing prohibited.
No person shall permit any cat under his or her care or control to go upon
the lawn, yard, entrance, walk or driveway of any private residence without
the permission of the owner thereof.
§ 91-25. Disposal of feces. [Amended 9-11-2006 by Ord. No. 06-651]
Every person owning, keeping, harboring or in control of a cat shall be
responsible to immediately and properly pick up, remove and dispose of in
a sanitary manner all solid waste deposited by said cat on any property,
public or private, not owned or possessed by that person, including property
dedicated to public use, including without limitation parks, sidewalks,
easements, roadways or walking or riding paths.
§ 91-26. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Department of Health of the Township
of Cedar Grove, the Cedar Grove Police Department and/or the Animal
Control Authority appointed by the Township. In addition, a violation of
§§ 91-24 or 91-25 may be enforced by any resident of the municipality by
the filing of a complaint in Municipal Court.
§ 91-23 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 91-26
88:242
ARTICLE III
Kennels and Pet Shops
§ 91-27. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
KENNEL — Any establishment wherein or whereon the business of
boarding or training or selling dogs or breeding dogs for sale is carried on,
except a pet shop.
PET SHOP — Any room or group of rooms, store or stores, cage or
exhibition pen, not part of a kennel, wherein, among other things, dogs for
sale are kept or displayed.
§ 91-28. License required.
§ 91-29. Contents and conditions of license.
A. No kennel or pet shop shall be located, established or maintained
within the Township unless the person who keeps or operates or
proposes to establish a kennel or pet shop shall apply to and obtain
from the Township Health Officer a license entitling him to keep or
operate such establishment as provided by law.56
B. Any person holding a license issued under Subsection A of this section
shall not be required to procure individual licenses for dogs owned by
said licensee and kept at such establishment.
A. All licenses issued under this article by the Township Health Officer for
a kennel or pet shop shall state the purpose for which the establishment
is maintained and shall not be transferable to another owner or
different premises. Such licenses shall expire on the last day of January
of each year.
B. Revocation.
(1) All such licenses may be revoked by the Township Health Officer on
recommendation of the State Department of Health or the
Township Department of Health for any failure to comply with the
rules and regulations of the State Department of Health or of the
Township Department of Health governing the same, subject to a
right of appeal as provided in Chapter 31, Health Council, Advisory,
§ 31-7.
(2) In addition, a license issued pursuant to this article may be revoked
or suspended by the Township Council when any licensee, who is
the owner of the property upon which the licensed business is
conducted, has failed to pay the taxes due on the property for at
56.Editor's Note: Kennel and pet shop fees are established by N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.8.
§ 91-27 AMUSEMENT, PLACES OF § 91-29
88:243
§ 91-30. Dogs off premises.
No dog kept in a kennel or pet shop shall be permitted off such premises,
except on a leash or in a crate or other safe control.
least three consecutive quarters. [Added 5-6-1991 by Ord. No.
91-383]
§ 91-29 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 91-30
88:244
ARTICLE IV
Keeping of Animals
§ 91-30.1. Definitions. [Added 5-5-2014 by Ord. No. 14-770]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EXOTIC ANIMAL — Any live monkey, alligator, crocodile, cayman, raccoon,
skunk, fox, bear, sea mammal, potentially dangerous snake, member of
the feline species other than domestic cat (felis domesticus), member of
the canine species other than domestic dog (canis familiaris) or any other
animal that would require a standard of care and control greater than that
required for customary household pets sold by commercial pet shops.
FARM ANIMAL — An animal which is normally found on a farm, ranch, or
stable. Such animals include, but are not limited to, horses, cattle, sheep,
goats, swine, and chickens.
NONDOMESTICATED ANIMAL — Any wild animal, reptile or fowl which is
not naturally tame or gentle but is of a wild nature or disposition and which,
because of its size, vicious nature or other characteristics, would constitute
a danger to human life or property.
§ 91-31. Injury to property of others.
No person owning, keeping or harboring or in control of any dog or other
animal shall permit or suffer it to do any injury or to do any damage to any
lawn, shrubbery, flowers, grounds or property of another or in other ways
to cause a nuisance to another.
§ 91-32. Wild, nondomesticated, exotic and nondomesticated farm
animals prohibited. [Amended 9-11-2006 by Ord. No. 06-651;
5-5-2014 by Ord. No. 14-770; 6-16-2014 by Ord. No. 14-777]
No person shall keep or harbor any wild animal, nondomesticated animal,
exotic animal or nondomesticated farm animal within the Township which
is dangerous to public safety or health. No person shall feed, in any public
park or on any other property owned or operated by the Township, any
wildlife, excluding confined wildlife such as animals confined in zoos, parks
or other rehabilitation centers or unconfined wildlife at environmental
education centers.
§ 91-32.1. Registration of domesticated farm animals required.
[Added 6-16-2014 by Ord. No. 14-777]
A. Domesticated farm animals, other than cats or dogs, must be registered
with the Cedar Grove Health Department annually. An annual fee of $5
per animal must be paid for each registration. Said animal or animals
must be housed in a barn/coop/pen with a setback no closer than 10 feet
from any side or rear property line and behind the rear building line of
the principal structure. All properties housing domesticated farm
§ 91-30.1 AMUSEMENT, PLACES OF § 91-32.1
88:245
animals must be kept clean and sanitary to ensure the health and
safety of the animals and the general public. In addition to the above
setback requirements, no animal can be housed within 50 feet of any
window, door or opening of any adjoining principal structure. The Cedar
Grove Health Department will inspect each registered property where
animals are housed annually. Failure to comply with the provisions of
this section will result in the revocation of said registration and removal
of animals being housed on said property at the owner's expense.
B. It is the intent of this section to allow for the lawful keeping of
domesticated (farm) animals while maintaining the rights and quality of
life for all surrounding property owners. Animals housed that have a
negative effect on any adjoining properties will not be reissued a
registration in the subsequent year as determined by the Township
Health Office.
§ 91-32.1 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 91-32.1
88:246
ARTICLE V
Wildlife Feeding
[Added 2-5-2007 by Ord. No. 07-66557]
§ 91-33. Purpose.
An article to prohibit the feeding of unconfined wildlife in any public park or
on any other property owned or operated by the Township of Cedar Grove,
so as to protect public health, safety and welfare and to prescribe penalties
for failure to comply.
§ 91-34. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible
material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — All animals that are neither human nor domesticated. The
definition of "wildlife" shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
exotic animal, nondomesticated animal and nondomesticated farm animal
as set forth in Article IV above.[Amended 5-5-2014 by Ord. No. 14-770;
6-16-2014 by Ord. No. 14-777]
§ 91-35. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned or
operated by the Township of Cedar Grove, any wildlife, excluding confined
wildlife (for example, wildlife confined in zoos, parks or rehabilitation
centers, unconfined wildlife at environmental education centers, or feral
cats as part of an approved trap-neuter-release program).
§ 91-36. Enforcement.
A. This article shall be enforced by the Police Department, Health
Department, and Code Enforcement Department of the Township of
Cedar Grove. [Amended 5-5-2014 by Ord. No. 14-770]
57.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Art. V,
Penalties, as Art. VI. Former § 91-33, Violations and penalties, was also renumbered as
§ 91-37 pursuant to Ord. No. 07-665.
§ 91-33 AMUSEMENT, PLACES OF § 91-36
88:247
B. Any person found to be in violation of this article shall be ordered to
cease the feeding immediately.
§ 91-36 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 91-36
88:248
ARTICLE VI
Penalties
§ 91-37. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-30-1984 by Ord. No.
84-222; 10-23-2006 by Ord. No. 06-656]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000 or by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 91-37 AMUSEMENT, PLACES OF § 91-37
88:249
Chapter 95
BACKGROUND CHECKS
§ 91-37 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 91-37
88:250
ARTICLE I
Recreation Employees and Volunteers
[Adopted 5-7-2012 by Ord. No. 12-742]
§ 95-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD BACKGROUND CHECK — A determination
of whether a person has a criminal record by cross-referencing that
person's name and fingerprints with those on file with the Federal Bureau
of Investigation, Identification Division, and/or the New Jersey State Bureau
of Identification in the Division of State Police.
MUNICIPALITY/TOWNSHIP — The Township of Cedar Grove, in the County
of Essex of New Jersey.
MUNICIPAL-SPONSORED YOUTH PROGRAMS — Any program sponsored
by the Township of Cedar Grove, including any municipal employees,
volunteer organizations created by the municipality, and all leagues, boards,
committees and commissions affiliated with, falling within the purview of, or
acting for or on behalf of the Township of Cedar Grove and having contact
with persons under the age of 18 years.
NONSPONSORED YOUTH PROGRAM — Any youth program not sponsored
by the Township of Cedar Grove, but that utilizes municipal facilities or has
an affiliation with a municipal-sponsored youth program and having contact
with persons under the age of 18 years.
YOUTH PROGRAM — Any program that allows for participation in activities
by those persons under 18 years of age. Activities may include, but are
not limited to, sporting or athletic activities, or camps and trips or other
activities whereby some control and responsibility for children is assigned
to some person acting for or on behalf of a municipal-sponsored youth
program or nonsponsored youth program, other than a parent or caregiver.
§ 95-2. Use of municipal facilities by nonsponsored youth programs.
A. Prior to any club or organization, not defined as a municipal-sponsored
youth program, being authorized to use municipal-owned facilities for
functions participated in by children, all adults, those persons 18 years
of age or older, in any way assisting in the function, including but not
limited to coaches, assistant coaches, or similar positions, must provide
the municipal Chief of Police or designee, or other chief law
enforcement officer of the municipality, with findings of a criminal
history background check obtained from the State Bureau of
Identification in the New Jersey State Police.
B. The submission of background check findings must be based upon a
check performed within three years of the start of use of the municipalowned
facility. In the case of coaches performing duties as employees of
a school district, the policy of background checks adopted by the
§ 95-1 AMUSEMENT, PLACES OF § 95-2
88:251
§ 95-3. Municipal-sponsored youth programs.
§ 95-4. Identification cards.
Individuals engaged in providing recreation opportunities for, or on behalf
of, the municipality shall be issued identification cards with appropriate
individual school district shall be used to establish eligibility for use
of municipal-owned facilities. In all cases, the background check must
comply with the provisions of any applicable laws regarding same,
but not less detailed than those performed by the municipality for
individuals involved in administering municipal-sponsored youth
programs. All fees for individuals not administering a non-municipalsponsored
program shall be borne by the individual or program with
which they are participating.
A. All adults, those persons 18 years of age or older, including but not
limited to coaches, assistant coaches, or similar positions involved in
educating, directing or supervising youth, and in any way assisting in a
municipal-sponsored function participated in by children, shall submit
sufficient information on forms supplied by the municipal Police
Department or other enforcement authority from the New Jersey State
Police for the purpose of obtaining a criminal history background check
with the State Bureau of Identification in the New Jersey State Police.
Applications for background checks shall be processed by the municipal
Chief of Police or other chief law enforcement authority of the
municipality.
B. Based upon the memorandum of understanding executed between the
municipality of Cedar Grove and the New Jersey State Police, the
individual applying for the background check shall authorize the
municipal Chief of Police or other chief law enforcement officer of the
municipality to be the recipient of the response from the State Police
based upon the findings of the background check. Individuals involved
in a municipal-sponsored youth function, and who are required to
undergo background checks based upon this chapter, shall not be
responsible for the costs involved with obtaining the criminal
background check. The municipality shall bear the costs for the
background checks for individuals qualified under this section.
C. All league officers and/or those individuals in charge of each recreation
program are required to ensure compliance with this chapter for that
league or program. The president or leader of each recreation program
shall file an annual roster of individuals that are required to participate
in the background check procedures of this chapter. The roster shall be
on forms supplied by the municipality and shall contain a certification
as to the accuracy and completeness of the roster and individual names.
Any person who knowingly certifies a background check roster that
excludes an individual required to be checked shall be in violation of
this chapter and laws regarding false swearing.
§ 95-2 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 95-4
88:252
expirations based upon the date of their individual background check.
Individuals issued identification cards are required to display their cards
while in performance of their duty involving youth programs.
§ 95-5. Disqualification standards.
A. Upon receipt of a completed background check conducted by the State
Bureau of Identification in the New Jersey State Police and/or the
Federal Bureau of Investigation, Identification Division, the municipal
Chief of Police or designee or other chief law enforcement officer of the
municipality shall notify the applicant and the president or leader of the
recreation program of affirmative or negative results. The
determination of the municipal Chief of Police or other chief law
enforcement officer is based upon § 95-5B(1) of this chapter. Details in
the background check that result in a negative determination by the
State Police are not afforded to the municipal Chief of Police and are
only available to the applicant upon making a formal request to the
State Bureau of Investigation.
B. In the event the criminal background check reveals any prior
convictions for crimes or offenses which negatively impact the health,
safety and welfare of children, said person shall not be qualified to
participate in any official capacity in any function for persons under the
age of 18 years held at any Township-owned facilities. Such offenses
shall include, but not to be limited to:
(1) In New Jersey, any crime or disorderly persons offense:
(a) Involving danger to the person, meaning those crimes and
disorderly persons offenses set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1 et seq.,
such as criminal homicide; N.J.S.A. 2C:12-1 et seq., such as
assault, reckless endangerment, threats, stalking; N.J.S.A.
2C:13-1 et seq., such as kidnapping; N.J.S.A. 2C:14-1 et seq.,
such as sexual assault; or N.J.S.A. 2C:15-1 et seq., such as
robbery.
(b) Against the family, children or incompetents, meaning those
crimes and disorderly persons offenses set forth in N.J.S.A.
2C:24-1 et seq., such as endangering the welfare of a child.
(c) Involving theft as set forth in Chapter 20 of Title 2C of the New
Jersey Statutes.
(d) Involving any controlled dangerous substance or controlled
substance analog as set forth in Chapter 35 of Title 2C of the
New Jersey Statutes except Paragraph (4) of Subsection a of
N.J.S.A. 2C:35-10.
(e) Any fourth-degree offense or higher.
§ 95-4 AMUSEMENT, PLACES OF § 95-5
88:253
§ 95-6. Frequency of background checks.
§ 95-7. Appeals.
Any person whose criminal history background check disqualifies that
person from employment or from volunteering may appeal his or her
disqualification.
(2) In any other state or jurisdiction, conduct which, if committed in
New Jersey, would constitute any of the crimes or disorderly
persons offenses described in this section.
C. The list of crimes and violations contained in this section is for
illustrative purposes only and shall not be construed as a limitation on
those criminal activities or violations that would be grounds to
disqualify a person from assisting with youth-related activities as
indicated herein.
D. Refusal by individuals required to submit to background checks will
result in an immediate dismissal of the individual from any municipalsponsored
activities requiring background checks. In addition, refusal
to comply with this chapter by any individual falling within the scope of
requirements for nonsponsored youth programs will forfeit that
individual's ability to participate with the respective program. Refusal
of a non-municipal-sponsored youth program to subscribe to the
requirements of this chapter shall forfeit that program's ability to use
municipal facilities.
A. All nonsponsored youth programs that have individuals subject to this
chapter shall supply background checks for all of its participants prior
to the individual being able to participate at any function at a
municipal-owned facility to the extent covered by this chapter.
Thereafter, every three years, a new background check shall be
submitted to the Chief of Police, Municipal Administrator or Municipal
Solicitor.
B. All municipal-sponsored youth programs that have individuals subject
to this chapter shall direct those individuals to the Chief of Police for
background checks prior to the individual being able to participate at
any function sponsored by the municipality. Thereafter, every three
years, a new background check shall be submitted to the municipal
Chief of Police or other chief law enforcement officer.
A. Appeal re: accuracy of record. A person may challenge the accuracy of
the criminal history record. A challenge to the accuracy of the report
shall be filed with the municipal Chief of Police or other chief law
enforcement officer, who shall coordinate the challenge with the New
Jersey State Police.
B. Appeal alleging rehabilitation. A person may claim to be rehabilitated.
§ 95-5 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 95-7
88:254
(1) No person may appeal a disqualification on the grounds of
rehabilitation, if convicted of a fourth-degree offense or higher, if
the person has been disqualified because that person has been
convicted, adjudicated delinquent or acquitted by reason of
insanity of aggravated sexual assault; sexual assault; aggravated
criminal sexual contact; kidnapping pursuant to Paragraph (2) of
Subsection c of N.J.S.A. 2C13:1; endangering the welfare of a child
by engaging in sexual conduct which would impair or debauch the
morals of the child pursuant to Subsection a of N.J.S.A. 2C:24-4;
endangering the welfare of a child pursuant to Paragraph (4) of
Subsection b of N.J.S.A. 2C:24-4; luring or enticing pursuant to
Section 1 of P.L. 1993, c.291 (N.J.S.A. 2C:13-6); criminal sexual
contact pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:14-3b if the victim is a minor;
kidnapping pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:13-2, or false imprisonment
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:13-3 if the victim is a minor and the
offender is not the parent of the victim; knowingly promoting
prostitution of a child pursuant to Paragraph (3) or Paragraph (4) of
Subsection b of N.J.S.A. 2C:34-1; or an attempt to commit any of
these enumerated offenses.
(2) Appeals Committee. An appeal based on rehabilitation shall be
made to an Appeals Committee, which shall consist of the Chief of
Police, the president or administrator of the municipal recreation
program and municipal attorney. Any such appeal must be made
within 30 days of receipt of the notice of disqualification.
(3) Rehabilitation criteria. In determining whether a person has
affirmatively demonstrated rehabilitation, the Appeals Committee
shall consider the following factors:
(a) The nature and responsibility of the position which the
convicted person would hold or has held, as the case may be;
(b) The nature and seriousness of the offense;
(c) The circumstances under which the offense occurred;
(d) The date of the offense;
(e) The age of the person when the offense was committed;
(f) Whether the offense was an isolated or repeated incident;
(g) Any social conditions which may have contributed to the
offense; and
(h) Any other evidence of rehabilitation, including good conduct in
prison or the community, counseling or psychiatric treatment
received, acquisition of additional academic or vocational
schooling, successful participation in correction work-release
programs, or the recommendation of those who have had the
person under their supervision.
§ 95-7 AMUSEMENT, PLACES OF § 95-7
88:255
§ 95-8. Privacy and confidentiality.
(4) If the Appeals Committee determines that the disqualified person
has been successfully rehabilitated, it shall enter that person's
name on the list of qualified employees and volunteers maintained
by the municipal Chief of Police or other chief law enforcement
officer of the municipality.
A. Any and all criminal background checks supplied to the municipal Chief
of Police or other chief law enforcement officer shall be filed and
maintained in a secure and locked cabinet or room and shall not be
available to the public. The Chief of Police or other chief law
enforcement officer of the municipality shall take appropriate steps to
safeguard such records. The records shall be exempt from public
disclosure under the common law or the New Jersey Right to Know
Law.58 The records shall only be retained for such period of time as is
necessary to serve their intended and authorized purpose, and
thereafter shall be destroyed.
B. Access to criminal history record information for noncriminal justice
purposes, including licensing and employment, is restricted to the
members of the review committee, as authorized by federal or state
statute, rule or regulation, executive order, local ordinance or
resolution regarding obtaining and disseminating of criminal history
record information obtained under this section.
C. The review committee shall limit its use of criminal history record
information solely to the individual for which it was obtained, and the
criminal history record information furnished shall not be disseminated
to persons or organizations not authorized to receive the records for
authorized purposes. This information shall be limited solely to the
authorized purpose for which it was given, and it shall not be
disseminated to any unauthorized persons. Any person violating federal
or state regulations governing access to criminal history records
information may be subject to criminal and/or civil penalties.
58.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq.
§ 95-7 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 95-8
88:256
Chapter 97
BINGO AND RAFFLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement devices — See. Ch. 86.
Places of amusement — See Ch. 88.
Gambling and disorderly conduct — See Ch.
188, Art. I.
Games of chance in recreation areas — See
Ch. 205.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Bingo Licensing Law — See N.J.S.A. 5:8-24 et
seq.
Permit bingo on Sundays — See N.J.S.A.
5:8-31.
Raffles Licensing Law — See N.J.S.A. 5:8-50 et
seq.
Permit raffles on Sundays — See N.J.S.A.
5:8-58.
§ 95-8 BINGO AND RAFFLES § 95-8
97:257

ARTICLE I
Bingo on Sundays
[Adopted 11-3-1975 as Ord. No. 75-13 as part of Ch. 7, Art. 5, of the
former Revised Ordinances]
§ 97-1. Bingo permitted on Sundays.
Pursuant to the Bingo Licensing Law, N.J.S.A. 5:8-24 et seq., it shall be
lawful for the Township to issue licenses for the conduct of bingo or lotto
games on Sunday.
§ 97-1 BINGO AND RAFFLES § 97-1
97:259

ARTICLE II
Raffles on Sundays
[Adopted 4-19-1976 as Ord. No. 76-7 as part of Ch. 7, Art. 5, of the
former Revised Ordinances]
§ 97-2. Raffles permitted on Sundays.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 5:8-50 et seq., it shall be lawful for the
Township to issue licenses for the conducting of raffles on Sunday.
§ 97-2 BINGO AND RAFFLES § 97-2
97:261

ARTICLE III
Fees
[Adopted 2-20-1995 as Ord. No. 95-457]
§ 97-3. Raffle license fee.
The license fee payable in advance of issuance of any license issued in
connection with a raffle application shall be $5 per application.
§ 97-3 BINGO AND RAFFLES § 97-3
97:263
Chapter 99
BODY ART ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 99-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BODY ART — The practice of physical body adornment in permitted
establishments by operators utilizing, but not limited to, the following
techniques: body piercing, tattooing, and permanent cosmetics.
BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT — Any place or premises, whether public or
private, temporary or permanent in nature or location, where the practices
of body art, whether or not for profit, are performed.
§ 99-2. License to operate required; fees; renovations and
alterations.
Chapter 100
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Shade Tree Committee — See Ch. 67.
Outdoor burning — See Ch. 107.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 137.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 146.
Housing standards — See Ch. 158.
Littering — See Ch. 168.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 179.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 197.
Trees — See Ch. 246.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a body art establishment
without first obtaining a license from the Health Department to engage
in such business in accordance with the provisions of N.J.A.C. 8:27-1 et
seq. All licenses shall expire on the 31st day of December annually.
B. An application for a license shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount
of $200. Any renewal application received after November 30 shall be
subject to a late fee of $50. Any change in ownership shall require a
new application and license with payment of the required application
fee.
C. In the event that renovations and/or alterations are proposed to a body
art establishment, plans must be submitted to the Health Department
for its review and approval.
§ 97-3 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 99-2
97:264
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Removal of debris from sidewalks — See
N.J.S.A. 40:65-12.
Removal of debris from private
property — See N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.13 et seq.
Removal of sight obstructions — See N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.26 et seq.
§ 99-2 BINGO AND RAFFLES § 99-2
97:265

ARTICLE I
Removal from Sidewalks
[Adopted by 8-2-1915, Ch. 20, Art. 2, of the former Revised
Ordinances]
§ 100-1. Removal required; service and contents of notice.
§ 100-2. Removal upon noncompliance; assessment of cost.
A. The owner, tenant or occupant of lands abutting or bordering upon the
public streets of the Township shall remove or cause to be removed
from the abutting paved sidewalks of such streets grass, weeds, dirt,
refuse and other impediments, and from the sidewalk right-of-way area
of such streets weeds, refuse, debris and other impediments therefrom,
within three days after receipt by such owner, tenant or occupant of
written notice to remove the same.
B. Such notice may be served upon the owner, tenant or occupant either
personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested.
If the notice is served by registered or certified mail, the three-day
period within which such removal shall be accomplished shall be
deemed to have commenced to run from the date of the return receipt
obtained from the postal authorities for the delivery of such registered
or certified notice.
C. Every such notice shall, in addition to requiring the removal as
aforesaid, warn the owner, tenant or occupant of the lands to which it
refers that failure to accomplish such removal will result in the removal
by or under the direction of the Township Engineer. The notice shall
also state that in the event of the removal by or under the direction of
the Township Engineer, the cost of such removal shall forthwith become
a lien upon the said lands and shall be added to and become a part of
the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon the same, to bear interest
at the same rate and to be collected as in the case of such taxes.
A. In cases where the owner, tenant or occupant shall have neglected or
refused to remove such grass, weeds, dirt, refuse or other impediments
within three days after notice to remove the same as provided in
§ 100-1, the Township Engineer shall remove or cause to be removed
under his direction the said grass, weeds, dirt, refuse or other
impediments.
B. The Township Engineer shall certify to the Council the cost of said
removal. The Council shall examine such certificate of cost and, if it
finds said certificate to be correct, shall cause such cost to be charged
against the lands abutting or bordering as aforesaid. In the event that
such cost is excessive, the Council shall cause the reasonable cost
thereof to be charged against said lands. The amount so charged shall
thereupon become a lien and tax upon said lands and be added to and
be a part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied thereon, and
§ 100-1 BINGO AND RAFFLES § 100-2
97:267
§ 100-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-17-1962; 7-30-1984
by Ord. No. 84-222]
enforced and collected with interest at the same rate as other taxes by
the same officers and in the same manner as other taxes.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
B. The imposition and collection of any penalty imposed by the provisions
of Subsection A of this section shall not constitute any bar to the right of
the Township to collect the cost of removal as provided in § 100-2.
§ 100-2 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 100-3
97:268
ARTICLE II
Removal from Private Property
[Adopted by 6-21-1943, Ch. 11, Art. 6, of the former Revised
Ordinances]
§ 100-4. Definitions. [Amended 1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 77-64]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BRUSH, WEEDS AND DEBRIS — Includes brush; weeds, including
ragweed; stumps; roots; obnoxious growths; filth; garbage; trash; or other
debris.[Amended 10-7-2019 by Ord. No. 19-847]
§ 100-5. Inspections. [Amended 1-7-1963; 1-9-1978 by Ord. No.
77-64; 10-7-2019 by Ord. No. 19-847]
It shall be the duty of the Township Health and Zoning Officer to inspect,
within reasonable hours, as often as he may deem necessary or advisable,
any lot, yard, lands or premises situated within the Township for the
purpose of ascertaining and determining whether the removal or
destruction of brush, weeds, including ragweed, or debris from such lot,
yard, lands or premises is necessary and expedient for the preservation of
the public health, safety or general welfare or to eliminate a fire hazard.
§ 100-6. Notice to remove; service procedure. [Amended 1-7-1963;
1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 77-64; 10-7-2019 by Ord. No. 19-847]
Whenever the Township Health and Zoning Officer shall find upon any such
lot, yard, land or premises any brush, weeds, including ragweed, or debris
to such an extent as in his opinion is inimical to the public health, safety
or general welfare of the Township or to such an extent as to constitute a
fire hazard, he shall give or cause to be given written notice to the owner,
lessee, tenant or occupant of said premises to remove therefrom or destroy
such brush, weeds or debris in the manner therein set forth within 10 days
after service of said notice. Service of any such notice shall be made upon
the owner, lessee, tenant or occupant either personally or by posting said
notice on said premises and mailing, by certified mail, a copy of said notice
to the owner at his last known post office address, if any. Service of the
notice by posting and mailing shall be deemed completed upon the posting
and mailing thereof.
§ 100-7. Noncompliance deemed a violation.
Any owner, lessee, tenant or occupant, as the case may be, who fails or
neglects to comply with the notice duly served as provided in § 100-6 hereof
and within the time prescribed therein shall be subject to the penalty
prescribed in § 100-9 hereof.
§ 100-4 BINGO AND RAFFLES § 100-8
97:269
§ 100-8. Removal by Township; assessment of cost. [Amended
1-7-1963; 1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 77-64]
Whenever, after due notice has been given as provided in § 100-6 hereof,
the owner, lessee, tenant or occupant shall have refused or neglected to
remove or destroy such brush, weeds, including ragweed, or debris in the
manner and within the time provided for in said notice, the Township Health
Officer shall cause the same to be removed or destroyed by the appropriate
facilities of the Township, and the cost of such removal or destruction
shall be certified to the Council by such officer. If, upon examination of
such officer's certificate, the Council shall find the same to be correct,
such certified cost shall forthwith become a charge against said lands and
constitute a lien upon said lands, which shall be added to and become and
form a part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon said lands. The
amount of such charge or lien shall bear interest at the same rate and shall
be collected and enforced by the same officers and in the same manner as
taxes.
§ 100-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-17-1962; 1-7-1963;
7-30-1984 by Ord. No. 84-222]
A. Any person who violates the provisions of § 100-7 of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or
by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
B. The imposition of the penalty provided for in Subsection A of this
section shall not constitute a bar to, or be deemed in substitution of, the
exercise of the right and power of the Township provided for in § 100-8
hereof.
§ 100-8 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 100-9
97:270
ARTICLE III
Removal of Sight Obstructions at Intersections
[Adopted by 11-7-1949, Ch. 20, Art. 3, of the former Revised
Ordinances]
§ 100-10. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PLANT LIFE — Includes any hedge, brush or other plant life on lands within
the Township.
§ 100-11. Legislative declaration.
The Council hereby finds and declares that the existence of plant life
growing within 10 feet of any roadway and within 25 feet of the intersection
of two roadways to a height in excess of 2 1/2 feet is inimical to the
preservation of public safety and the general welfare and is likely to
constitute a traffic hazard. The foregoing shall not apply to shade trees
planted under the authority of the Township.
§ 100-12. Responsibility for removal of hazard; notice.
Whenever it shall appear to the Chief of Police that the existence upon any
land within the Township of plant life growing within 10 feet of any roadway
and within 25 feet of the intersection of two roadways and exceeding 2 1/
2 feet in height is hazardous to the public safety or the general welfare of
the residents of the Township or those using its highways, or constitutes
a safety hazard, the owner, tenant or occupant of any such lands shall be
required to cut such plant life to a height of not more than 2 1/2 feet within
10 days after receipt by such owner, tenant or occupant of written notice
from the Chief of Police requiring such cutting.
§ 100-13. Service of notice.
Such notice may be served upon any such owner, tenant or occupant, either
personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested; and if
by registered or certified mail, the ten-day period within which such cutting
shall be accomplished shall be deemed to have commenced to run from
the date of the return receipt obtained from the postal authorities for the
delivery of such registered or certified notice.
§ 100-14. Contents of notice.
Every such notice shall, in addition to requiring the cutting as aforesaid,
warn the owner, tenant or occupant of the lands to which it refers that
failure to accomplish such cutting will result in the cutting by the Township
under the direction of the Township Engineer. The notice shall also state
that, in the event of the cutting by the Township, the cost of such cutting
shall forthwith become a lien upon said lands and shall be added to and
§ 100-10 BINGO AND RAFFLES § 100-14
97:271
become a part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon the same,
to bear interest at the same rate and to be collected as in the case of such
taxes.
§ 100-15. Removal upon noncompliance; assessment of cost.
Whenever the owner, tenant or occupant of any lands receiving notice to
cut from said lands any plant life shall have neglected or refused to effect
the cutting of said plant life in the manner and within the time hereinabove
provided, such cutting shall be accomplished by or under the direction of
the Township Engineer, who, upon completion thereof, shall certify the cost
to the Council. The Council shall examine the certificate, and, if it shall find
the same to be correct, it shall cause the cost so certified to be charged
against said lands. In the event that such costs are excessive, the Council
shall cause the reasonable costs thereof to be charged against said lands.
The amount of such charge shall forthwith become a lien upon said lands
and shall be added to and become and form a part of the taxes next to be
assessed and levied upon said lands, to bear interest at the same rate as
taxes and to be collected and enforced by the same officers and in the same
manner as taxes.
§ 100-16. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-17-1962;
7-30-1984 by Ord. No. 84-222]
A. Every owner, tenant or occupant who shall refuse or neglect to cut or
trim any plant life in the manner and within the time hereinabove
provided in this article or who violates any provision of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000 or
by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues. [Amended 10-23-2006 by Ord. No.
06-656]
B. The imposition and collection of any penalty imposed by the provisions
of Subsection A of this section shall not constitute any bar to the right of
the Township to collect the cost of removal as provided in § 100-15.
§ 100-14 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 100-16
97:272
Chapter 102
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Building Safety — See Ch. 3.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 38.
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 105.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 119.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 137.
Gas piping and appliances — See Ch. 150.
Housing standards — See Ch. 158.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 197.
Individual sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
213.
Sewers — See Ch. 217.
Soil removal — See Ch. 226.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 234.
Private swimming pools — See Ch. 237.
Zoning — See Ch. 268.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Adoption of codes by reference — See N.J.S.A.
40:49-5.1.
§ 102-1. Definitions.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BASIC BUILDING CODE or BASIC CODE — That certain printed code
entitled "The Basic Building Code of the Building Officials Conference
of America, Inc., Fifth Edition/1970" and the printed supplement
thereto entitled "Supplement No. 1, Approved Changes--1970."
BUILDING CODE OF THE TOWNSHIP or TOWNSHIP BUILDING CODE
— The Building Code of the Township of Cedar Grove adopted as set
forth in this chapter and for the purposes of regulating and controlling:
BUILDING OFFICIAL — The Building Inspector of the Township of
Cedar Grove who shall be charged with the administration and
enforcement of the Building Code of the Township.
The construction, alteration, repair, demolition or removal of
buildings or structures erected or to be erected.
(1)
The use, occupancy and continued use or occupancy and
maintenance of all buildings or structures heretofore erected or to
be erected.
(2)
Whenever the following words, terms or phrases are used in the
Basic Building Code, they shall have the meanings herein given:
(3)
§ 100-16 BINGO AND RAFFLES § 102-1
97:273
§ 102-2. Adoption of standards by reference.
§ 102-3. Amendments.
LEGAL OFFICER or LEGAL COUNSEL or LEGAL REPRESENTATIVE —
The Township Attorney of the Township of Cedar Grove.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Cedar Grove.
A. The whole of the Basic Building Code, as defined in § 102-1A, save and
except such portions thereof as are deleted and changed and modified
by the provisions of § 102-3 hereof, is incorporated herein by reference
as though it had been set forth at length, of which one copy has been
placed in the Clerk's office, two copies in the library and at least three
copies in the Building Inspector's office of the Township of Cedar Grove,
and shall remain on file in each of said offices for the use and
examination of the public so long as this chapter shall remain in effect.
The said Basic Building Code as deleted, changed, modified and
supplemented by the provisions of § 102-3 hereof is hereby adopted as
the Building Code of the Township and may be so cited.
B. In every case where the provisions of § 102-3 hereof specify any
changes, modifications and additions of and to the Basic Building Code,
any such changes, modifications and additions shall take precedence
over and supersede any inconsistent section or provision in the Basic
Building Code, to the end that the said Basic Building Code in all its
parts should be deemed and be construed as to conform to the changes,
modifications and additions set forth in § 102-3 hereof, including, but
not by way of limitation, changes in titles, designations and definitions.
A. The following provisions of the Basic Building Code are hereby deleted,
modified, changed and supplemented as set forth below. Sections of the
Basic Building Code which are deleted, changed and modified are
identified by the same section numbers appearing in the Basic Building
Code. Newly added sections to the Basic Building Code are identified by
the designation of a section number to conform as nearly as practicable
to the numbering system of said code.
(1) Section 100.1 is changed and modified to read as follows:
100.1 Title: These regulations shall be known as the "Basic
Building Code" or "Basic Code." They shall control all matters
concerning the construction, alteration, addition, repair, removal,
demolition, use, location, occupancy and maintenance of all
buildings and structures and their service equipment as herein
defined and shall apply to existing or proposed buildings and
structures in the Township of Cedar Grove, except as such matters
are otherwise provided for in the local municipal charter, or other
ordinances or statutes, or in the rules and regulations authorized
for promulgation under the provisions of the Basic Code.
(2) Section 105.0 is deleted in its entirety, including all subsections.
§ 102-1 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 102-3
97:274
(3) Section 107.1 is deleted.
(4) Section 107.2 is deleted.
(5) Section 107.3 is deleted.
(6) Section 107.4 is changed and modified to read as follows:
107.4 Deputy: The Building Official may designate any employee
as his deputy, who shall exercise all the powers of the Building
Inspector during the temporary absence or disability of the
Building Inspector.
(7) Section 107.5 is deleted.
(8) Section 107.6 is deleted.
(9) Section 107.7 is changed and modified to read as follows:
107.7 Restriction on employees: No official or employee
connected with the Department of Building Inspection shall be
engaged in or directly or indirectly connected with the furnishing
of labor, materials or appliances for the construction, alteration
or maintenance of a building, or the preparation of plans or of
specifications therefor, unless he is the owner of the building; nor
shall such officer or employee engage in a work which conflicts
with his official duties or with the interests of the Department.
(10) Section 109.1 is deleted.
(11) Section 109.3 is deleted.
(12) Section 109.4 is deleted.
(13) Section 111.1 is changed and modified to read as follows:
111.1 Preliminary Inspection: Before issuing a permit, the
Building Official shall examine or cause to be examined all
buildings, structures and sites for which an application has been
filed for a permit to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, remove,
demolish or change the use thereof; and he shall conduct such
inspections from time to time during and upon completion of the
work for which he has issued a permit; and he shall maintain
a record of all such examinations and inspections and of all
violations of the Basic Code. Interim inspections between the
preliminary and final shall include but not be limited to an
inspection of the footing prior to pouring concrete, an inspection
of the foundation prior to backfilling and an inspection of the
framework construction prior to covering.
(14) Section 113.6 is changed and modified to read as follows:
§ 102-3 BINGO AND RAFFLES § 102-3
97:275
113.6 Plot Diagram: There shall also be filed a plot plan showing
to scale the size and location of all the new construction and all
existing structures on the site, distances from lot lines and the
established street grades, the existing and proposed elevations
around the perimeter of the proposed structure, lot corners and
proposed first floor elevations; and it shall be drawn in accordance
with an accurate boundary line survey.
(15) Section 113.61 is added to read as follows:
113.61 Survey Requirement: After construction of foundation
walls and prior to any further construction, a survey by a licensed
professional land surveyor shall be furnished to the Building
Inspector, showing the location of the foundation in relation to the
lot lines.
(16) Section 114.1 is deleted.
(17) Section 117.3 is added to read as follows:
117.3 Certificate of Insurance: Whenever a building is to be
demolished or removed, the Township shall be provided with a
certificate of insurance indicating that the owner or agent is
insured for bodily injury in the amount of $100,000 for each
person and $300,000 for each accident and $50,000 coverage for
property damage.
(18) Section 117.4 is added to read as follows:
117.4 License or Permit Bond: Whenever a house or building
is to be demolished or removed, the owner or agent shall furnish
the Township with a license or permit bond in the amount of
$1,000 for the demolition of a building or $5,000 for each mile of
Township streets over which a building is to be moved.
(19) Section 117.5 is added to read as follows:
117.5 Notice to Police Department: The owner or agent shall
give written notice to the Police Department 24 hours prior to
moving a building over Township streets or rights-of-way.
(20) Section 117.6 is added to read as follows:
117.6 Removal of buildings: Before the demolition or removal
or moving of a building or structure, the building or structure must
be completely exterminated to rid the premises of infestation.
A letter from a reputable exterminating company certifying that
they have treated the building and premises for extermination of
infestation a minimum of 72 hours prior to the issuance of a permit
will satisfy this requirement.
(21) Section 117.7 is added to read as follows:
§ 102-3 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 102-3
97:276
117.7 Route and time of moving: Before a building can be
demolished or moved within the Township, the owner or agent
shall present to the proper Township official the time of moving
and the route which is intended to be utilized in moving said
building or structure. No such time or route shall be considered
as approved unless such approval setting forth the time and route
shall be issued by the proper Township official.
(22) Section 118.2 is changed and modified to read as follows:
118.2 New Construction and Alterations: The fee for a
building permit shall be based on the value of the structure, or
as otherwise prescribed in the local ordinances, and the rate for
such permit shall be as follows: for the first $1,000 valuation or
part thereof, $10; for each additional $1,000 or part thereof, $5.
[Amended 10-18-1976 by Ord. No. 76-26]
(23) Section 118.3 is changed and modified to read as follows:
118.3 Moving of Buildings: The fee for a building permit for the
removal of a building or structure from one location to another on
the same property shall be $15; the fee for a building permit for
the removal of a building or structure from one location to another
requiring the use of a public thoroughfare shall be $50.
(24) Section 118.4 is changed and modified to read as follows:
118.4 Demolition: The fee for a permit for the demolition of a
building or structure shall be $15.
(25) Section 118.5 is changed and modified to read as follows:
118.5 Signs: The fee for signs, billboards and other display
structures for which permits are required under the provisions of
the Basic Code shall be as follows: signs in a residential zone, $2;
signs in a business or industrial zone, $1 a square foot for ground
signs, $0.50 a square foot for flat signs, except that there shall be
a minimum fee of $2 for each flat sign. [Amended 10-18-1976 by
Ord. No. 76-26]
(26) Section 118.61 is added to read as follows:
118.61 Certificate of Occupancy: Before any new building or
structure shall be occupied for any purposes, a certificate of
occupancy shall be procured by the owner or builder, and the fee
for said certificate shall be $20. [Amended 10-18-1976 by Ord.
No. 76-26]
(27) Section 118.7 is deleted and new section substituted to read as
follows:
§ 102-3 BINGO AND RAFFLES § 102-3
97:277
118.7 Payment of fees: All fees, including the fee for certificate
of occupancy, shall be paid at the time of the issuance of the
permit.
(28) Section 119.0 is deleted in its entirety, including all subsections.
(28.1) Section 119.3H is added to read as follows: [Added 9-8-2008 by
Ord. No. 08-690]
H. Waiver of construction permit and enforcing agency fees for
work done to promote accessibility.
(1) No person shall be charged a construction permit
surcharge fee or Cedar Grove Construction Inspection
Agency fee for any construction, reconstruction,
alteration or improvement designed and undertaken
solely to promote accessibility by disabled persons to an
existing public or private structures or any of the
facilities contained therein.
(2) A disabled person, or parent or sibling of disabled person,
shall not be required to pay any municipal fee or charge
in order to secure a construction permit for any
construction which promotes accessibility to his own
living unit.
(3) The term “disabled person” shall be defined in
accordance with the definition provided by N.J.S.A.
52:27D-126e.
(29) Section 122.3 is changed and modified to read as follows:
122.3 Violation Penalties: Any person who violates any
provision of the Basic Building Code or fails to comply with any
of the requirements thereof shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punished by a fine not exceeding $500 or by imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
(30) Section 123.2 is changed and added to read as follows:
123.2 Unlawful Continuances: Any person who shall continue
any work in or about the building after having been served with
a stop order, except such work as he is directed to perform to
remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of
not less than $100 nor more than $200.
(31) Section 126.0 is deleted in its entirety, including all subsections.
(32) Section 127.1 is changed and modified to read as follows:
§ 102-3 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 102-3
97:278
127.1 Application for Appeal: The owner of a building or
structure, his architect, agents or servants may appeal from a
decision of the Building Official refusing to grant a modification
of the provisions of the Basic Code covering the manner of
construction or materials to be used in the erection, alteration
or repair of a building or structure to the Township Council.
Application for appeal shall be made in writing whenever it is
claimed that the true intent of the Basic Code or the rules legally
adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the
provisions of the Basic Code do not fully apply or an equally
good or better form of construction can be used. Said appeal
shall specify in detail the reason or reasons for the appeal and
the authority, if any, for the claim made by the appellant. Such
appeal shall be heard by the Township Council who may hold a
hearing thereon on five days' notice to the appellant or may, in
its discretion, make a determination of the ground or grounds of
appeal based upon the utilization of Township personnel or such
outside experts as it may deem necessary or proper. The Township
Council shall affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the Building
Inspector by a concurring vote of three members of the Township
Council, within 30 days from receipt of the written appeal. The
Building Inspector shall take immediate action in accordance with
the decision of the Council.
(33) Section 127.2 is deleted.
(34) Section 127.21 is deleted.
(35) Section 127.22 is deleted.
(36) Section 127.23 is deleted.
(37) Section 127.24 is deleted.
(38) Section 127.25 is deleted.
(39) Section 127.3, is deleted.
(40) Section 127.4 is deleted.
(41) Section 127.41 is deleted.
(42) Section 127.42 is deleted.
(43) Section 127.43 is deleted.
(44) Section 127.5 is deleted.
(45) Section 127.51 is deleted.
(46) Section 127.52 is deleted.
(47) Section 127.53 is deleted.
§ 102-3 BINGO AND RAFFLES § 102-3
97:279
(48) Section 127.54 is deleted.
(49) Section 127.6 is deleted.
(50) Section 201.2 is amended so that only the following identified
terms and general definitions contained under Section 201.2 are
deleted or changed and modified to read as set forth below, all
others being retained:
(a) Dwellings:
One-family dwelling is changed and modified to read as
follows:
A detached building designed for and occupied exclusively
for one family.
Two-family dwelling is changed and modified to read as
follows:
A building designed for or occupied by two families living
independently of each other.
(b) Boardinghouse, lodging house, tourist house is changed and
modified to read as follows:
A private dwelling in which not more than two persons,
whether individually or as a family (but not including
employed domestic help), are housed or lodged for hire, with
or without meals. A rooming house or a furnished rooming
house shall be termed a boardinghouse.
(c) Dormitory is deleted.
(d) Hotel is deleted.
(e) Garage (incorporating by reference definition in Section 401.0)
is changed and modified to read as follows:
Garage private: an accessory building or part of a main
building used only for the storage of a motor vehicle as an
accessory use.
Garage public: a building or part thereof other than a private
garage used for the storage or care of motor vehicles for
profit, including any sale of motor vehicle accessories, or
where any such vehicles are kept for hire.
(f) Lot:
Corner lot is changed and modified to read as follows:
A parcel of land with two or more adjacent sides abutting
upon streets or other public places.
§ 102-3 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 102-3
97:280
(g) Motor fuel service station (incorporating by reference
definition in Section 401.0) term and definition deleted and
following term and definitions substituted to read as follows:
Motor vehicle service station: shall mean and include any
area of land, including structures thereon, that is used for the
sale of gasoline or other motor vehicle fuel and oil and other
lubricating substances, including any sale of motor vehicle
accessories, and which may include facilities used or designed
to be used for polishing, greasing, washing, spraying, dry
cleaning, repairing or providing similar services.
Motor vehicle service station shall also be deemed and
considered to be a "gasoline station" as defined in Chapter
268, Zoning, of the Township.
(h) Motor vehicle repair shop (incorporating by reference
definition in Section 401.0) is changed and modified to read as
follows:
Any land, building or part of a building used for repairing
motor vehicles, such as engines, overhaul, body repairs,
replacement of parts, sale of motor vehicles or any part
thereof or other repairs of a machine character. Any such
land, building or part of a building where vehicles are also
supplied with gasoline or other motor fuels shall be classified
also as a "gasoline station."
(i) Street is deleted.
(51) Section 301.1 is changed and modified to read as follows:
301.1 Fire District No 1: Fire District No. 1 shall comprise
the areas housing highly congested business, commercial,
manufacturing and industrial uses or in which such uses are
developing. The limits of such areas are described as including
the B Zone, RC Zone, M-1 Zone, M-2 Zone and L-C-1 Zone, L-C-2
Zone, R-18A Zone and O Zone described in Chapter 268, Zoning,
as amended.
(52) Section 301.11 is added to read as follows:
301.11 All zones in Chapter 268, Zoning, are to be considered
within the fire zone, with the exception of one-family dwellings.
(53) Section 301.2 is deleted.
(54) Section 303.1 is deleted.
(55) Section 410.17 is deleted.
(56) Section 414.11 is changed and modified to read as follows:
§ 102-3 BINGO AND RAFFLES § 102-3
97:281
414.11 One- and Two-Family Dwellings: Private garages
located beneath a one- and two-family dwelling shall have walls,
partitions, floors and ceilings, separating the garage space from
the dwelling, constructed of not less than one-hour fire resistance,
with the sills of all door openings between them raised not less
than four inches above the garage floor. The door opening
protectives shall be three-quarter-hour fire doors complying with
Article 9 or one-and-three-quarter-inch solid-core wood doors. The
entire ceiling over the garage, when such garage is in a basement,
shall be covered with insulation before applying the one-hour-fireresistant
covering.
(57) Section 420.0 is deleted.
(58) Section 420.1 is deleted.
(59) Section 420.11 is deleted.
(60) Section 420.12 is deleted.
(61) Section 420.2 is deleted.
(62) Section 420.3 is deleted.
(63) Section 420.4 is deleted.
(64) Section 420.5 is deleted.
(65) Section 424.2 is changed and modified to read as follows:
424.2 Lanes and Parking Spaces: Access lanes shall be
provided for each row of cars not less than 13 feet in length where
parking is at a forty-five-degree angle or greater, not less than 18
feet where parking is at a sixty-degree angle or greater and not
less than 24 feet where parking is at a right angle; and the parking
space shall be not less than 10 feet by 20 feet in area for each
motor vehicle.
(66) Section 425.0 is deleted in its entirety, including all subsections.
(67) Section 426-1 is changed and modified to read as follows:
426.1 Garages: Garages, when attached to motel residential
buildings, shall have the interior faces of all walls, when not
of approved masonry construction, and the ceilings protected to
afford one-hour fire resistance; and all connecting openings shall
be protected with approved three-quarter-hour fire doors or their
equivalent complying with Article 9, or with one-and-threequarter-
inch solid-core wood doors. Roofed-over passageways may
be used to connect garages to dwellings if protected with onehour-
fire-resistive construction.
(68) Section 426.2 is changed and modified to read as follows:
§ 102-3 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 102-3
97:282
426.2 Required Exitways: All exitways in buildings more than
one story in height shall be constructed with a one-hour fire
resistance and all stories above the first shall have at least two
means of egress complying with Article 6. All exits from residential
quarters shall lead to open spaces not less than 20 feet in width
which provide direct exit to public streets or highways.
(69) Section 426.3 is changed and modified to read as follows:
426.3 Driveways and Parking Spaces: The arrangement and
capacity of driveways, lanes and parking spaces shall comply with
the requirements specified for parking lots in Section 424.2.
(70) Section 429.0 is deleted in its entirety, including all subsections.
(71) Section 611.3 is deleted.
(72) Section 611.31 is changed and modified to read as follows:
611.31 Residential Buildings: In multifamily dwellings (Use
Group L-2), not over three stories and attic in height for not
more than six families, nor more than 3,000 square feet in area
of fireproof construction (Type 1) or protected noncombustible
construction (Types 2-A and 2-B), and in other types of
construction, not more than 2,400 square feet in area. The
distance of travel to the two required exits shall not exceed 50
feet, and the stairway shall be enclosed in partitions of two-hour
fire resistance with three-quarter-hour fire doors complying with
Article 9 at the opening.
In multifamily dwellings (Use Group L-2) not over two stories and
nonhabitable attic in height for not more than eight families, nor
more than four families to a floor nor more than 3,000 square feet
in area. The distance of travel to the two required exits shall not
exceed 50 feet, and the stairway shall be enclosed with partitions
of not less than one-and-one-half-hour fire resistance with threequarter-
hour fire doors complying with Article 9 at the openings.
(73) Section 623.1 is changed and modified to read as follows:
623.1 Where Permitted: Fire escapes shall not in general be
accepted as an element of a required means of egress. Fire
escapes shall be permitted only by special order of the Building
Official in existing buildings or structures not exceeding five
stories or 60 feet in height, when constructed in accordance with
the approved rules and when more adequate exitway facilities
cannot be provided.
(74) Section 623.2 is deleted.
(75) Section 623.33 is deleted.
(76) Section 623.34 is deleted.
§ 102-3 BINGO AND RAFFLES § 102-3
97:283
(77) Table 13A Add below Table 13 in Section 707.0 the following:
Table 13A Size and Dimensions of Beams and Rafters;
Dwelling Beams; Rafters: first and second floors, two inches
by 10 inches on centers up to fourteen-foot span; if over, use 12
inches on centers or two inches by 12 inches, 16 inches on centers,
depending on span.
Ceiling Beams: two inches by six inches, 16 inches on centers
up to twelve-foot span; two inches by eight inches, 16 inches on
centers of over 12 feet, or if stairs run to attic.
Rafters on five inches on twelve-inch span or more, two inches
by six inches, 16 inches on centers up to 11 feet; if over, use
two inches by eight inches, 16 inches on centers, depending on
span. Less than five inches on 12 inches shall be figured the same
as floor joists. All buildings built in the fire zone: for roofs use
three inches by 10 inches, 16 inches on centers up to sixteen-foot
span; three inches by 12 inches, 16 inches on centers over 16 feet
through 19 feet, six inches. No girders shall be permitted less than
six inches in width and 10 inches in thickness, unless approved by
the Building Inspector.
(78) Section 729.0 is changed and modified to read as follows:
729.0 Depth of Footings: Except when erected on solid rock or
when otherwise protected from frost, foundation walks, piers and
other permanent supports of all buildings shall extend three feet,
six inches below the finished grade; spread footings of adequate
size shall be provided where necessary to properly distribute the
load within the allowable bearing value of the soil. Such structures
may be supported on piles when solid earth or rock is not
available. No footings shall be founded on frozen soils.
(79) Section 733.1 is changed and modified to read as follows:
733.1 Concrete Strength: Concrete in unreinforced foundation
footings shall be so proportioned as to develop an ultimate
compressive strength of not less than 3,000 pounds per square
inch at 28 days.
(80) Section 733.3 is changed and modified to read as follows:
733.3 Dimensions: In unreinforced concrete footings, the edge
thickness shall be not less than 12 inches.
(81) Section 733.5 is added to read as follows:
733.5 Walls: Walls shall not be raised on foundations until the
footings have at least 24 hours of curing, but the Building
Inspector may permit up to two courses of block on trench footings
during the waiting period.
§ 102-3 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 102-3
97:284
(82) Section 734.1 is changed and modified to read as follows:
734.1 Dimensions: Masonry unit footings shall be laid in cement
mortar or cement-lime mortar complying with Section 816, and
the depth shall be not less than twice the total projection beyond
the wall, pier or column, and the width shall be not less than 12
inches wider than the wall supported thereon.
(83) Section 803.9 is added to read as follows:
803.9 Tests of Concrete Cylinders: The Building Inspector may,
at his option, order laboratory tests of concrete cylinders obtained
from each load or batch of concrete. Such tests shall be made by a
laboratory to be selected by the Building Inspector and shall be at
the cost of the owner.
(84) Section 825.2 is deleted.
(85) Section 825.3 is deleted.
(86) Section 826.1 is changed and modified to read as follows:
826.1 Sheathing: Sheathing of gypsum, processed fiber and
other approved materials shall conform to accepted engineering
practice. Five-eighths-inch gypsum sheathing or five-eighths-inch
processed fiber sheathing, or other approved equivalent materials,
may be used in frame construction under brick veneer. When used
in frame construction, they shall meet requirements of Sections
855.1 and 855.2 When required to meet fire resistance ratings, the
assembled construction shall comply with Table 5 for structural
elements and Article 9 for trim and finishes.
(87) Section 847.22 is added to read as follows:
847.22 Floors: Load-bearing walls, concrete-filled pipe columns
or piers shall be set in place before the pouring of any basement,
crawl area or garage floor.
(88) Section 855.16 is changed and modified to read as follows:
855.16 Headers Over Openings: Framing in load-bearing walls
is required to consist of full-length stud and a jack, or lap stud or
equal to support double headers, acceptable lintels and headers
over openings in bearing walls and partitions consisting of wood
members set on end as follows:
§ 102-3 BINGO AND RAFFLES § 102-3
97:285
Wood Members
Supporting One Floor
or Roof
Wood Members
Supporting Two
Floors or Roof
Spans
(feet) Number
Size
(inches) Number
Size
(inches)
Less than 3 2 2 x 4 2 2 x 6
Over 3 to 5 1/2 2 2 x 6 2 2 x 8
Over 5 1/2 to 7 2 2 x 8 2 2 x 10
Over 7 to 10 2 2 x 12
Headers and lintels over openings in nonbearing walls and
partitions may be reduced two sizes, provided that the minimum
size is not less than the equivalent of two-inch members.
(89) Section 855.2 is changed and modified to read as follows:
855.2 Wall Sheathing: All enclosed frame buildings shall be
sheathed as herein provided unless stucco construction is used
complying with Section 821.5 or the wall is otherwise braced with
approved equivalent construction to furnish the required rigidity
specified in this section. Jointing shall occur over the center of
and parallel to the studs. If ten-inch boards are used, they shall
be triple-nailed at points of bearing. No more than two adjoining
boards shall break joints over the same stud space, and each board
shall bear on at least two studs.
(90) Section 855.21 is changed and modified to read as follows:
855.21 Types of Sheathing: Sheathing shall consist of one of the
materials of the following nominal thickness or any other material
of equal strength and durability acceptable to the Building
Inspector:
One-inch reinforced cement mortar.
One-inch wood sheathing.
Five-eighths-inch exterior plywood.
Five-eighths-inch gypsum sheathing.
Five-eighths-inch fiber boards.
(91) Section 855.71 is changed and modified to read as follows:
855.71 Types of Decking: Roof deck sheathing shall consist of
not less than one-inch boards or five-eighths-inch exterior plywood
or other approved equivalent materials of a similar strength and
rigidity.
§ 102-3 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 102-3
97:286
(92) Section 855.72 is changed and modified to read as follows:
855.72 Wood Shingles: Wood shingles and hand split shakes
complying with the standards listed in Appendix C may be used
for roof covering where permitted in Section 903.53 and shall be
installed on tight decking.
(93) Section 858.21 is added to read as follows:
858.21 Gutters and Coping: Unless constructed with parapet
walls and coping as required by Section 869, all exterior walls
shall be provided with gutters and downspouts or leaders to
dispose of roof drainage to comply with the Plumbing Code.59
(94) Section 867.0 is changed and modified to read as follows:
867.0 Thickness of Solid Masonry Walls: All masonry walls
shall be of the minimum thickness specified in the Building Code
standards for "masonry" listed in Appendix B. In no case shall the
combined stress due to all loads exceed the allowable working
stresses specified in this Basic Code for the materials of
construction. In no case shall the total thickness of the solid
masonry wall be less than 12 inches.
(95) Section 870.22 is changed and modified to read as follows:
870.22 Hollow and Solid Masonry and Mass Concrete:
Masonry block foundation walls shall be not less than 12 inches
thick and poured concrete walls shall be not less than 10 inches
thick.
(96) Section 870.6 is added to read as follows:
870.6 Cement Blocks: Cement blocks, not cinder blocks nor any
other block composed of some lightweight aggregate, shall be
used in the construction of foundation walls below grade.
(97) Section 873.3 is changed and modified to read as follows:
59.Editor's Note: See Ch. 194, Plumbing.
§ 102-3 BINGO AND RAFFLES § 102-3
97:287
873.3 Foundations: Exterior walls below grade and the cellar
floors of all buildings for institutional and residential uses (Use
Groups H and L) enclosing habitable or occupiable rooms or
spaces below grade shall be made watertight and, when necessary,
shall be reinforced to withstand water pressure as prescribed
in Sections 710 and 870. The basement walls of buildings in
the residential use groups and the walls of all habitable and
occupiable rooms and spaces below grade shall be protected with
not less than a one-coat application of approved waterproofing
paint, or a one-half-inch parging coat of portland cement mortar or
other approved dampproof covering. A coat of tar shall be applied
over either the waterproof paint or the coat of portland cement.
(98) Section 873.5 is added to read as follows:
873.5 Drain: Perforated drain shall be installed in a bed of stone
around the outside foundations of the building. Said drain tiles and
the gutters required in Section 858.21 shall be led by gravity into
the storm sewer in front of the building. In the event that there is
no storm sewer in front of said building or in the event that said
storm sewer is not deep enough to accept a gravity flow, then the
gutters shall provide for proper drainage of the drain tile water
by means of a secondary drainage system, subject to the approval
of the Building Inspector. If no storm sewer exists, the Building
Inspector may require the builder to lead the drain tile from the
foundation drain and gutters into a nearby drainage course.
(99) Section 878.0 is added to read as follows:
878.0 Soundproofing: To prevent the transmission of noise
between living quarters for multiple-family units, provision shall
be made for soundproofing ceilings by installing drop ceilings with
insulation inserted between ceilings and the joists and for the
installation of insulation between party walls and for the provision
of offset studs between party walls. Insulation shall also be placed
completely around the inside of bathroom walls.
(100) Section 907.2 is changed and modified to read as follows:
907.2 Reinforced Concrete: The thickness of fire walls of
reinforced concrete shall be not less than eight inches, and such
walls shall be constructed in accordance with the American
Concrete Institute Code.
(101) Section 910.5 is added to read as follows:
§ 102-3 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 102-3
97:288
910.5 Fire-Resistant Ceilings and Walls: Ceilings of living
quarters located under living quarters shall be constructed of a
material with a minimum of one-hour fire resistance, also party
walls between adjacent multiple-family living quarters (where it is
not a masonry fire wall) shall be covered with a material having a
minimum of one-hour fire resistance.
(102) Section 928.11 is added to read as follows:
928.11 Reroofing: A maximum of two roof coverings, including
a new roof, will be permitted. In cases which have two or more
coverings, the excess coverings must be removed before applying
the new roof. Slate roofing must always be removed before
applying a new roof.
(103) Section 1009.0 is deleted in its entirety, including all subsections.
(104) Section 1102.0 is deleted in its entirety, including all subsections.
(105) Section 1102.4 is added to read as follows:
1102.4 All permits for installation of any gas appliance shall be
obtained from the Board of Health.
(106) Section 1103.4 is deleted.
(107) Section 1114.5 is added to read as follows:
1114.5 Basement Ceiling Protection: Where heating plants
are located in basements, the underside of floor beams over the
heating plant shall be covered with 100 square feet of one-hourfire-
resistant material. If the heating plant is located in a separate
compartment on the first floor, the entire wall and ceiling area
inside of the compartment shall be covered with one-hour-fireresistant
material.
(108) Section 1115.1 is changed and modified to read as follows:
1115.1 Enclosures: Except in one- and two-family dwellings and
as specifically required for industrial furnaces and accessory
equipment or for high-hazard uses in Article 4, all heating boilers
installed in a building or structure shall be located in a separate
room or compartment completely enclosed by floors, walls and
ceiling of the required fire resistance; but in no case shall the
enclosure of boiler rooms have less than two-hour fire resistance
for high-pressure boilers and not less than one-hour fire resistance
for low-pressure boilers.
(109) Section 1129.0 is deleted in its entirety, including all subsections.
(110) Section 1130.0 is deleted in its entirety, including all subsections.
(111) Section 1131.0 is deleted in its entirety, including all subsections.
§ 102-3 BINGO AND RAFFLES § 102-3
97:289
(112) Section 1133.0 is deleted in its entirety, including all subsections.
(113) Section 1211.0 is deleted in its entirety, including all subsections.
(114) Section 1213.16 is deleted.
(115) Section 1213.17 is deleted.
(116) Section 1213.20 is added to read as follows:
1213.20 Automatic Sprinkler Systems: All buildings 6,000
square feet or more shall be equipped with automatic sprinkler
systems.
(117) Section 1308.21 is changed and modified to read as follows:
1308.21 Deep Excavations: Whenever an excavation is made to
a depth of more than eight feet below the established curb, the
person who causes such excavation to be made, if afforded the
necessary license to enter the adjoining premises, shall preserve
and protect from injury at all times and at his own expense such
adjoining structure or premises which may be affected by the
excavation. If the necessary license is not afforded, it shall then
be the duty of the owner of the adjoining premises to make his
building or structure safe by installing proper underpinning or
foundation or otherwise; and such owner, if it be necessary for the
prosecution of his work, shall be granted the necessary license
to enter the premises where the excavation or demolition is
contemplated.
(118) Section 1308.22 is changed and modified to read as follows:
1308.22 Shallow Excavations: Wherever an excavation is made
to a depth less than eight feet below the curb, the owner of a
neighboring building or structure, the safety of which may be
affected by the proposed excavation, shall preserve and protect
from injury and shall support his building or structure by the
necessary underpinning or foundations. If necessary for that
purpose, he shall be afforded a license to enter the premises
where the excavation is contemplated.
(119) Section 1403.0 is deleted in its entirety, including all subsections.
(120) Section 1408.0 is deleted in its entirety, including all subsections.
(121) Section 1409.0 is deleted in its entirety, including all subsections.
(122) Section 1507.0 is added to read as follows:
§ 102-3 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 102-3
97:290
1507.0 Metal Roofs, Metal Veneer and Metal Siding: Metal
roofs, metal veneer and metal siding on buildings shall be made
electrically continuous by bonding together each course when
applied horizontally, and each strip or panel when applied
vertically.
(123) Section 1507.1 is added to read as follows:
1507.1 Bonding of Horizontally-Applied Siding: Electrical
continuity between horizontally applied courses of metal siding
shall be assured by bonding each course at all inner and outer
corners with a conductor having no greater resistance than the
grounding conductor used for grounding the electrical system
in the building on which such siding is applied. All conductors
grounding such siding shall be joined together and attached in an
approved manner to the same grounding electrode used to ground
the electrical system in the building.
(124) Section 1507.11 is added to read as follows:
1507.11 Electrical Grounding of Metal Roofs: Whenever,
because of hazard resulting from electrical equipment or
apparatus located thereon or because of proximity to power lines
or for any other reason, it is deemed necessary by the Building
Inspector, metal roofs shall be grounded by bonding together each
course or strip at the outer edge of such roofing, and the bonding
conductor or conductors shall be extended to and attached in an
approved manner to the grounding electrode used to ground the
electrical system within the building on which such metal roofing
is applied. The conductors used to bond courses or strips of metal
roofing together, or any conductor extended for grounding to the
grounding electrode, shall not have a greater resistance than
the conductor used to ground the electrical system within the
building.
(125) Section 1507.12 is added to read as follows:
1507.12 Bonding of Vertically-Applied Siding: Verticallyapplied
metal siding shall be bonded together at the lower edge of
each strip or panel. The bonding conductor shall have no greater
resistance than the conductor used to ground the electrical system
within the building on which such metal siding is applied and
shall be extended to and attached in an approved manner to the
grounding electrode used to ground the electrical system within
the building.
(126) Section 1507.13 is added to read as follows:
§ 102-3 BINGO AND RAFFLES § 102-3
97:291
§ 102-4. Carbon monoxide and smoke detectors. [Added 9-8-1997
by Ord. No. 97-490]
1507.13 Grounding of Nonwired Building: In cases where
metal roofing, metal veneer or metal siding are to be applied on
a building with no electrical wiring system, grounding shall be
by one of the methods outlined in Article 250 of the National
Electrical Code, if deemed necessary by the Building Inspector.
Whether a building is or is not wired, no grounding of metal
roofing, metal veneer or metal siding shall be concealed until the
installation has first been inspected and approved by the Building
Inspector.
(127) Section 1507.14 is added to read as follows:
1507.14 Alternate Methods of Grounding: Alternate methods
of grounding metal roofing, metal veneer or metal siding may
be used, provided that they are at least equal to the method
prescribed herein, and further provided that such desired method
is first submitted to and approved by the Building Inspector.
(128) Section 1508.0 is added to read as follows:
1508.0 Electrical Inspections: Whenever any electrical
inspections are required under any provisions of this code, such
inspections shall be made by the Middle Department Association
of Fire Underwriters. All applications for inspections and approval
of electrical work shall be made to said Middle Department
Association of Fire Underwriters at the cost of the applicant. Any
reference in this code to Building Officer or Building Inspector,
when such reference relates to any electrical inspection or
approval, shall be deemed to mean the Middle Department
Association of Fire Underwriters.
(129) Article 17 is deleted in its entirety.
A. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
CARBON MONOXIDE DETECTOR — A device which senses and detects
the presence of the carbon monoxide (CO) in a dwelling and which,
when activated, provides an alarm sufficiently audible to warn
occupants in the dwelling. A carbon monoxide detector device shall
bear a seal evidencing that such device has been tested and listed by
a product certification agency or an approved nationally recognized
testing laboratory which is recognized by the New Jersey Division of
Codes and Standards. The unit shall be the type that is either hardwired
or plugs into household electrical outlet type.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room, or group rooms located within a
dwelling and forming a single habitable unit which includes facilities
for living, sleeping, cooking, eating, bathing and toilet purposes.
§ 102-3 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 102-4
97:292
SMOKE DETECTOR — A device which senses and detects visible or
invisible smoke particles or combustion and which, when activated,
provides an alarm sufficiently audible to warn the occupants within
the dwelling. Any such smoke detector shall bear the seal evidencing
that such device has been tested by an approved nationally recognized
testing laboratory and shall comply in design to all state and federal
requirements. If such smoke detector device is electrically operated
(hard-wired), then such device shall be installed in conformity with the
National Electric Code and shall comply with all provisions of the New
Jersey Uniform Construction Code.
B. Required installation. Every dwelling unit in a one- or two-family use
(R-3 or R-4 Use Groups) within the Township shall be equipped with a
minimum of one carbon monoxide detector device which shall be
installed in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications. It shall
be the responsibility of the owner of such dwelling unit to install carbon
monoxide detectors in accordance with this chapter.
Every dwelling unit in a residential use (R-2, R-3 or R-4) shall be
equipped with a minimum of one approved smoke detector on each
story or level, including basement and attic levels. In addition, twofamilies
or more shall require a hard-wire operated smoke detector in
the common hallway area of each story or level. Such smoke detectors
whether battery operated or hard-wire shall be installed in accordance
with the manufacturer's specifications. It shall be the responsibility
of the owner of each dwelling unit to install the smoke detectors in
accordance with this chapter.
An owner who sells, leases, rents or otherwise permits to be occupied
for residential purposes any premises shall be subject to the provisions
of this Code.
C. Maintenance. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of each dwelling
unit to maintain the carbon monoxide detectors and smoke detectors
required by this chapter in proper working order, except that it shall be
the responsibility of the tenant who occupies a dwelling unit to maintain
and replace batteries in all battery operated smoke detectors located
within the tenant's dwelling unit.
D. Inspection. An inspection shall be performed upon the resale of the
property and/or change in tenant. An inspection fee shall be paid to the
Township of Cedar Grove Construction Code Enforcement Office. The
fee shall be $25.
E. Violation. Failure to comply with this Code shall be a punishable fine of
not more than $500 per day and each day that the violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 102-4 BINGO AND RAFFLES § 102-4
97:293
Chapter 105
BUILDINGS, UNFIT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 100.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 119.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 137.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 146.
Gas piping and appliances — See Ch. 150.
Housing standards — See Ch. 158.
Littering — See Ch. 168.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 179.
Property maintenance — See Chs. 197 and
198.
Wells, cisterns and holes — See Ch. 265.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Control of unfit buildings — See N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.3 et seq.
§ 105-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING — Any building or structure or part thereof, whether used
for human habitation or otherwise, and includes any outhouses, and
appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith.
OWNER — The holder or holders of the title in fee simple.
PARTIES IN INTEREST — All individuals, associations and corporations
who have interests of record in a building and any who are in actual
possession thereof.
PUBLIC AUTHORITY — Any housing authority or any officer who is in
charge of any department or branch of the government of the Township,
county or state relating to health, fire, building regulations or to other
activities concerning buildings in the Township.
PUBLIC OFFICER — The Building Inspector or such other employee as may
be hereafter designated by the Township Council, who is authorized by this
chapter to exercise the powers hereinafter prescribed for him.
§ 105-2. Declaration of public necessity.
It has been found and declared by resolution adopted on November 20,
1961, that there exists in the Township a building or buildings, or parts
thereof, which are unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use, due
to dilapidation; defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other
calamities; lack of ventilation, light or sanitation facilities; or due to other
§ 102-4 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 105-2
105:294
conditions rendering such building or buildings, or part thereof, unsafe or
unsanitary or dangerous or detrimental to the health or safety or otherwise
inimical to the welfare of the residents of the Township. It is therefore
necessary to exercise the police powers of the Township to repair, close or
demolish or cause or require the repairing, closing or demolition of such
building or buildings, or parts thereof, in the manner provided pursuant to
the statute applicable thereto.
§ 105-3. Designation of enforcement officer.
The Building Inspector is hereby designated and appointed as the public
officer to exercise the powers prescribed by this chapter. The Council may,
by resolution from time to time at its discretion, transfer to some other
Township employee or employees the duties and functions of such public
officer.
§ 105-4. Complaints; investigation; hearings.
Whenever a petition is filed with the public officer by a public authority or
by at least five residents of the Township charging that a building is unfit for
human habitation or occupancy or use or whenever it appears to the public
officer that any building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use,
the public officer shall make a preliminary investigation. If the investigation
discloses a basis for such charges, he shall issue and cause to be served
upon the owner and parties in interest of such building a complaint stating
the charges in that respect. The complaint shall also contain a notice that
a hearing will be held before the public officer or his designated agent at
a place therein fixed not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days after the
serving of said complaint. The notice shall state that the owner and parties
in interest have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in
person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the
complaint; and that the rules of evidence prevailing in the courts shall not
be controlling in hearings before the public officer. The complaint shall be
served in the manner provided in § 105-7 hereof.
§ 105-5. Determination; standards.
After the notice and hearing, the public officer may determine that the
building under consideration is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or
use, if he finds that conditions exist in such building which are dangerous
or injurious to the health or safety of the occupants of such building, the
occupants of neighboring buildings or other residents of the Township. Such
conditions may, among other things, include the following:
A. Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other
calamities.
B. Lack of adequate ventilation, toilet facilities and running water, light or
sanitary facilities.
C. Dilapidation, disrepair, structural defects or uncleanliness.
§ 105-2 BUILDINGS, UNFIT § 105-6
105:295
§ 105-6. Findings to be in writing; service of orders to remedy.
§ 105-7. Manner of serving complaints, notices and orders.
Complaints, notices and orders issued by the public officer pursuant to this
chapter shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered
mail. If the whereabouts of such persons are unknown and the same cannot
be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence,
and he shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the serving of such
complaint, notice or order upon such persons may be made by publishing
the same once each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper printed
and published in the Township or, in the absence of such newspaper, in one
printed and published in the county and circulating in the Township. A copy
of such complaint, notice or order shall be posted in a conspicuous place
on the premises affected by the complaint, notice or order. A copy of such
complaint, notice or order shall be duly recorded with the Register's office
of Essex County.
§ 105-8. Failure to comply.
A. If, after the notice and hearing, the public officer determines that the
building under consideration is unfit for human habitation or occupancy
or use, he shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of such
determination. He shall then issue and cause to be served upon the
owner thereof and parties in interest an order. The order shall require
the repair, alteration or improvement of the said building to be made by
the owner, within a reasonable time, which time shall be set forth in the
order, and it shall give the option to the owner to vacate or have the said
building vacated and closed within the time set forth in the order.
B. If the building is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the
health and safety of persons on or near the premises and the owner fails
to repair, alter or improve said building within the time specified in the
order described in Subsection A hereof, then the owner shall be
required by a further order to remove or demolish the said building
within a reasonable time as specified in the said order of removal.
C. The orders referred to in Subsections A and B of this section shall be
served upon the owner and parties in interest in the manner provided in
§ 105-7 hereof.
A. If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve or,
at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the building, the public
officer may cause such building to be repaired, altered or improved or
to be vacated and closed. The public officer may cause to be posted on
the main entrance to any building so closed a placard with the following
words, "This building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use;
the use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful."
B. If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the
building, the public officer may cause such building to be removed or
§ 105-6 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 105-8
105:296
§ 105-9. Assessment of costs; credit for sums received.
§ 105-10. Powers of enforcement officer.
The public officer is hereby authorized to exercise such powers as may
be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and
provisions of this chapter, including the following powers, in addition to
others herein granted:
demolished, or he may contract for the removal or demolition thereof
after advertisement for and receipt of bids therefor.
A. The amount of the cost of filing of legal papers, expert witnesses' fees,
search fees and advertising charges in the course of any proceeding
taken under this chapter determined in favor of the Township and such
repairs, alterations or improvements or vacating and closing or removal
or demolition, as the case may be, shall be a municipal lien against the
real property upon which such cost was incurred. If the building is
removed or demolished by the public officer, he shall sell the materials
of such building. The proceeds of any sale of such materials or any sum
derived from any contract for the removal or demolition of the building
shall be credited against the cost of the removal or demolition thereof.
If there are no such credits or if the total sum of such costs exceeds the
total of such credits, a detailed statement of the aforesaid costs and the
amount so due shall be filed as a lien certificate with the Township Tax
Assessor, and a copy thereof shall be sent forthwith to the owner by
registered mail.
B. If the total of the credits exceeds such costs, the balance remaining
shall be deposited by the public officer in the Superior Court of New
Jersey and shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by such
Court. The proceeds shall be disbursed according to the order or
judgment of such Court to the persons found entitled thereto by final
order or judgment of the Court. Any owner or party in interest may,
within 60 days from the date of the filing of the lien certificate, proceed
in a summary manner in the Superior Court of New Jersey to contest
the reasonableness of the amount or the accuracy of the costs set forth
in the lien certificate.
A. To investigate building conditions in the Township in order to determine
which buildings therein are unfit for human habitation or occupancy or
use.
B. To administer oaths and affirmations; and examine witnesses and
receive evidence.
C. To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations,
provided that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the
least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession.
§ 105-8 BUILDINGS, UNFIT § 105-10
105:297
§ 105-11. Appeals by persons aggrieved.
Any person aggrieved by an order issued by the public officer under this
chapter shall be entitled to the remedies prescribed by Chapter 112 of the
Laws of 1942, as amended by Chapters 37 and 428 of the Laws of 1953
(N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.8).
§ 105-12. Appropriations for enforcement.
The Township Manager shall prepare an estimate of the annual expenses
or costs to provide the equipment, personnel and supplies necessary for
periodic examinations and investigations of the buildings in the Township
for the purpose of determining the fitness of such buildings for human
habitation or occupancy or use and for the enforcement and administration
of this chapter, and submit same to the Council. The Council shall make
such appropriations from its revenues as it may deem necessary, for the
purposes of this chapter. The Council may accept and apply grants or
donations to assist it in carrying out the provisions of this chapter.
§ 105-13. Other remedies not excluded.
This chapter shall not be construed to impair or limit in any way the power
of the Township to define and declare public nuisances and to cause their
removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise.
§ 105-14. Enforcement of other provisions not affected.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers
of any department of the Township to enforce any provisions of its charter
or its ordinances or regulations or to prevent or punish violations thereof.
Chapter 107
BURNING, OUTDOOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 23.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 100.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 137.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 146.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 179.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Municipal regulations authorized — See
N.J.S.A. 26:2C-22.
D. To delegate any of his functions and powers under this chapter to such
assistants and other employees as he may require in the performance of
his duties.
§ 105-10 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 105-14
107:298
§ 107-1. Open burning restricted.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit open burning of refuse or
plant life or conduct a salvage operation by open burning, except for the
limited purpose of outdoor cooking when done with equipment or fireplaces
designed for such purpose and in a manner not offensive to persons in the
vicinity thereof, or as hereinafter provided.
§ 107-2. Standards for issuance of permit for burning of trade
waste.
Where no other alternative means is available, trade waste may be disposed
of by open burning upon special permit issued by the Township Manager
after application made therefor and demonstration to the satisfaction of the
Township Manager that:
§ 107-3. Application procedure; conditions of permit.
The Township Manager shall, prior to issuing a special permit, obtain on
appropriate application forms information pertinent to the satisfaction of
the foregoing conditions. Any such special permit shall be temporary and
shall limit the burning as to character, quantity, time, place and conditions
of burning.
§ 107-4. Permits for special events by community organizations.
Special permits authorizing open air burning for special events conducted
by, for and under the supervision of public, charitable, religious or nonprofit
civic community organizations may be issued by the Township Manager
upon application showing the purpose, time, place, date and manner of
supervision and control, if the Township Manager is satisfied that no undue
or unnecessary air pollution will be caused thereby and that supervision and
control thereof is adequate to protect the public safety, health and welfare.
Prior approval by the Fire Division is required.
A. An affidavit has been filed with and approved by the Commissioner of
the New Jersey State Department of Health in accordance with Chapter
II, Section 1.4, of the New Jersey Air Pollution Control Code. Open
burning of plant life grown on the premises is not intended to be
covered by the requirement of this subsection.
B. Disposition can be made without danger to persons or property with
proper safeguards and supervision.
C. Disposition will be done in a manner, at such time and in such place, as
will minimize the possibility of air pollution.
D. The Fire Department of the Township has approved the application.
§ 105-14 BURNING, OUTDOOR § 107-5
107:299
§ 107-5. Fees. [Added 2-1-1971 by Ord. No. 70-15(a)]
The fee for each special permit under this chapter shall be $50.
§ 107-6. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AIR POLLUTION — The presence in the outdoor atmosphere of one or
more air contaminants in such quantities and duration as are or tend to be
injurious to human health or welfare, to animal or plant life or to property
or would unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property
throughout the Township as shall be affected thereby, and excludes all
aspects of employer-employee relationship as to health and safety hazards.
OPEN BURNING — Any fire wherein the products of combustion are
emitted into the open air and are not directed thereto through a stack.
PERSON — Includes corporations, companies, associations, societies, firms,
partnerships, joint companies and governmental units.
PLANT LIFE — A crop or growth of something planted or something
growing with roots in the ground.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible wastes, except body wastes,
and shall include but not be limited to garbage, rubbish, yard trimmings,
leaves, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and
solid market and industrial wastes.
TRADE WASTE — All solid or liquid material or rubbish resulting from
construction, building operations or the prosecution of any business, trade
or industry and shall include but not be limited to plastic products, cartons,
paint, grease, oil and other petroleum products, chemicals, cinders and
other forms of solid or liquid waste material.
§ 107-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-30-1984 by Ord. No.
84-222; 10-23-2006 by Ord. No. 06-656]
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000 or by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
§ 107-5 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 107-7
107:300
Chapter 110
CABLE TELEVISION
Chapter 114
CHECKS, FRAUDULENT
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Bad checks — See N.J.S.A. 2C:21-5. Adoption of police ordinances — See N.J.S.A.
40:69A-29.
§ 114-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CREDIT — An arrangement or understanding with the bank or depository
for the payment of the check, draft or order involved.
§ 114-2. Issuance of check with intent to defraud. [Amended
4-2-1973 by Ord. No. 73-7]
It shall be unlawful for any person, either for himself or as agent or
representative of another person, or as an officer or agent of any
corporation or as a member of a partnership, with intent to defraud, to
make, draw, utter or deliver any check, draft or order for the payment of
money in a sum not in excess of $200 upon any bank or other depository,
knowing at the time of so doing that the maker or drawer has no funds
or insufficient funds in or credit with such bank or other depository for
the payment in full of such instrument upon its presentation although no
express representation is made in reference thereto.
§ 114-3. Evidence of violation.
The making, drawing, uttering or delivering of a check, draft or order as
set forth in § 114-2 shall be prima facie evidence of intent to defraud,
and the certificate of protest of nonpayment of same shall be presumptive
evidence that there were no funds or insufficient funds in or credit with such
bank or other depository and that the person making, drawing, uttering
or delivering the instrument knew that there were no funds or insufficient
funds in or credit with such bank or other depository.
§ 107-7 CABLE TELEVISION § 114-4
110:301
§ 114-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-17-1962; 7-30-1984
by Ord. No. 84-222; 10-23-2006 by Ord. No. 06-656]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000 or by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days, or both.
Chapter 116
CHRISTMAS TREES, SALE AND STORAGE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Trees — See Ch. 246. Signs for Christmas trees sales — See Ch.
268, § 268-14.1E.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Adoption of police ordinances — See N.J.S.A.
40:69A-29.
§ 116-1. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to provide a procedure by which persons
may be allowed to sell and store Christmas trees and other cut evergreens
on a temporary basis during the pre-Christmas season and to provide for
adequate control over such temporary establishments in order to protect
the public health, safety and welfare and to make provision for proper
cleanup after the cessation of such temporary operation.
§ 116-2. License required.
No individual, partnership, corporation or other legal entity shall engage in
or carry on the business of sale or storage of cut evergreens on a temporary
basis without first obtaining a license for that purpose from the Township
Clerk. This chapter shall not apply to nursery and commercial greenhouse
uses. It is the intention of this chapter that licenses shall only be required
for the sale or storage of cut evergreens on a temporary basis on premises
which are not normally devoted to that use or a related type use.
§ 116-3. Applications for licenses.
All applications for licenses under this chapter shall be made in writing in
the form prescribed or approved by the Township Clerk. The application
form shall state the full name and address of the applicant and, if a
partnership, corporation or other legal entity, the names and addresses of
all partners, officers, directors and/or shareholders as may be applicable
to the particular legal entity; the address of the proposed use; a general
description of the limited area on the subject property that will be used for
§ 114-4 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 116-3
116:302
such business; the maximum number of trees proposed to be stored at any
one time and the location of such storage; a description of any and all other
articles proposed to be sold at the location; the name and address of the
owner of the property in question; the tax lot and block of the property;
and other provisions as the Township Clerk shall deem reasonable and
appropriate. Such application form shall be signed by the applicant and
consented to in writing by the owner of the property.
§ 116-4. Grounds for denial of application.
The Township Clerk may deny the application for any of the following
reasons:
§ 116-5. Fees. [Amended 10-21-1985 by Ord. No. 85-251]
The applicant shall, at the time of the filing of its application, pay a permit
fee of $100. In addition, upon issuance of a permit, the applicant shall
deposit with the Township Clerk the sum of $150 to guarantee the removal
and cleanup of any rubbish left on the property or in the vicinity thereof
after termination of the license. In the event that cleanup by the applicant
or the owner is not completed by January 1 of the year following the year the
license was issued, the applicant/licensee shall forfeit the deposit of $150,
and the applicant/licensee, as well as the property owner, shall be subject
to the penalty provisions of this chapter.
§ 116-6. Term and expiration of license.
No license shall be issued for a period longer than 61 days, and all licenses
shall expire on December 31 of the year in which issued.
§ 116-7. Location restrictions.
The temporary sale and storage of evergreens shall be restricted as follows:
A. The location and use of the property covered by the application does not
conform to all applicable ordinances of the Township, including this
chapter.
B. The applicant or property owner has failed to comply with the
provisions of this chapter in prior years.
C. The operation of said enterprise is likely to adversely affect the public
health, safety or welfare.
D. The proposed use on the property in question is likely to create a
nuisance to nearby property owners and/or tenants.
A. No trees or cut evergreens shall be stored within 50 feet of any frame
structure located on adjoining property not owned by the licensee or
property owner on which the sale or storage is being conducted.
B. No cut evergreens shall be placed upon any sidewalk.
§ 116-3 CHRISTMAS TREES, SALE AND STORAGE OF § 116-7
116:303
§ 116-8. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Township Clerk with reference
to the issuance or nonissuance of a license may appeal such decision to the
Township Council by notifying the Township Clerk of the intent to appeal
within 10 days of the applicant's receipt of the Township Clerk's decision.
The Township Council shall then schedule a hearing on such appeal within
30 days of receipt of the notice of appeal, at which time the applicant may
present evidence to establish the grounds for the appeal. Said appeal shall
be decided by a majority vote of the Council, and the decision shall be final.
§ 116-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-30-1984 by Ord. No.
84-222; 10-23-2006 by Ord. No. 06-656]
Any applicant or property owner who violates any provision of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000
or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate
C. No cut evergreens more than two feet high shall be placed upon that
portion of a corner lot which is closer to the intersection of the
bounding street lines than a straight line drawn between two points
measured 15 feet along each such street line from the intersection of
those two street lines.
D. No trees or cut evergreens shall be stored or sold on lots on which there
is a residential use as a principal, mixed or accessory use. [Added
10-21-1985 by Ord. No. 85-251]
E. The sale and storage of poinsettias as well as plants, trees or shrubs
other than evergreens and cut evergreens are not permitted by this
chapter. [Added 10-21-1985 by Ord. No. 85-251]
F. Off-street parking for at least five vehicles shall be maintained. [Added
10-21-1985 by Ord. No. 85-251]
G. Only one sign shall be permitted on the site and such sign shall not
exceed 10 square feet in area. No sign shall be of a type that flashes,
rotates or moves or one which incorporates moving components. Such
signs and all their supports shall be at least 10 feet from any building or
structure and 10 feet from any side or rear lot line, and shall be located
back from the street line a distance equal to not less than the height of
the top of the sign above the ground. [Added 10-21-1985 by Ord. No.
85-251]
H. The placement of a trailer and/or the installation of lights in connection
with the sale of Christmas trees shall require additional permits which
shall be applied for and secured from the Construction Code
Enforcement Office. Any trailer shall be placed or positioned a
minimum of 15 feet from the street line. [Added 4-21-2003 by Ord.
No. 03-593]
§ 116-7 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 116-9
116:304
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 117
CIGARETTES AND E-CIGARETTES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Youth Advisory Committee — See Ch. 75.
Curfew — See Ch. 122.
Parental supervision of minors — See Ch. 186.
Smoking — See Ch. 224.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Sale of cigarettes to minors — See N.J.S.A.
2C:33-13.1.
Sale of tobacco to persons under 18 — See
N.J.S.A. 2A:170-51.4.
§ 116-9 CHRISTMAS TREES, SALE AND STORAGE OF § 116-9
116:305

ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 117-1. Definitions; word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number shall include the singular number,
and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE — An electronic or other powered device
that can be used to deliver nicotine or other substances to the person
inhaling from the device, including but not limited to an electronic
cigarette, cigar, cigarillo or pipe, or any cartridge, refill or other component
of the device or related product, including but not limited to refills such as
liquids, gels, waxes and powders.
HEALTH DEPARTMENT — The Department of Health of the Township of
Cedar Grove.
HEALTH OFFICER — The Health Officer of the Township of Cedar Grove or
his/her designee.
LICENSE — Any license issued by the Township including, but not limited
to, a liquor license, a license to sell or distribute food and beverages, or a
license to permit vending machines and/or mechanical amusement devices.
LICENSE YEAR — The time period covering January 1 through December
31 of the year for which a license is issued pursuant to this chapter.
LIQUOR LICENSE — Any license to sell or distribute alcoholic beverages
issued by the Township pursuant to the laws of the State of New Jersey.
MINOR — Any male or female under the age of 18 years of age.
NICOTINE DELIVERY PRODUCT — Any product that is designed to deliver
nicotine, nicotine vapor or non-nicotine vapor, including but not limited to
any type of electronic smoking device defined as an electronic or other
powered device that can be used to deliver nicotine or other substances
to the person inhaling from the device, including but not limited to an
electronic cigarette, cigar, cigarillo or pipe, or any cartridge or other
component of the device or related product, including but not limited to
any substances used in such devices such as liquids, gels or powders,
or any forms of tobacco, but excluding United States Food and Drug
Administration approved nicotine patches or nicotine chewing gum.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, corporation, cooperative
association, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee or any
other legal entity.
§ 117-1 CHRISTMAS TREES, SALE AND STORAGE OF § 117-1
116:307
PUBLIC PLACE — Any building or enclosed structure open to the general
public and any street, road, sidewalk, walkway, park or open space located
within the Township and maintained for use by the general public.
RETAIL ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE ESTABLISHMENT — Any
establishment that sells, distributes, gives or offers for sale electronic
smoking devices designed for consumption through inhalation.
SALE — Every delivery of electronic smoking devices, whether the same
is by direct sale or the solicitation or acceptance of an order, including
the exchange, barter, traffic in, keeping and exposing for sale, displaying
for sale, delivering for value, peddling and possession with intent to sell,
distribute or give.
TOBACCO — Any product made from the tobacco plant for the purpose
of including but not limited to smoking, chewing, inhaling or other use,
including but not limited to cigars, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff,
shisha and cigarettes in any form, or shall mean any other matter or
substance which can be smoked.
TOBACCO RETAILER — Any person that operates a store, stand, booth,
concession or place at which sales of tobacco are made including a person
that owns, operates or uses a vending machine.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Cedar Grove.
VENDING MACHINE — Any automated self-service device which, upon
insertion of money, tokens or other form of payment, dispenses a tobacco
product or nicotine delivery product.
§ 117-1 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 117-1
116:308
ARTICLE II
Age of Sale for Tobacco and Nicotine Delivery Products
§ 117-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit the sale, furnishing or giving
of tobacco and nicotine delivery products to persons under the age of 21.
The Township of Cedar Grove recognizes the dangers and health risks
associated with teenagers and young persons who start smoking, as set
forth in various studies conducted by the United States Department of
Health and surveys conducted by other entities. The Township of Cedar
Grove has concluded that it is appropriate to prohibit the sale, furnishing
or giving of tobacco and nicotine delivery products within the Township of
Cedar Grove to persons under the age of 21.
§ 117-3. Findings.
The Township Council adopts the following findings with respect to this
article:
A. Cigarette smoking causes about one out of every five deaths in the
United States every year (Centers of Disease Control and Prevention,
2014).
B. Ninety percent of all tobacco users start before the age of 21
(Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids, 2015).
C. Every day, more than 1,200 people in this country die due to smoking
(United States Surgeon General, 2016).
D. The younger a child begins smoking, the more likely it is that he/she will
become a heavy smoker as an adult (Surgeon General's Report, 1994).
E. As of 2015, the American Academy of Pediatrics strongly recommends
the minimum age to purchase tobacco products, including e-cigarettes,
be increased to age 21.
F. Raising the minimum age of legal access to tobacco products to at least
21 years old would significantly reduce smoking rates, resulting in
223,000 fewer premature deaths, 50,000 fewer deaths from lung
cancer, and 4.2 million fewer years of life lost for persons born between
2000 and 2019 (Institute of Medicine, 2015).
G. Seventy-five percent of United States adults support raising the age of
tobacco product sales to age 21 (United States Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, 2015).
H. Teens that use e-cigarettes have a willingness to start smoking
conventional cigarettes, more so than teens that do not use e-cigarettes
(Tobacco Control Journal, 2015).
I. E-cigarette use amongst high school students has tripled from 2013 to
2014 (Center for Disease Control, 2015).
§ 117-2 CHRISTMAS TREES, SALE AND STORAGE OF § 117-4
116:309
§ 117-4. Prohibition of tobacco product and nicotine delivery
product sales to persons under age 21.
§ 117-5. Identification required.
Any retailer, employee or other person selling, distributing or giving
tobacco or nicotine delivery products shall verify, by means of governmentissued
photograph identification containing the bearer's date of birth, that
no purchaser of tobacco or nicotine containing products is younger than 21
years of age. No such verification is required for any purchaser over the
age of 26. No retailer, employee or other person shall sell, distribute or give
tobacco or nicotine delivery products to a purchaser less than 21 years of
age who has a note or any form of communication from any person.
§ 117-6. Sign requirement.
The following six-inch-by-eight-inch sign shall be posted in a conspicuous
place near each cash register in all retail establishments which sell tobacco
products and/or nicotine delivery products:
A. No person shall sell, distribute or give tobacco or nicotine delivery
products in the Township of Cedar Grove unless an employee of the
establishment controls the sale of such products. A person may only sell
tobacco or nicotine delivery products in a direct, face-to-face exchange
between the retailer and the consumer. Self-service displays and all
vending machines of tobacco or nicotine delivery products shall be
prohibited.
B. No person shall sell, distribute, or give tobacco or nicotine delivery
products to any person under the age of 21 years.
C. No person or tobacco retailer selling tobacco or nicotine delivery
products shall allow the retailer, employee or any other person to sell,
distribute or give such products until the retailer, employee or other
person has read the Cedar Grove ordinances and state laws pertaining
to the sale or distribution of tobacco and nicotine delivery products and
has signed a statement that they have read such ordinances and state
laws. Such form statement will be supplied by the Health Department
and all signed original statements shall be kept on file by the tobacco
retailer and made immediately available at all times for review by the
Health Department. All retailers shall be in compliance with this
provision by the effective date noted in § 117-16.
§ 117-4 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 117-6
116:310
SALE, DISTRIBUTION OR GIVING OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS OR
NICOTINE DELIVERY PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF 21
IS PROHIBITED BY LAW. LEGAL PROOF OF AGE MUST BE SHOWN. A
PERSON WHO SELLS OR OFFERS TO SELL A TOBACCO PRODUCT OR A
NICOTINE DELIVERY PRODUCT TO A PERSON UNDER 21 YEARS OF
AGE MAY BE PROSECUTED IN ACCORDANCE WITH STATE STATUTES
AND THE TOWNSHIP OF CEDAR GROVE ORDINANCES. IF YOU ARE
AWARE OF ANY RETAILER WHO IS VIOLATING THIS SECTION OF THE
LAW, PLEASE CONTACT THE CEDAR GROVE HEALTH DEPARTMENT AT
(973) 239-1410, EXT. 224.
§ 117-7. Restriction of tobacco vending machines and sales.
Self-service displays and vending machines of tobacco or nicotine delivery
products shall be prohibited.
§ 117-8. Enforcement.
A. Whenever the Health Officer, or his or her designee, or a Police Officer
of the Township of Cedar Grove reasonably believes there exists a
violation of this article, such officer shall issue a summons and
complaint not later than 15 days after discovery of the alleged violation.
The complaint shall be written and shall state with reasonable
particularity the nature of the violation, including reference to the
section(s) of this article alleged to have been violated. The complaint
shall be delivered personally or sent via certified mail to the alleged
violator.
B. The Health Officer, his/her designee or a Police Officer of the Township,
after giving proper identification, and if no search or other warrant is
required by law, may summarily inspect any matter, thing, premises,
place, person, record, incident or event as necessary to enforce the
provisions of this article.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully oppose, or otherwise act
to interfere with or obstruct the Health Officer or his/her designee or
any Police Officer in the performance of duties under this article. The
Health Officer or designee may request the assistance of the Police
Department when necessary to execute his or her official duty in the
manner prescribed by law.
D. Citizens may bring complaints against violators of this article.
§ 117-6 CHRISTMAS TREES, SALE AND STORAGE OF § 117-8
116:311

ARTICLE III
E-Cigarette Licensing
§ 117-9. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to license establishments that sell electronic
smoking devices and related products. This license will help the Township
of Cedar Grove to ensure compliance with state law that bans the sale,
furnishing or giving of tobacco products and electronic smoking devices
to persons under age 19, with any local ordinance of the Township of
Cedar Grove that increases such minimum age, and with the 2016 state
law N.J.S.A. 2A:170-51.9 et seq. requiring child-resistant packaging of refills
for these devices. The funds collected by licensing of such establishments
shall be used to fund the development and maintenance of programs related
to tobacco cessation, prevention and control as may be established and/or
administered by the Cedar Grove Health Department.
§ 117-10. Licensing fees.
A. No person shall conduct, maintain or operate a retail electronic
smoking device establishment that sells, distributes or gives electronic
smoking devices without first obtaining from the Cedar Grove Health
Department a written license approved to do so.
B. Fees in accordance with the following schedule shall be paid before any
license required in this article shall be issued:
(1) Electronic smoking device establishment license: $750.
(2) The fee for each initial license per retail location issued to a
licensee pursuant to this section shall be an amount proportionate
to the number of months remaining in the license year including
the month in which the license is issued [for example, a license
issued to a new licensee in February shall be one third of $750
($250)].
C. Licenses issued under the provisions of this article, unless forfeited or
revoked by the Cedar Grove Health Department, shall expire annually
on the 31st day of December of each year. In order to continue selling
electronic smoking devices in the next license year, the retail electronic
smoking device establishment shall apply for a renewal of its license for
each retail location at least 90 days prior to expiration of the current
license year, and the annual license renewal fee is $750 per retail
electronic smoking device establishment location.
D. At the time of the initial application and any subsequent renewals, or at
the discretion of the local Health Department, license holders shall:
(1) Disclose if they are also a manufacturer, wholesaler and distributor
of nicotine electronic smoking devices as defined above (which
includes related products, components, refills, etc.), and if that part
of their business is conducted or takes place at the same location as
§ 117-9 CHRISTMAS TREES, SALE AND STORAGE OF § 117-10
116:313
§ 117-11. Sale requirements.
the retail electronic smoking device establishment or another
location(s) as noted in the initial application or subsequent
renewals. If such business takes place at a different address(es)
in the Township of Cedar Grove, the said retail electronic smoking
device establishment shall disclose such address(es) in the
Township of Cedar Grove.
(2) Provide any and all contact information, including but not limited to
company name, company contact name, address, phone, website
and email, regarding any and all sources of their nicotine delivery
products for sale or distribution. This includes but is not limited to
information regarding any and all nicotine delivery product
suppliers, manufacturers, wholesalers, distributors, etc., including
those based in the Township of Cedar Grove.
E. No license is transferrable by sale or otherwise.
F. Such license shall be posted in a conspicuous place in such
establishment. No itinerant establishments shall be permitted to obtain
an electronic smoking device establishment license.
G. All licensing fees shall be paid to the Township of Cedar Grove to offset
budget appropriations in connection with education and enforcement of
this chapter and/or the state's Tobacco Age of Sale Inspection Program.
A. No person shall sell, distribute or give electronic smoking devices in the
Township of Cedar Grove unless an employee of the establishment
controls the sale of such products. A person may only sell electronic
smoking devices in a direct, face-to-face exchange between the retailer
and the consumer. Self-service displays and vending machines of
electronic smoking devices shall be prohibited.
B. No person shall sell, distribute, or give electronic smoking devices to
any person under the age of 21 years.
C. No retail electronic smoking device establishment shall allow the
retailer, employee or any other person to sell, distribute or give such
products until the retailer, employee or other person has read the Cedar
Grove Ordinances and state laws pertaining to the sale of electronic
smoking devices and has signed a statement that he/she has read such
ordinances and state laws. Such form statement will be supplied by the
Cedar Grove Health Department and all signed original statements
shall be kept on file by the retail electronic smoking device
establishment and made immediately available at all times for review
by the Cedar Grove Health Department. All retail electronic smoking
device establishments shall be in compliance with this provision by the
effective date noted in § 117-16.
D. The sale of any electronic smoking device refill, including but not
limited to any and all liquids, gels, wax or powders, and whether or not
§ 117-10 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 117-11
116:314
§ 117-12. Enforcement.
§ 117-13. Violations and penalties.
such refill contains nicotine, that is intended for human consumption
and is not contained in packaging that is child-resistant is prohibited as
set forth in N.J.S.A. 2A:170-51.9 et seq.
E. License holders can only do in-person marketing and sales of electronic
smoking devices at their retail electronic smoking device
establishment. There shall be no cross marketing or sales at
nonregistered retail locations and mobile locations, including but not
limited to street fairs, local fairs, festivals, etc.
A. This article shall be enforced by the Cedar Grove Health Department
and/or other municipal officials of the Township of Cedar Grove.
B. Any person found to be in violation of this article shall be ordered to
cease the sale of electronic smoking devices immediately.
A. Unless otherwise provided by law, statute or ordinance, any person(s)
who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof, pay a fine of not less than $250 for the first
violation, not less than $500 for the second violation, and not less than
$1,000 for third and each subsequent violation. Each violation, and
every day in which a violation occurs, shall constitute a separate
violation. No fines shall be issued for 60 days after publication of this
chapter.
B. In addition any violator of this article shall be subject to having any
Township license held by the violator suspended, revoked or fined. No
such action may be taken unless the requirements of due process are
satisfied.
C. These penalties are in addition to any penalties that may be imposed
including but not limited to penalties imposed by the New Jersey Code
of Juvenile Justice, N.J.S.A. 2A:170-51 et seq.60 and 2C:33-13.1 et seq.
D. Fines and sanctions associated with this section shall be dedicated and
forwarded to the Cedar Grove Health Department to be used in
connection with education and enforcement of this chapter. The monies
shall be maintained by the Chief Financial Officer of the Township of
Cedar Grove.
E. Any person who continually violates Article II may also be charged in
the Municipal Court or in Superior Court with maintaining a nuisance.
F. Each sale, furnishing or giving of tobacco and/or nicotine delivery
product to any person under the age of 21 shall constitute a separate
60.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 2A:170-51 was repealed by L. 1999, c. 90, § 19, effective 5-3-1999.
§ 117-11 CHRISTMAS TREES, SALE AND STORAGE OF § 117-13
116:315
§ 117-14. Severability.
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this chapter is
declared to be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and
phrase. If any portion of this chapter, or its application to any person or
circumstances, shall be adjudged or otherwise determined to be invalid,
unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any clause or reason, such
determination shall not affect the remaining provisions of this chapter, and
the application of such remaining provisions shall not be affected thereby
and shall remain in full force and effect, and to this end, the provisions of
this chapter are severable.
§ 117-15. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances contrary to or inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict
or inconsistency.
§ 117-16. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon final passage, adoption, and publication
in the manner prescribed by law.
violation. Each violation, and every day in which a violation occurs,
shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 117-13 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 117-16
116:316
Chapter 118
CHARITABLE CLOTHING BINS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garage sales — See Ch. 188, Art. VII. Dumpsters — See Ch. 197, Art. II.
§ 118-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.60 et seq. a set of criteria for granting of permits to place and
to regulate charitable clothing bins within the Township of Cedar Grove
("Township").
§ 118-2. Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
CHARITABLE CLOTHING BIN — A container which a person, organization,
or other entity intends to place on either Township of Cedar Grove or
private property to collect clothing and other charitable donations and that
will remain where placed for a period of time granted pursuant to the
permitting procedures described below.
SOLICITATION or SOLICIT — The request, directly or indirectly, of money,
credit, property, financial assistance, or other thing of any kind or value.
Solicitation shall include, but not be limited to, the use or employment of
canisters, cards, receptacles or similar devices for the collection of money
or other thing of value. A solicitation shall take place whether or not the
person making the solicitation receives any contribution.
§ 118-3. Permit process.
A. Applications to obtain a permit to place, use or employ a charitable
clothing bin in the Township of Cedar Grove shall be submitted to the
Township Building Department.
B. The Township Zoning Department shall review the permit application in
consultation with the Township Building Department, Fire Department,
Police Department, and/or any other Township Department when
necessary to determine if the application is compliant with the criteria
required by this chapter.
C. If an application is deemed to be sufficient by the Township Zoning
Officer, the Township Building Department shall contact the applicant
to inform the applicant that a permit will be issued, when the permit
will be issued and any other relevant information as deemed necessary
by the Zoning Officer.
§ 117-16 CHRISTMAS TREES, SALE AND STORAGE OF § 118-3
116:317
D. If an application is deemed to be insufficient or unapprovable, the
Township Zoning Officer shall draft a written response detailing the
inadequacies of the application and or the grounds for why the
application cannot be approved. The Zoning Officer shall then contact
the applicant and inform the applicant that the application has been
denied and that a written explanation can be picked up at the Township
Building Department:
(1) The Township Building Department shall not grant an application
for a permit to place, use, or employ a donation clothing bin if it
determines that the placement of the bin could constitute a safety
hazard. Such hazards shall include, but not be limited to, the
placement of a donation clothing bin within 100 yards of any place
which stores large amounts of, or sells, fuel or other flammable
liquids or gases.
E. An application fee of $25 must be submitted with each permit
application.
F. The permit shall be valid for a period of one year from the date on which
the applicant receives the permit.
G. An expired permit may be renewed upon written request to the
Township Building Department. The criteria for a renewal application is
provided at § 118-5.
H. If a permit is granted, the following pieces of information must be
conspicuously displayed on the exterior of the donation clothing bin:
(1) The permit number and expiration date;
(2) The information provided pursuant to § 118-4C of this chapter;
(3) The name and address of the registered person that owns the bin,
and of any other entity which may share or profit from any clothing
or other donations collected via the bin;
(4) The telephone number of the person's bona fide office and, if
applicable, the telephone number of the bona fide office of any
other entity which may share or profit from any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin;
(5) In cases when an entity other than the person who owns the bin
may share or profit from any clothing or other donations collected
via the bin, a notice, written in a clear and easily understandable
manner, indicating that clothing or other donations collected via
the bin, their proceeds, or both, may be shared, or given entirely to,
an entity other than the person who owns the bin, and identifying
all such entities which may share or profit from such donations; and
(6) A statement, consistent with the information provided to the
Township Building Department in the most recent permit or
renewal application pursuant to § 118-4B and § 118-5C indicating
§ 118-3 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 118-3
116:318
§ 118-4. Permit criteria.
A charitable clothing bin permit application must include the following
information:
§ 118-5. Permit renewal criteria.
the manner in which the applicant anticipates any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin would be used, sold, or dispersed,
and the method by which the proceeds of collected donations would
be allocated or spent.
A. The name, address and phone number of the applicant;
B. The manner in which the person anticipates any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin would be used, sold, or dispersed, and
the method by which the proceeds of collected donations would be
allocated or spent;
C. The name and telephone number of the bona fide office required
pursuant to Subsection D of this section, of any entity which may share
or profit from any clothing or other donations collected via the bin;
D. The name of any and all person(s), and any other entity which may
share or profit from any clothing or other donations collected via the
bin, which maintains a bona fide office where a representative of the
person or other entity, respectively, can be reached at a telephone
information line during normal business hours for the purpose of
offering information concerning the person or other entity. For the
purposes of this subsection, an answering machine or service unrelated
to the person does not constitute a bona fide office;
E. The location where the bin would be placed, as precisely as possible;
F. The length of time the applicant requests the permit be granted for; and
G. If the bin will be placed on private property, written consent from the
property owner.
A. The location where the bin is situated, as precisely as possible, and, if
the person intends to move it, the new location where the bin would be
situated after the renewal is granted;
B. If the bin is on or will be moved to private property, written consent
from the property owner;
C. The manner in which the person has used, sold, or dispersed any
clothing or other donations collected via the bin, the method by which
the proceeds of collected donations have been allocated or spent, and
any changes the person anticipates it may make in these processes
during the period covered by the renewal; and
§ 118-3 CHRISTMAS TREES, SALE AND STORAGE OF § 118-5
116:319
§ 118-6. Receipt and investigation of complaints; seizure of bin;
removal costs.
§ 118-7. Violations and penalties; remedies.
In addition to any other penalties or remedies authorized by the Township
Code or other laws of this state, any person who violates any provision of
this chapter or N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60 et seq. which results in seizure of the
donation clothing bin shall be:
D. The name, and telephone number of the bona fide office required
pursuant to § 118-4D of this Chapter, of any entity which shared or
profited from any clothing or other donations collected via the bin, and
of any entities which may do so during the period covered by the
renewal.
A. The Township Clerk's office shall receive and investigate, within 30
days, any complaints from the public concerning charitable clothing
bins.
B. Whenever it appears to the Clerk or the Clerk's designate that a person
has engaged in, or is engaging in any act or practice in violation of this
chapter or N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.61, the person who placed the bin shall be
issued a warning, stating that if the violation is not rectified or a
hearing with the appropriate municipal agency is not requested within
45 days, the bin will be seized or removed at the expense of the person
who placed the bin, and any clothing or other donations collected via
the bin will be sold at public auction or otherwise disposed of. In
addition to any other means used to notify the person who placed the
bin, such warning shall be affixed to the exterior of the bin itself.
C. In the event that the person who placed the bin does not rectify the
violation or request a hearing within 45 days of the posting of the
warning, the appropriate municipal agency may seize the bin, remove
it, or have it removed; at the expense of the person who placed the bin,
and sell at public auction or otherwise dispose of any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin. Any proceeds from the sale of the
donations collected via the bin shall be absorbed by the Township
Treasury.
A. Subject to a penalty of up to $20,000 for each violation. The appropriate
municipal agency may bring this action in the municipal court or
Superior Court as a summary proceeding under the "Penalty
Enforcement Law of 1999," N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et seq., and any penalty
monies collected shall be absorbed by the Township Treasury; and
B. Deemed ineligible to place, use, or employ a donation clothing bin for
solicitation purposes pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.61 et seq. A person
disqualified from placing, using, or employing a donation clothing bin
by violating the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60 et seq. may apply to
the appropriate municipal agency to have that person's eligibility
§ 118-5 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 118-7
116:320
Chapter 119
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 3.
Building construction — See Ch. 102.
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 105.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 137.
Gas piping and appliances — See Ch. 150.
Housing standards — See Ch. 158.
Hydrants and sprinklers — See Ch. 161.
Plumbing — See Ch. 194.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Enforcement of State Uniform Construction
Code — See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-126 et seq.
§ 119-1. Enforcement agency established; composition.
restored. The appropriate municipal agency may restore the eligibility
of a person who:
(1) Acts within the public interest; and
(2) Demonstrates that he made a good faith effort to comply with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60 et seq. and all other applicable
laws and regulations, or had no fraudulent intentions.
A. There is hereby established in the Township of Cedar Grove a State
Uniform Construction Code enforcing agency to be known as the
"Cedar Grove Construction Inspection Agency," consisting of a
Construction Official, Building Subcode Official, Plumbing Subcode
Official, Electrical Subcode Official, Fire Protection Subcode Official
and such other subcode officials for such additional subcodes as the
Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs, State of New
Jersey, shall hereafter adopt as part of the State Uniform Construction
Code. The Construction Official shall be the chief administrator of the
enforcing agency.
B. Each official position created in Subsection A hereof shall be filled by a
person qualified for such position pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217,61 as
amended, and N.J.A.C. 5:23 and appointed by the Township Manager,
provided that, in lieu of any particular subcode official, an on-site
inspection agency may be retained by contract pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:23. More than one such official position may be held by the same
person, provided that such person is qualified pursuant to P.L. 1975, c.
217,62 and N.J.A.C. 5:23 to hold each such position.
61.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 118-7 CHRISTMAS TREES, SALE AND STORAGE OF § 119-1
116:321
§ 119-2. Construction Board of Appeals.
C. The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency
at one location, except for emergencies and unforeseen or unavoidable
circumstances.
A. There is hereby established a Construction Board of Appeals to hear
appeals from decisions by the enforcing agency. Such Board shall
consist of five members. At least one Board member shall be a
registered architect or licensed professional engineer of building
construction experience, and at least one Board member shall be as
qualified as a Plumbing Subcode Official and one as qualified as an
Electrical Subcode Official. No more than two Board members shall be
selected from the same business or profession. Each Board member
shall have had at least three years' experience in construction, design
or supervision as a licensed engineer or registered architect; or, in the
alternative, five years' experience in construction, design or supervision
as an architect or engineer with a bachelor's degree in architecture or
engineering, respectively, from an accredited institution of higher
education; or, as a further alternative, 10 years' experience in
construction, design or supervision as a journeyman in a construction
trade or as a construction contractor, subcontractor or inspector.
B. The Township Council shall appoint the Board members and any
alternate members. For the members first appointed, the Township
Council shall designate the appointee's terms so that one shall be
appointed for a term of one year, one for a term of two years, one for a
term of three years, and two for a term of four years. At the expiration
of such terms and thereafter, appointments shall be made for terms of
four years. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term.
C. Members of the Board may be removed for cause by the appointing
authority. Notice of the proposed removal and the reasons therefor shall
be provided in writing to the affected Board member, who shall have an
opportunity to defend the charges in a private hearing before the
Council. [Added 5-16-1977 by Ord. No. 77-46]
D. The Township Council shall appoint such number of alternates as may
be appropriate for terms not to exceed four years or may, in the
alternative, appoint alternates on a case-by-case basis.
E. No regular or alternate Board member may be a member of the
enforcing agency, the decisions of which are subject to the review of the
Board.
F. Members of the Board shall be reimbursed their necessary expenses
incurred in the performance of their duties.
62.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 119-1 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 119-3
116:322
§ 119-3. Fees. [Amended 4-18-1977 by Ord. No. 77-42; 6-19-1978 by
Ord. No. 78-73; 8-19-1985 by Ord. No. 85-249; 11-7-1988 by Ord.
No. 88-326; 1-16-1989 by Ord. No. 88-334; 6-1-1998 by Ord. No.
98-497; 11-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-715]
A. Construction permit. The fee for a construction permit shall be the sum
of the subcode fees in Subsection B, C, D, E, and F hereof and shall be
paid before a permit is issued.
B. Building subcode fees. The building subcode fees shall be as follows.
(1) New construction.
(a) For new construction: $0.040 per cubic foot of the building or
structure volume, including the basement, attic and main
floors of Use Groups B, E, H-1, H-2, H-3, H-4, H-5, I-1, I-2, I-3,
I-4, M, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 and $0.030 per cubic foot of the
building or structure volume, including the basement, attic and
main floors of Use Groups A-1, A-2, A-3, A-4, A-5, F-1, F-2, S-1
and S-2.
(b) Basic fee for new construction.
[1] R-3, R-5 and U Use Groups: $50.
[2] All other use groups: $100.
(2) For renovations, alterations and repairs: $50 per $1,000 or part
thereof for the first $2,000 of the estimated cost of the work and
$25 per $1,000 or any part thereof in excess of $2,000. For a
combination of alterations and additions; the sum of the fees
computed separately as alterations and additions.
(3) For additions: computed the same way as new construction and
minimum fee of $50.
(4) For decks, porches, satellite dishes, communication tower, roofing,
central conditioning, fences six feet or over, sheds 100 square feet
or more and/or 10 feet in height and any other outdoor structures
shall be figured under the alteration fee. Sheds that are less than
100 square feet and less than 10 feet in height requiring a zoning
permit only. Any fence/barrier around swimming pools requires a
construction permit.
(5) Retaining walls:
(a) Retaining walls for R-3 and R-5:
[1] Wall surface less than 550 square feet: $50.
[2] Wall surface greater than 550 square feet: $75.
(b) In all other use groups, it shall be computed as an alteration.
§ 119-3 CHRISTMAS TREES, SALE AND STORAGE OF § 119-3
116:323
(6) For demolition fees for Use Group U-Utility shall be $25 and for all
use groups it shall be as follows:
(a) Less than 5,000 square feet of total area is $150.
(b) More than 5,000 square feet is $500.
(7) For removal or abandonment of any combustible or flammable
liquid storage tank, swimming pool, or septic tank there shall be
required a demolition permit. The fee shall be $75 per tank for Use
Group R-3/R-5. For all other use groups, the fee shall be $200 per
tank.
(8) For aboveground pools, the fee shall be $75. In-the-ground pools
shall be $150. Any other fees for pools that appear in other sections
of this Code book shall hereby be deleted.
(9) For signs and awnings with a logo and/or business name, the fee
shall be $6 per square foot of surface of sign exclusive of posts. In
case of the double-faced signs, one side shall be computed.
Replacement of any sign face which requires no increase to the
overall dimensions of said sign shall be $50 per sign.
(10) For asbestos abatement, the fee shall be $50 for Use Group R-3/
R-5. All other use groups shall be $100. A certificate of occupancy
shall be issued at the completion of the work.
(11) For radon remediation, the fee shall be $50.
(12) For lead hazard abatement, the fee shall be $50 for Use Group R-3.
All other use groups shall be $100. A lead abatement clearance
certificate shall be issued at the completion of the work. The
certificate fee shall be $25.
(13) For tents in excess of 900 square feet or more than 30 feet in any
dimension shall be $100.
(14) Moving a structure shall be computed the same as a new building.
Any Township costs such as police, fire and public works shall be
paid prior to the move by the applicant.
C. Electrical subcode fees. The electrical subcode fees shall be as follows:
(1) Outlets, fixtures, switches, receptacles, exit lights, emergency
lights, horns, strobes, communication devices, pull stations and
fractional horsepower motors shall be computed as follows:
(a) The fees shall be $55 for one to 25 outlets, etc.
(b) The fee for each additional 25 outlets, etc., shall be $10.
(2) Motors.
§ 119-3 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 119-3
116:324
(a) The fee for motors greater than one horsepower and less than
or equal to 10 horsepower is $50 when it stands alone. In
addition to any other device, it shall be $10 per unit.
(b) The fee for motors up to 50 horsepower is $75.
(c) The fee for motors up to 100 horsepower is $150.
(d) The fee for motors greater than 100 horsepower is $600.
(3) Electrical devices, transformers, generators:
(a) Greater than one kW and less than or equal to 10 kW is $50
when it stands alone. In addition to any other device, it shall be
$10.
(b) Greater than 10 kW and less than or equal to 50 kW is $75.
(c) Greater than 50 kW and less than or equal to 100 kW is $150.
(d) Greater than 100 kW is $600.
(4) Service panel, service entrance or subpanel:
(a) Less than or equal to 200 amps is $75.
(b) Greater than 200 amps and less than or equal to 1,000 amps is
$150.
(c) Greater than 1,000 amps is $600.
(5) Solar photovoltaic systems:
(a) One kW and less than or equal to 50 kW is $75.
(b) Fifty-one kW and less than or equal to 100 kW is $150.
(c) Greater than 100 kW is $600.
(6) Annunciation control panels: $50 per unit.
(7) Burglar alarm systems: $50 per unit.
(8) Pools:
(a) Aboveground pools: $50.
(b) In-ground pools: $100.
(c) Exterior spas or hot tubs: $50.
(9) Air-conditioner feeders, condenser, and disconnects: $50.
D. Fire subcode fees. The fire subcode fees shall be as follows:
(1) Smoke/heat detectors/pull stations:
§ 119-3 CHRISTMAS TREES, SALE AND STORAGE OF § 119-3
116:325
(a) One to five units shall be $50 and for each unit above five shall
be an additional $5 per unit.
(2) Automatic fire sprinkler system including limited area systems and
basement systems. The fee shall be based on the number of
sprinkler heads:
Number of Heads Fee
1 to 5 $50
6 to 25 $75
26 to 100 $150
101 to 200 $250
201 to 500 $500
501 and over $750
(3) Standpipe system shall be $75 per hose connection.
(4) Fire-suppression system such as dry chemical, carbon dioxide, wet
chemical or any other extinguishing agent shall be $75 for the first
$5,000 or any part thereof and an additional $5 per $1,000 or any
part thereof in excess of $5,000.
(5) Installation and/or modification of a combustible liquid storage
tank for Use Group R-3 shall be $75 per tank. Installation and/or
modification of a stationary combustible flammable liquid storage
tank for all other use groups shall be $250.
(6) Premanufactured fireplaces, wood stoves, masonry fireplaces, hot
tar kettles, metal or masonry flues, pool heaters or commercial
exhaust hoods or spray booths shall be $75 per unit. Oil- or gasfired
appliances, such as gas-fired fireplaces and furnaces, shall be
$75 per unit. The fee for commercial hoods and spray booths will
not include the suppression system fee. This fee shall be added in.
(7) Incinerators and crematoriums shall be $260 per unit. The units
shall require approval from the NJDEP before any permits can be
issued.
(a) Smoke-control systems shall be $200.
(8) Private-yard fire hydrants which are not serviced by the Cedar
Grove Water Department and/or any other water supplier regulated
by the NJPUC shall be $500 per fire hydrant.
E. Plumbing subcode fees. The plumbing subcode fees shall be:
(1) The first three fixtures shall be $65 and every additional shall be
$10 per fixture. Fixtures shall be water closets, urinal/bident,
bathtub, lavatory, shower, floor drain, sink, hose bibb, dishwasher,
drinking fountain, water cooler, soda machine, washing machine,
decorative fountain, baseboard heating.
§ 119-3 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 119-3
116:326
(2) The following equipment or appurtenance shall have the following
fees for each unit:
(a) Water heater: $50.
(b) Backflow preventer (not lawn sprinkler): $85.
(c) Steam boiler: $85.
(d) Hot-water boiler (R-3/R-5): $85.
(e) Hot-water boiler: $85.
(f) Furnace: $85.
(g) Sewer pump: $85.
(h) Inceptor: $85.
(i) Separator: $85.
(j) Grease trap: $150.
(k) AC water cooled: $85.
(l) Refrigeration unit: $85.
(m) Sewer connection (R-3/R-5): $85.
(n) Sewer connection: $100.
(o) Water connection (R-3/R-5): $85.
(p) Water connection: $100.
(q) Gas piping (R-3/R-5): $50.
(r) Gas piping, all other Use Groups: $75.
(s) Lawn sprinkler system: $75.
(t) Garage disposal: $50.
(u) Oil lines and/or oil tank lines: $50.
F. Certificates and plan review fees.
(1) Certificate of occupancy shall be $50 for all alterations and
additions in Use Groups R-3 and R-5 and in all other use groups
shall be $75. For alterations and additions in all use groups and
new construction for all use groups, 15% of the total construction
permit which includes building, electrical, fire and plumbing
subcode fees exclusive of NJDCA training fees, zoning fees, sewer
and water fees. The base fee shall be $50 for other use groups.
§ 119-3 CHRISTMAS TREES, SALE AND STORAGE OF § 119-3
116:327
§ 119-4. Fire limits. [Added 7-11-1977 by Ord. No. 77-54]
(2) Certificate of compliance (smoke and carbon monoxide detector
certification) shall be issued for the resale, rental or lease of any
one- and two-family dwelling shall be $50.
(3) Certificate of approval shall be issued upon the completion of any
work prescribed under the NJUCC. There shall be no fee.
(4) Certificate of continued occupancy for all use groups other than
R-3/R-5 and single occupancy of an R-2 shall be $75.
(5) A certificate of occupancy shall be issued in a change of use, and
the fee shall be $150.
(6) Plan review fee for new construction shall be 20% of the total
construction permit which includes building, electrical, fire and
plumbing subcode fees exclusive of NJDCA training fees, zoning
fees, sewer and water fees. For the addition and/or alterations in
Use Group R-3 and R-4, the plan review shall be 5% and for
additions and alterations in all other use groups, the fee shall be
20% of the total construction permit which includes building,
electrical, fire and plumbing subcode fees exclusive of NJDCA
training fees, zoning fees, sewer and water fees. Plan review fees
are nonrefundable.
G. Miscellaneous fees.
(1) Zoning Approval review fee shall be $25. Zoning review for a new
R-3/R-5 structure shall be $100, and structure all other use groups
shall be $250.
(2) The fee for an application for a variation in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.10 shall be $250 for Class I structures, $150 for
Class II structures and $50 for Class III structures.
(3) The State of New Jersey training fees shall be established per
N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.19.
(4) Elevators, escalators, dumbwaiters, or lifts-all fees shall be
assessed pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23-12.6 when the state acts as the
enforcing agency.
H. This shall amend any other Township Code which prohibits the use of
garbage disposal units.
A. The following fire limits are hereby established in the Township, to
which shall be applied the supplemental restrictions on construction
permitted in accordance with the State Uniform Construction Code and
the subcodes adopted thereunder.
(1) West side of Pompton Avenue, beginning at a point 130 feet north of
Franklin Street with a depth of 300 feet, thence north along
§ 119-3 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 119-4
116:328
Pompton Avenue to a point 47 feet south of Harper Terrace (to
coincide with the LC1 Zone).
(2) West side of Pompton Avenue, beginning at Highland Road, thence
north to South Mountain Avenue and west to Birch Road.
(3) West side of Pompton Avenue beginning at South Mountain Avenue
with a depth of 200 feet, thence north along Pompton Avenue to
Bradford Avenue (to coincide with the RC Zone).
(4) West side of Pompton Avenue, beginning at Bradford Avenue with a
depth of 430 feet, thence north along Pompton Avenue to a depth of
200 feet at Robin Lane (to coincide with the RC Zone).
(5) West side of Pompton Avenue, beginning at Robin Lane with a
depth of 570 feet, thence north along Pompton Avenue to a depth of
320 feet at Vreeland Lane (to coincide with the B Zone).
(6) West side of Pompton Avenue, beginning at Vreeland Lane with a
depth of 530 feet, thence north along the sewer easement line to
Church Street and then west to Grove Avenue and thence north
along Grove Avenue and Pompton Avenue to the point of
intersection of said roads (to coincide with B Zone).
(7) West side of Grove Avenue, beginning at a point 155 feet south of
Lewis Road, thence west to the Erie Lackawanna Railroad, thence
north along Grove Avenue and the railroad to the intersection of
Grove Avenue and Pompton Avenue.
(8) West side of Pompton Avenue, beginning at the Erie Lackawanna
Railroad with a depth of 250 feet and then north along Pompton
Avenue to a depth of 40 feet at Brunswick Road (to coincide with
the B Zone).
(9) West side of Pompton Avenue, beginning at a point 220 feet north of
Fairview Avenue with a depth of 350 feet, thence north along
Pompton Avenue to Lindsley Road (to coincide with the RC Zone).
(10)West side of Pompton Avenue, beginning at a point 1,050 feet north
of Lindsley Road with a depth of 350 feet and then north along
Pompton Avenue to the Township line (to coincide with the M-1
Zone).
(11) East side of Pompton Avenue, beginning at the Borough of Verona
line with a depth of 1,000 feet, thence north along Pompton Avenue
to a point 50 feet north of the intersection of Ridge Road with a
depth of 1,350 feet (to coincide with the LC 2 Zone).
(12) East side of Pompton Avenue, beginning at Bradford Avenue, with a
depth of 170 feet, thence north along Pompton Avenue to Union
Street (to coincide with the RC Zone).
§ 119-4 CHRISTMAS TREES, SALE AND STORAGE OF § 119-4
116:329
Chapter 122
(13) East side of Pompton Avenue, beginning at Union Street with a
depth of 120 feet, then north along Pompton Avenue to Cedar
Street (to coincide with the B Zone).
(14) East side of Pompton Avenue, beginning at Cedar Street with a
depth of 200 feet, then north along Pompton Avenue to Taylor's
Brook and Bowden Road.
(15) East side of Pompton Avenue, beginning at Bowden Road and then
northerly along Bowden Road a distance of 810 feet then to the
west 190 feet and then north to the Erie Lackawanna Railroad and
along Pompton Avenue north to the railroad (to coincide with the B
Zone).
(16) East side of Pompton Avenue, beginning at the Erie Lackawanna
Railroad and then north along Pompton Avenue to a point 570 feet
north of Little Falls Road and east to the Peckman River (to
coincide with the B Zone).
(17) East side of Pompton Avenue, beginning at a point 900 feet north of
Bortic Road, then east to Little Falls Road and north along Pompton
Avenue to a point 550 feet north of Commerce Road and east to the
Erie Lackawanna Railroad and along said railroad to Little Falls
Road (to coincide with the M-1 and M-2 Zones).
(18) East side of Pompton Avenue, beginning at a point 500 feet south of
Stevens Avenue with a depth of 250 feet, then north along Pompton
Avenue to a point 1,230 feet north of Stevens Avenue.
(19) East side of Pompton Avenue, beginning at a point 1,120 feet south
of Lindsley Road with a depth of 200 feet north along Pompton
Avenue to Lindsley Road (to coincide with the RC Zone).
(20) That area on Lindsley Road bounded by the Erie Lackawanna
Railroad to the west, south and east and Lindsley Road and the
Township line to the north.
(21) That area on Little Falls Road bounded by Bowden Road and Public
Service right-of-way to the south, the Erie Lackawanna Railroad to
the east, Little Falls Road to the west and the railroad and
Township line to the north.
(22) East side of Ridge Road, beginning at a point 740 feet south of
Bradford Avenue with a depth of 1,590 feet and then north along
Ridge Road to Bradford Avenue (to coincide with the O Zone).
(23) North side of Lindsley Road, beginning at a point 125 feet west of
Stevens Avenue with a depth of 340 feet, then east along Lindsley
Road to a point 340 feet east of Stevens Avenue.
§ 119-4 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 119-4
122:330
CURFEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Youth Advisory Committee — See Ch. 75.
Places of amusement — See Ch. 88.
Sale of cigarettes to minors — See Ch. 117.
Parental supervision of minors — See Ch. 186.
Loitering — See Ch. 188, Art. III.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Juvenile curfew ordinances — See N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.52.
§ 122-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to curtail the incidents of juvenile vandalism
and malicious mischief to public and private property and the incidents or
other juvenile crime by restricting and prohibiting the presence of children
under 17 years of age on the public streets and upon public and private
lands during the peak times of vandalism and juvenile offenses unless
accompanied by a responsible adult.
§ 122-2. Curfew established.
It shall be unlawful for any person under 17 years of age to be or remain
upon any street, other public place or upon private property without the
express invitation of the owner thereof, in the Township of Cedar Grove,
between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. unless such child is
accompanied by his parent, legal guardian or other adult having custody of
said child with the consent and authorization of his parent or legal guardian.
§ 122-3. Exceptions.
A violation of the prohibition set forth in § 122-2 shall not be deemed to have
occurred when either of the following circumstances are satisfied:
§ 122-4. Parental responsibility.
It shall be unlawful for any parent, legal guardian or other adult having
custody of any child under 17 years of age to knowingly, or under
A. Where the parent, legal guardian or other adult having custody of such
child has prenotified the Cedar Grove Police Department in writing that
the child has his permission to be out between the hours of 1:00 a.m.
and 5:00 a.m. and the reason therefor.
B. Where, as a result of an emergency situation presenting a danger to
life, safety or property, the child was required to be out of his home and
in the prohibited area set forth in § 122-2.
§ 119-4 CURFEW § 122-4
122:331
circumstances where he should reasonably have known, allow or permit
such child to go or be upon any public street or upon public or private
lands in violation of § 122-2, except in cases of emergency or necessity in
accordance with § 122-3.
§ 122-5. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 127
DRY-CLEANING ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Advisory Health Council — See Ch. 31.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 119.
Gas piping and appliances — See Ch. 150.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Adoption of health codes by reference — See
N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 et seq.
Adoption by Township Council — See N.J.S.A.
26:3-1 and 40:69A-88 et seq.
§ 127-1. Definitions.
A. A violation of this chapter by a child under 17 years of age shall be an
act of juvenile delinquency and the Cedar Grove Police Department
shall take custody of said child until appropriate juvenile authorities are
contacted. Upon taking said child into custody, his parent, legal
guardian or other custodian shall be advised of such violation.
B. A violation of this chapter by the parent, legal guardian or other adult
having custody of a child who violates the curfew shall be punishable by
a fine not exceeding $2,000 or by imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 90 days, or both. [Amended 7-30-1984 by Ord. No.
84-222; 10-23-2006 by Ord. No. 06-656]
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COIN-OPERATED DRY CLEANING ESTABLISHMENT CODE OF NEW
JERSEY (1962) — That certain printed code entitled and commonly
known as the "Coin-Operated Dry Cleaning Establishment Code of
New Jersey (1962)" approved by the State Department of Health on
March 13, 1962, for adoption by reference in accordance with law,
being a code regulating the use, operation and maintenance of coinoperated
or self-service dry-cleaning establishments and providing for
the inspection of such establishments.
B. Whenever the following words, terms or phrases are used in the Coin-
Operated Dry Cleaning Establishment Code of New Jersey (1962), they
§ 122-4 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 127-1
127:332
§ 127-2. Adoption of standards by reference; copies on file.
§ 127-3. License required.
No person shall conduct or operate or engage in the conduct or operation
of a coin-operated or self-service dry-cleaning establishment, as defined in
§ 127-lB hereof, without first obtaining a license therefor from the Township
Department of Health, which license shall be applied for and issued as
provided in Section II of the Coin-Operated Dry Cleaning Establishment
Code of New Jersey (1962).
§ 127-4. Term of license.
A license issued under this chapter shall be for a term of one year
commencing on January 1 of each year and expiring on December 31 of the
year of its issuance.
§ 127-5. Fee.
The annual license fee for a license issued under this chapter shall be $20
and shall be payable to the Department of Health. No license shall be issued
unless and until said license fee is paid.
shall have the following meanings herein given, and said code is
accordingly amended:
BOARD OF HEALTH — The Department of Health of the Township of
Cedar Grove.
COIN-OPERATED OR SELF-SERVICE DRY-CLEANING
ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment, store or other premises
wherein there is installed and offered for use by the general public one
or more machines or devices which, upon insertion of a coin, coins or
token or by other means, provide self-service dry-cleaning facilities.
HEALTH AUTHORITY — The Department of Health of the Township of
Cedar Grove or an authorized representative thereof.
PERMIT — Shall have the same meaning as the term "license" used in
this chapter.
A. There is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference and
made a part hereof the whole of the Coin-Operated Dry Cleaning
Establishment Code of New Jersey (1962), as amended by the
definitions set forth in § 127-lB hereof, as if set forth herein at length.
B. In accordance with law, not less than 10 printed copies of the Coin-
Operated Dry Cleaning Establishment Code of New Jersey (1962) have
been placed on file in the office of the Township Clerk and in the office
of the Health Officer of the Township and shall remain on file in said
offices for the use and examination of the public so long as this chapter
shall remain in effect.
§ 127-1 DRY-CLEANING ESTABLISHMENTS § 127-6
127:333
§ 127-6. Hours of operation.
Any coin-operated or self-service dry-cleaning establishment for which a
license has been obtained under this chapter shall operate only between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
§ 127-7. Attendant required.
Every coin-operated or self-service dry-cleaning establishment shall, during
all operating hours, have in attendance and on duty a person trained in the
use of the equipment and prepared to deal with emergencies that may arise
in connection therewith.
§ 127-8. Application of chapter.
No provision of this chapter shall be applied so as to impose any unlawful
burden on either interstate commerce or any activity of the state or federal
government.
§ 127-9. Suspension or revocation of license; appeals.
Licenses issued under this chapter may be revoked or suspended by the
Township Health Officer for any violation of the provisions of this chapter
or of the code adopted herein by reference or the applicable provisions
of any other ordinance of the Township or any false statement made in
the application for the license, subject to a right of appeal as provided in
Chapter 31, Health Council, Advisory, § 31-7.
§ 127-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-17-1962]
Chapter 133
FEES FOR PUBLIC RECORDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 3.
A. Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this
chapter, including the Coin-Operated Dry Cleaning Establishment Code
of New Jersey (1962) incorporated herein by reference, shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000 or by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues. [Amended 7-30-1984 by Ord. No.
84-222; 10-23-2006 by Ord. No. 06-656]
B. In addition to the penalty provided in Subsection A of this section,
licenses under this chapter may be suspended or revoked as provided in
§ 127-9 hereof.
§ 127-6 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 127-10
133:334
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Access to public records — See N.J.S.A.
47:1A-1 et seq.
§ 133-1. Legislative findings.
Increasing demands by persons to examine certain municipal records open
to public inspection and for copies of same and for special services of
employees have placed a burden upon the time of municipal employees
and have increased the use of expensive reproduction equipment and other
business machines. Accordingly, to reduce the resulting added cost of
municipal operations, the Council determines that the Township should be
reimbursed for said added municipal costs and expenses by providing for
reasonable copying fees.
§ 133-2. Establishment of fees.
The Council may from time to time, by resolution, establish fees to be
charged any person applying to copy any municipal record which he may
be legally entitled to copy, or utilize the services of municipal employees.
Appropriate fees shall be recommended by the Township Manager, and in
each case said fee shall relate to the cost of the Township in providing the
services or materials requested.
§ 133-3. Exemptions.
No fee shall be charged for any examination or search made by or any copy
of any record or report requested by any local, county, state or federal law
enforcement agency or by the federal postal authorities.
Chapter 135
FILMING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Regulations for exhibition of motion
pictures — See Ch. 88.
§ 135-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FILMING — The taking of still or motion pictures either on film or videotape
or similar recording medium, for commercial or educational purposes
intended for viewing on television, in theaters, for direct sale, or for
§ 127-10 FILMING § 135-1
135:335
institutional uses. The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to
include the filming of news stories within the Township of Cedar Grove.
MAJOR MOTION PICTURE —
PUBLIC LANDS — Any and every public street, highway, sidewalk, square,
public park or playground or any other public place within the Township
which is within the jurisdiction of the Township of Cedar Grove.
§ 135-2. Permit required.
Any film which is financed and/or distributed by a major motion-picture
studio, including but not limited to the following:
(1) Universal Pictures;
Warner Brothers, including New Line Cinema, Castle Rock Cinema,
and Turner Production Company;
(2)
(3) Paramount;
(4) 20th Century Fox;
(5) Columbia/Tri-Star;
(6) Disney;
(7) MGM — United Artists; or
A.
B. Any film for which the budget is at least $5,000,000.
A. No person or organization shall film or permit filming on public
property within the Township of Cedar Grove without first having
obtained a permit from the office of the Township Clerk, which permit
shall set forth the approved location of such filming and the approved
duration of such filming by specific reference to day or dates not to
exceed three in duration, except in the case of a major motion picture
as described in § 135-11. Said permit must be readily available for
inspection by Township officials at all times at the site of the filming.
B. All permits shall be applied for and obtained from the office of the
Township Clerk during normal business hours. Applications for such
permits shall be in a form approved by the Township Clerk and be
accompanied by a permit fee in the amount established in § 135-12
herein.
C. A permit shall be sufficient to authorize outdoor or indoor filming for a
period not to exceed three days, except in the case of a major motion
picture, as described in §135-11, provided that the maximum number of
days of filming authorized in any calendar year for premises located in a
residential zone where waiver(s) are granted hereunder shall not
exceed 10 days.
§ 135-1 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 135-2
135:336
§ 135-3. Issuance of permits.
§ 135-4. Responsibilities of permit holder.
D. If a permit is issued and, due to inclement weather or other good cause,
filming does not take place on the dates specified, the Township Clerk
may, at the request of the applicant, issue a new permit for filming on
other dates subject to full compliance with all other provisions of this
chapter. No additional fee shall be paid for this permit.
A. No permits will be issued by the Township Clerk unless applied for prior
to five days before the requested shooting date; provided, however, that
the Township Manager may waive the five-day period if, in his
judgment, the applicant has obtained all related approvals and adjacent
property owners or tenants do not need to be notified.
B. No permit shall be issued for filming on public lands unless the
applicant shall provide the Township with satisfactory proof of the
following:
(1) Proof of insurance coverage as follows:
(a) For bodily injury to any one person in the amount of $500,000
and any occurrence in the aggregate amount of $1,000,000;
and
(b) For property damage for each occurrence in the aggregate
amount of $300,000.
(2) An agreement, in writing, approved by the Township Attorney,
whereby the applicant agrees to indemnify and save harmless the
Township of Cedar Grove from any and all liability, expense, claim
or damages resulting from the use of public lands.
(3) The posting of a cash bond of $500 or a maintenance bond of
$1,000 running in favor of the Township and protecting and
insuring that the location utilized will be left after filming, in a
satisfactory condition, free of debris, rubbish and equipment, and
that due observance of all Township ordinances, laws and
regulations will be followed. Within seven days of the completion of
the filming, the Township will return the bond if there has been no
damage to public property or public expense caused by the filming.
(4) The hiring of an off-duty Township police officer for the times
indicated on the permit.
A. The holder of the permit shall take all reasonable steps to minimize
interference with the free passage of pedestrians and traffic over public
lands and shall comply with all lawful directives issued by the Cedar
Grove Police Department with respect thereto.
§ 135-2 FILMING § 135-4
135:337
§ 135-5. Filming in residential zones.
Filming in residential zones shall be permitted Monday through Friday
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., provided that all requests for
night scenes shall be approved in the permit or by a waiver to be granted in
accordance with § 135-8 hereof.
§ 135-6. Refusal of permit; requirement for police patrol;
electrician.
The Township Manager may refuse to issue a permit whenever he
determines that filming at the location and/or the time set forth in the
application would violate any law or ordinance or would unreasonably
interfere with the use and enjoyment of adjoining properties, unreasonably
impede the free flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic or otherwise
endanger the public's health, safety or welfare. Further, the Township
reserves the right to require one or more on-site patrolmen in situations
where the proposed production may impede the proper flow of traffic, the
cost of said patrolman to be borne by the applicant as a cost of production.
Where existing electrical power lines are to be utilized by the production,
an on-site licensed electrician may be similarly required if the production
company does not have a licensed electrician on staff.
§ 135-7. Appeals to Township Council.
B. The holder of a permit shall conduct filming in such a manner as to
minimize the inconvenience or discomfort to adjoining property owners
attributable to such filming and shall, to the extent practicable, abate
noise and park vehicles associated with such filming off the public
streets. The holder shall avoid any interference with previously
scheduled activities upon public lands and limit, to the extent possible,
any interference with normal public activity on such public lands.
Where the applicant's production activity, by reason of location or
otherwise, will directly involve and/or affect any businesses, merchants
or residents, these parties shall be given written notice of the filming at
least three days prior to the requested shooting date and be informed
that objections may be filed with the Township Clerk, said objections to
form a part of applicant's application and be considered in the review of
same. Proof of service of notification to adjacent owners shall be
submitted to the Township Clerk within two days of the requested
shooting date.
A. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Township Manager denying
or revoking a permit or a person requesting relief pursuant to § 135-8
may appeal to the Township Council. A written notice of appeal setting
forth the reasons for the appeal shall be filed with the Clerk. An appeal
from the decision of the Manager shall be filed within 10 days of the
Manager's decision.
§ 135-4 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 135-7
135:338
§ 135-8. Waiver of requirements by Manager.
The Township Manager may authorize a waiver of any of the requirements
or limitations of this chapter, and may authorize filming other than during
the hours herein described or may permit filming at a particular location in
a residential zone for more than three days, to a maximum of 10 days at any
one location other than in connection with major motion pictures, as further
provided for in § 135-11, or may waive any other limitation or requirement
of this chapter whenever it determines that such a permit may be issued
without endangering the public health, safety and welfare. In determining
whether to issue a waiver under this section, the Manager shall consider
the following factors:
§ 135-9. Involvement of Police and Fire Departments and other
inspectors.
Copies of the approved permit will be sent to the Police and Fire
Departments before filming takes place, and to the New Jersey Film
Commission. The applicant shall permit the Fire Prevention Bureau or other
Township inspectors to inspect the site and the equipment to be used.
The applicant shall comply with all safety instruction issued by the Fire
Prevention Bureau or other Township inspectors.
B. The Township Council shall set the matter down for a hearing within 30
days of the day on which the notice of appeal was filed. The decision of
the Township Council shall be in the form of a resolution supporting the
decision of the Township Council at the first regularly scheduled public
meeting of the Township Council after the hearing on the appeal, unless
the appellant agrees in writing to a later date for the decision. If such a
resolution is not adopted within the time required, the decision of the
Manager shall be deemed to be reversed, and a permit shall be issued
in conformity with the application or the relief pursuant to § 135-8 shall
be deemed denied.
A. Traffic congestion at the location caused by vehicles to be parked on the
public street;
B. Applicant's ability to remove film-related vehicles off the public streets;
C. When the applicant is requesting restrictions on the use of public
streets or public parking during the course of the filming;
D. Nature of the film shoot itself; e.g., indoor or outdoors; day or night;
E. Prior experience of the film company/applicant with the Township, if
any; and
F. Consultation with the Council-Ward representative wherein the filming
is to take place
§ 135-7 FILMING § 135-10
135:339
§ 135-10. Reimbursement of Township for lost revenue.
In addition to any other fees or costs mentioned in this chapter, the
applicant shall reimburse the Township for any lost revenue, such as
parking meter revenue, repairs to public property or other revenues that
the Township was prevented from earning because of filming.
§ 135-11. Special regulations for major motion pictures.
§ 135-12. Fees.
The schedule of fees for the issuance of permits authorized by this chapter
are as follows:
§ 135-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-23-2006 by Ord.
No. 06-656]
Any person violating this chapter or these rules and regulations, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000 per day
or by imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days, or
both. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues.
A. When filming is requested with respect to a major motion picture, the
approved location of such filming and approved duration of such filming
by specific reference to day or dates shall not exceed five days in
duration.
B. Any days necessary to be used for setup and preparation for a major
motion picture filming may, in the discretion of the Manager, be
counted as a filming day where such setup is anticipated to involve one
or more of the factors set forth in § 135-8.
A. Basic filming permit: $75. Where an applicant requests a waiver of the
provision of § 135-3 requiring expedited processing of the permit
application, the basic filming permit fee shall be $125.
B. Daily filming fee payable in addition to the basic filming permit: $500
per day.
C. Daily filming fee payable in addition to the basic filming permit for
major motion picture: $1,000 per day.
D. Filming permit for nonprofit applicants filming for educational
purposes (no daily rate required): $25.
§ 135-10 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 135-13
135:340
Chapter 137
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 23.
Outdoor burning — See Ch. 107.
Fire limits — See Ch. 119.
Gasoline stations — See Ch. 148.
Gas piping and appliances — See Ch. 150.
Housing standards — See Ch. 158.
Hydrants and sprinklers — See Ch. 161.
Property maintenance — See Chs. 197 and
198.
Snow and ice removal — See Ch. 230, Art. I.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 251.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Establishment of fire zones — See N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.46.
Adoption of Uniform Fire Safety Act — See
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.
§ 135-13 FIRE PREVENTION § 135-13
137:341

ARTICLE I
Fire Prevention Standards63
[Adopted 5-2-1988 as part of Ord. No. 88-312]
§ 137-1. Adoption of standards.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-202b, the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code
adopted by the State of New Jersey pursuant to the Uniform Fire Safety Act
and established as the standard of fire prevention to be used in determining
whether dwellings, buildings or other structures comply with standards of
fire prevention separate and apart from enforcement of the New Jersey
Uniform Fire Code by the State of New Jersey.
63.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. I, Fire Prevention Standards,
adopted 7-14-1986 as part of Ord. No. 86-274.
§ 137-1 FIRE PREVENTION § 137-1
137:343

ARTICLE II
Fire Zones on Private Property
[Adopted 7-16-1973 by Ord. No. 73-17, Ch. 9, Art. 2, of the former
Revised Ordinances]
§ 137-2. Legislative findings; parking restricted. [Amended
8-6-1979 by Ord. No. 79-97]
§ 137-3. Establishment of fire zones. [Amended 8-6-1979 by Ord.
No. 79-97; 4-21-1986 by Ord. No. 86-259]
The Fire Chief of the Township of Cedar Grove is hereby authorized, subject
to approval by resolution adopted by the Township Council, to establish fire
zones on private properties in the Township of Cedar Grove devoted for
public uses, including but not limited to shopping centers, stores, theaters,
bowling alleys, hospitals, nursing homes, schools, public buildings,
churches and similar uses, where the parking of motor vehicles in close
proximity to buildings located on such properties would prevent adequate
ingress and egress of fire equipment and other emergency vehicles.
§ 137-4. Removal of snow around fire hydrants. [Amended 8-6-1979
by Ord. No. 79-97; 8-2-1993 by Ord. No. 93-423]
All fire hydrants on private property which may become covered by snow
shall have such snow removed within 12 hours after the snow ceases to fall
in order to enable the Fire Department to locate said fire hydrant.64
§ 137-5. Purpose for fire zones.
The fire zones to be established pursuant to § 137-3 of this article shall
be designated in such areas of such private properties as will ensure fire
equipment and other emergency vehicles unobstructed means of ingress,
egress and operation to such properties in the event of fire or other
emergency.
A. It is hereby determined that the parking of motor vehicles in close
proximity to buildings devoted for public uses, including shopping
centers, stores, theaters, bowling alleys, hospitals, nursing homes,
schools, public buildings, churches and similar uses, constitutes a
danger to public health, safety and welfare in that the approach and
departure of fire equipment and other emergency vehicles is impeded
by such parking of motor vehicles.
B. The parking of motor vehicles or otherwise obstructing lanes shall be
prohibited at all times, and the fire lanes established pursuant hereto
shall be posted with "No Parking--Fire Zone" signs of the type specified
by the Township at the cost and expense of the owner of the property.
64.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 230, Streets and Sidewalks, Art. I, Removal of Ice and Snow.
§ 137-2 FIRE PREVENTION § 137-6
137:345
§ 137-6. Parking restrictions on access roads to multifamily
dwellings. [Amended 8-23-1976 by Ord. No. 76-19; 8-6-1979 by Ord.
No. 79-97]
§ 137-7. Marking of no-parking areas. [Amended 8-23-1976 by Ord.
No. 76-19; 8-6-1979 by Ord. No. 79-97]
A. The parking of motor vehicles on all internal roads providing ingress
and egress to multifamily dwellings may be restricted on one or both
sides of said roadway and "No Parking--Fire Zone" signs of the type
specified by the Township shall be posted at the expense of the owner in
accordance with the direction of the Fire Chief.
B. Approved signs shall be of the type described in the Federal Highway
Commission Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. They shall be
12 inches by 18 inches high, either red lettering, border and directional
arrows with the wording "No Parking--Fire Zone," or a no-parking
symbol, a black "P" circumscribed on a red slash on a white background
with a black border with "No Parking--Fire Zone" and directional
arrows in red underneath.
C. Except as provided in this subsection, snow and ice shall be removed
from all internal roads providing ingress and egress to multifamily
dwellings within 12 hours of daylight after the same shall have ceased
to have fallen or to have formed thereon. In the case of ice which may
be so frozen to make removal impracticable, the same shall be
thoroughly covered with sand within the same twelve-hour period.
Violation complaints of this subsection may be brought by any resident,
the municipality's Code Enforcement Officer or the Cedar Grove Police
Department. 65 [Added 8-2-1993 by Ord. No. 93-423]
A. Each fire zone shall be posted with Township-approved "No Parking--
Fire Zone" signs in locations designated by the Fire Chief, and each fire
zone will be indicated by yellow striped pavement not less than four
inches wide delineating the perimeter of such zone. In addition, where
deemed necessary, yellow diagonal or crosshatched lines not less than
four inches wide shall be marked at a forty-five-degree angle and not
more than four feet apart within the perimeter of the fire zone and
appropriate "No Parking--Fire Zone" markings stenciled within the
striped area, at the direction of the Fire Chief, and at the expense of the
owner of the property.
B. Pavement markings for purposes other than fire zones shall be of a
different color.
C. In any parking facility or multifamily, business, industrial, educational,
or governmental area in which markings have been painted or placed
for the purpose of delineating parking spaces, it shall be unlawful to
65.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 230, Streets and Sidewalks, Art. I, Removal of Ice and Snow
§ 137-6 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 137-7
137:346
§ 137-8. Appeals.
If any person shall be aggrieved by the action of the Fire Chief, appeal in
writing to the Township Council may be taken by filing a notice of appeal
with the Township Clerk. A hearing shall be had on notice to the appellant,
who shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard. After such hearing, the
Township Council may affirm, modify or reverse the action of the Fire Chief.
§ 137-9. Additional parking restrictions. [Amended 8-6-1979 by
Ord. No. 79-97]
The Fire Chief of the Township of Cedar Grove, subject to the approval
by resolution adopted by the Township Council, is further authorized to
promulgate regulations limiting, restricting or prohibiting the parking of
motor vehicles within the fire zones authorized to be established pursuant
to § 137-3.
§ 137-10. Enforcement; time for compliance. [Amended 8-23-1976
by Ord. No. 76-19; 8-6-1979 by Ord. No. 79-97]
Each property owner will have 60 days after passage of the Council
resolution establishing the fire zone to comply with this article. It shall be
the duty of the Police Department to enforce the provisions of this article.
§ 137-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-23-2006 by Ord.
No. 06-656]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the regulations to be
promulgated pursuant to this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000 or to imprisonment in the county jail
for a period not to exceed 90 days, or both, in the discretion of the Municipal
Judge.
park any vehicle outside the delineated lines or markings. [Added
6-4-2007 by Ord. No. 07-677]
D. Vehicles parked outside of the lines or markings of a delineated parking
space in any of the above-referenced locations will be charged with a
parking violation and fined accordingly. [Added 6-4-2007 by Ord. No.
07-677]
E. Any fire zone in the Township that does not comply with the conditions
of this section must be altered to conform accordingly. [Added
6-4-2007 by Ord. No. 07-677]
§ 137-7 FIRE PREVENTION § 137-11
137:347

ARTICLE III
Rapid Entry System
[Adopted 3-5-2007 by Ord. No. 07-668]
§ 137-12. Purpose.
The Governing Body has determined that the health, welfare and safety
of the Township's residents are promoted by requiring certain structures
within the Township to install and maintain a rapid entry system in the form
of a key lock box system on the exterior of the structure, which will permit
the Township's Fire Department and other public safety departments of the
Township to gain immediate and unfettered access to the structure when
responding and reporting to the structure.
§ 137-13. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
KEY LOCK BOX SYSTEM — As used herein, a secured, locked device affixed
to the exterior of the structure(s) identified below, and, as necessary, the
entry to the property on which the structure(s) is situated.
OWNER — As used herein, shall mean and include a person, corporation,
partnership or any other similar entity.
PREMISES or PROPERTY — As used herein, shall mean and include any
premises and property on which the structures identified below are situated
that have security or other gated properties impeding unfettered ingress
and egress.
SECURITY OR OTHER FORM OF GATE — As used herein, shall mean and
include property the entrance to which having limited access due to a
vehicular gate.
STRUCTURE — As used herein, shall mean and include those structures
identified below, and shall be afforded the meaning as is afforded elsewhere
throughout this Code.
§ 137-14. Structures required to install key lock boxes.
The owner of the following types of structures shall be required to install
and maintain a key lock box system that will provide the Township's Fire
Department and other public safety departments with immediate and
unfettered access to the structure and property on which the structure is
situated:
A. Any and all commercial or industrial structures protected by an
automatic activated alarm system, an automatic dialer, an automatic
fire-suppression system, and/or such structures that are secured in a
manner that restricts access during an emergency;
§ 137-12 FIRE PREVENTION § 137-14
137:349
§ 137-15. Exempt structures.
Any structure having on-site twenty-four-hour security personnel or onsite
twenty-four-hour door service personnel may be exempt from the
requirements of this article. Exemptions shall be at the discretion of the
Chief of the Township's Fire Department.
§ 137-16. Location of the key lock box system.
The key lock box system shall be located at or near the main entrance to
the structure. If the structure is located on property, ingress and egress
to which is inhibited by a security or other form of gate, then two lock
box systems shall be installed: the first at or near the main entrance to
the property on which the structure is situated, and the second at or near
the main entrance to the actual structure. The key lock box system shall
be mounted at a height of six feet above the final grade or as otherwise
designated by the Chief of the Township's Fire Department.
§ 137-17. Contents of key lock box system; necessity of HAZMAT
document storage box system.
B. Any and all facilities providing medical, nursing, congregate and/or
other care;
C. Any and all multiresidential structures, including apartment and
condominium complexes, that have restricted access through locked
doors and have a common corridor for access to the individual
residential units;
D. Any and all nursing homes, assisted-living residences, hospice facilities,
and/or other structures providing for long-term care for senior citizens;
E. Any and all public buildings;
F. Any and all high-rise structures, not otherwise identified herein, having
floors above 75 feet ground level;
G. Any and all existing buildings when undergoing renovations of at least
25% of the building; and
H. Any and all newly constructed buildings of the type and kind identified
in § 137-14A through G. All newly constructed buildings of the type and
kind identified in § 137-14A through G shall comply with the provisions
of this article before a certificate of occupancy or temporary certificate
of occupancy may be granted.
A. The key lock box system shall contain labeled keys to locked points of
ingress and egress, whether interior or exterior; labeled keys to locked
mechanical rooms; labeled keys to any gate or secured areas; labeled
keys to any other areas that may be required by the Chief of the
Township's Fire Department, the Chief of the Township's Police
Department, or the duly appointed director of the Township's other
§ 137-14 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 137-17
137:350
§ 137-18. Contact person.
Within 30 days after the installation of the key lock box system, each person
or entity using such system shall provide to the Chief of the Township's Fire
Department a list of the name(s), address(es), and telephone number(s),
including cellular, of at least one contact person who may be contacted
by the reporting public safety agency. If no contact person is provided as
required by this section, then the owner of the structure shall be designated
the contact person.
§ 137-19. Testing.
A test of the key lock box system, and a walk-through of the structure,
shall be conducted by the Chief of the Township's Fire Department in the
presence and with the participation of the structure's authorized contact
person(s) upon completion of the installation of the key lock box system.
Such testing and walk-through shall occur annually or when required by the
Chief of the Township's Fire Department.
§ 137-20. Enforcement.
The Chief of the Township's Fire Department shall enforce the provisions of
this article.
§ 137-21. Violations and penalties.
Any owner of a structure identified in this article who violates any portion
or section of this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not to
exceed $2,000, or imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed
90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, and each violation of any of
public safety departments; and a list containing the name(s),
address(es), telephone number(s), including cellular, of at least one
contact person who may be contacted by the reporting public safety
agency.
B. If the structure contains or otherwise stores hazardous materials as
defined by the Code or the State of New Jersey, then the structure must
also install and maintain a HAZMAT document storage box system
immediately adjacent to the key lock box system. The document storage
box system shall contain material safety data sheets; blueprints and/or
floor plans of the structure illustrating the location of the hazardous
materials; and any other information as required by the Chief of the
Township's Fire Department, the Chief of the Township's Police
Department, or the duly appointed director of the Township's other
public safety departments.
C. The above list of contents of the key lock box system and the HAZMAT
document storage box system should not be considered an exhaustive
list.
§ 137-17 FIRE PREVENTION § 137-21
137:351
the provisions of this article of the Code and each day the same is violated
shall be deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct offense.
§ 137-21 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 137-21
137:352
Chapter 140
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction — See Ch. 119.
Soil removal — See Ch. 226.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 234.
Zoning — See Ch. 268.
§ 137-21 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 137-21
140:353

ARTICLE I
Statutory Authority, Findings of Fact, Purpose and Objectives
§ 140-1. Statutory authority.
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et seq.
delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general
welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the governing body of the Township of
Cedar Grove, New Jersey, does ordain as follows.
§ 140-2. Findings of fact.
§ 140-3. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
A. The flood hazard areas of Cedar Grove are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and velocities
and, when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses
that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected
from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
A. To protect human life and health;
B. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
C. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; streets; and bridges
located in areas of special flood hazard;
F. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. To insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
§ 140-1 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 140-3
140:355
§ 140-4. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
H. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters;
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 140-3 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 140-4
140:356
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 140-5. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phases used in this chapter shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Township Engineer's interpretation
of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH, or VO Zone on a
community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with a one-percent
annual or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one foot to
3 feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of
flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
storage of equipment or materials, located within the area of special flood
hazard.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM) — The official map on
which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building i) built in the case of a
building in an area of special flood hazard to have the top of the elevated
floor elevated above the ground level by means of piling, columns (posts and
piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water; and ii) adequately
anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during
a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. In an area of special flood
hazard, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill
or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the
unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
§ 140-5 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 140-5
140:357
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report in which the
Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the
Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the
base flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special-purpose
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion
control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term
describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which
provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than 0.2
foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
B.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
D.
§ 140-5 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 140-5
140:358
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for the
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such
enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable nonelevation design requirements.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle."
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION
— A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation adopted
by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L.
No. 97-348), includes substantial improvements and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided that the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The "actual start"
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure
on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles,
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
A. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the longest
horizontal projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
C.
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
D.
§ 140-5 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 140-5
140:359
the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation,
or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. "Permanent
construction" does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading
and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways,
nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings or piers, or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
For a substantial improvement, the "actual start of construction" means
the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a
gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above the ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which exceeds
50% of the market value of the structure before the start of construction
of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred
substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The
term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter that
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure."
B.
§ 140-5 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 140-5
140:360
ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 140-6. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the Township of Cedar Grove, Essex County, New Jersey.
§ 140-7. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
§ 140-8. Violations and penalties.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined
not more than $2,000 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both,
for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved
in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Township of Cedar
Grove from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or
remedy any violation.
§ 140-9. Abrogation; greater restrictions to apply.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 140-10. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the Township of Cedar Grove,
Community No. 340180, are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study, Essex
County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)" dated June 4, 2007.
(2) Flood Insurance Rate Map for Essex County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions) as shown on Index and Panel Nos. 0019, 0038, 0082,
0101, 0102, 0103, 0104, whose effective date is June 4, 2007.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and maps are on file at 525
Pompton Avenue, Cedar Grove, New Jersey 07009-1795.
A. Considered as minimum requirements;
§ 140-6 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 140-10
140:361
§ 140-11. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
A. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural
causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special
flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Township of
Cedar Grove, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance
Administration for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 140-10 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 140-11
140:362
ARTICLE IV
Development Permit; Local Administrator; Variances
§ 140-12. Development permit required; application.
§ 140-13. Designation of Local Administrator.
The Township Engineer is hereby appointed to administer and implement
this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in
accordance with its provisions.
§ 140-14. Duties and responsibilities of Administrator.
Duties of the Township Engineer shall include, but not be limited to:
A. A development permit shall be obtained before construction or
development begins within any area of special flood hazard established
in § 140-7. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms
furnished by the Township Engineer and may include, but not be limited
to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location,
dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location
of the foregoing.
B. Specifically, the following information is required:
(1) Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all structures;
(2) Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any structure has
been floodproofed;
(3) Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet
the floodproofing criteria in § 140-17B; and,
(4) A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development.
A. Permit review.
(1) Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(2) Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
(3) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway; assure that the
encroachment provisions of § 140-18A are met.
§ 140-12 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 140-14
140:363
§ 140-15. Variances.
B. Use of other base flood and floodway data. When base flood elevation
and floodway data has not been provided in accordance with § 140-7,
Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard, the Township
Engineer shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood
elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other
source in order to administer § 140-17, Specific standards, Subsections
A, Residential construction, and B, Nonresidential construction.
C. Information to be obtained; recordkeeping.
(1) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.
(2) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
§ 140-12B(3).
(3) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
D. Alteration of watercourses.
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control Section,
and the Land Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
(2) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so the flood-carrying capacity
is not diminished.
E. Interpretation of DFIRM/FIRM Boundaries. Make interpretations
where needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of
special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict
between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in § 140-15.
A. Appeal Board.
(1) The Township Council of the Township of Cedar Grove shall hear
and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
§ 140-14 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 140-15
140:364
(2) The Township Council shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Township Engineer in the enforcement
or administration of this chapter.
(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Township Council, or any
taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of New
Jersey.
(4) In passing upon such applications, the Township Council shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive
Plan and floodplain management program of that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
(5) Upon consideration of the factors of § 140-15A(4) and the purposes
of this chapter, the Township Council may attach such conditions to
the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the
purposes of this chapter.
§ 140-15 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 140-15
140:365
(6) The Township Engineer shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions, including technical information, and report any variances
to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
B. Conditions for variances.
(1) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items
in § 140-15A(4)(a) through (k) have been fully considered. As the lot
size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification
required for issuing the variance increases.
(2) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
(3) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
(4) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
(5) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public as identified in § 140-15A(4), or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(6) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
§ 140-15 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 140-15
140:366
ARTICLE V
Standards for Flood Hazard Reduction
§ 140-16. General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards, the following standards are required:
A. Anchoring.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure.
(2) All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include,
but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to
ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state
and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
C. Utilities.
(1) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(2) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters;
(3) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
and
(4) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
D. Subdivision proposals.
(1) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
§ 140-16 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 140-16
140:367
§ 140-17. Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in § 140-7, Basis for establishing areas of special
flood hazard, or in § 140-14B, Use of other base flood data, the following
standards are required:
(2) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities,
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;
(3) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage; and
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed developments which contain at least
50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
E. Enclosure openings. All new construction and substantial
improvements having fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that
are usable solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage
in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
(1) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than
one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding shall be provided.
(2) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above
grade.
(3) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other covering
or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters.
A. Residential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall:
(1) Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above
base flood elevation.
(2) Require within any AO Zone on the municipality's DFIRM/FIRM
that all new construction and substantial improvement of any
residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as
high as the depth number specified in feet (at least two feet if no
depth number is specified), and require adequate drainage paths
§ 140-16 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 140-17
140:368
§ 140-18. Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in § 140-7 are areas
designated as "floodways." Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous
area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential
projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away
from proposed structures.
B. Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential
structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to the level of the base flood elevation or, together with the
attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, shall:
(1) Require within any AO Zone on the municipality's DFIRM/FIRM
that all new construction and substantial improvement of any
commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall
either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above
the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number
specified in feet (at least two feet if no depth number is specified),
and require adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes
to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures;
or
(2) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water;
(3) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
(4) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be provided to
the official as set forth in § 140-14C(2).
C. Manufactured homes.
(1) Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
§ 140-16A(2).
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the top of the lowest floor is at or
above the base flood elevation.
A. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development, unless a technical evaluation
§ 140-17 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 140-18
140:369
demonstrates that encroachment shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
B. If § 140-18A is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements must comply with Article V, Provisions for flood hazard
reduction.
C. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data
has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than 0.2 foot at any
point.
§ 140-18 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 140-18
140:370
Chapter 142
FOOD-HANDLING ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Advisory Health Council — See Ch. 31.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 83.
Cabarets, nightclubs and dance halls — See
Ch. 88.
Cigarette vending machines in
restaurants — See Ch. 117.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 179.
Outdoor sidewalk cafes — See Ch. 230, Art.
VII.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Adoption of health codes by reference — See
N.J.S.A. 28:3-69.1 et seq.
Adoption by Township Council — See N.J.S.A.
26:3-1 and 40:69A-88 et seq.
Adoption of general police ordinances — See
N.J.S.A. 40:69A-29.
§ 140-18 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 140-18
140:371

ARTICLE I
Health Standards and Licensing
[Adopted 2-6-1967 by Ord. No. 67-2, Ch. 11, Art. 2, of the former
Revised Ordinances]
§ 142-1. Adoption of standards by reference.
A code regulating retail food establishments, providing for the inspection of
such establishments and fixing penalties for violations is hereby established
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 to 3-69.6. A copy of said code is annexed
hereto and made a part hereof without the inclusion of the text thereof
herein.
§ 142-2. Title of code adopted.
The said code established and adopted by this article is described and
commonly known as the "Retail Food Establishment Code of New Jersey
(1965)."
§ 142-3. Copies of code on file.
Ten copies of the said Retail Food Establishment Code of New Jersey (1965)
have been placed on file in the office of the Health Officer of this local Board
of Health66 upon the introduction of this article and will remain on file there
until final action is taken on this article, for the use and examination of the
public.
§ 142-4. License required; conditions of license; fees. [Amended
10-2-1967 by Ord. No. 67-14]
A. No person shall operate a retail food establishment unless a certificate,
permit or license or approval of an existing certificate, permit or license
to operate same shall have been issued by this Board of Health. Such
certificate, permit, license or approval of an existing certificate, permit
or license shall be posted in a conspicuous place in such establishment.
B. Permits issued or approved under the provisions of this article shall
expire annually on December 31; and application for renewal thereof
shall be submitted, together with the required fee, at least 10 days prior
to December 31 of each year. A late fee of $50 shall be imposed for
permits issued or approved beyond the time prescribed under the
provisions of this article. [Amended 12-20-2010 by Ord. No.
10-718]
C. The annual fees for permits issued or approved under the provisions of
this article shall be: [Amended 11-7-1988 by Ord. No. 88-326;
4-1-1991 by Ord. No. 91-380; 2-21-1994 by Ord. No. 94-435;
12-20-2010 by Ord. No. 10-718]
66.Editor's Note: The Township Council in conjunction with the Township Health Department
acts as the Board of Health pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 et seq.
§ 142-1 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 142-4
140:373
(1) Temporary food-handling permits:
(a) One day: $10.
(b) Two days or more, maximum 10 days: $10 per day.
(2) Retail food establishments:
(a) License Category 1: $100.
[1] Prepackaged and/or fresh foods.
[2] Minimal food preparation of non-potentially hazardous
foods.
[3] Heating only of commercially processed foods, including
potentially hazardous items for hot holding.
[4] No cooling of potentially hazardous foods.
[5] Includes: convenience stores, coffee shops.
(b) License Category 2: $200.
[1] Prepackaged and/or fresh foods.
[2] Prepare, cook, and serve most products to order, or for
immediate service, limited menu.
[3] Limited hot/cold holding of potentially hazardous foods.
[4] Limited cooling of potentially hazardous foods.
[5] Includes: quick-service operations such as delicatessens,
pizzerias, take-out restaurants, bagel shops, ice cream
shops, schools not serving highly susceptible populations.
(c) License Category 3: $300.
[1] Normal food preparation operations involving full-service
menus and potentially hazardous foods.
[2] Handling of raw ingredients.
[3] Complex preparation of menu items, may including
cooking, cooling and reheating of potentially hazardous
foods.
[4] Includes: full-service restaurants, diners, bakeries, sushi
restaurants, nursery schools and schools serving highly
susceptible populations.
(d) License Category 4: $450.
§ 142-4 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 142-4
140:374
§ 142-5. Additional activities to which code is applicable.
This code shall also apply to any wholesale food distributors, food-storage
warehouses and food-vending machines located within the Township.
[1] Exceptional food preparation operations involving fullservice
menus, potentially hazardous foods, cooking,
cooling and reheating operations.
[2] Multiple food operations (multiple departments, such as in
a supermarket).
[3] Large volume of food being served.
[4] Food served to a highly susceptible population.
[5] Includes: supermarkets, banquet halls or catering
facilities, hospitals, nursing homes, establishments
involved in processing or wholesale operations.
(e) Category designations shall be determined by the Health
Officer in accordance with New Jersey State Health
Department guidelines under N.J.A.C. 8:24-1 et al.
(3) Fees for reinspections necessitated by a conditional or
unsatisfactory rating given at the time of inspection of a retail food
establishment licensed or to be licensed by the Township of Cedar
Grove, including but not limited to caterers, road stands, ice cream
trucks, restaurants, dining rooms, and eating or lunch houses
serving food, shall be in the amount of the license fee applicable to
the facility or premises under § 142-4C(2).
(4) Any retail food establishment requiring an inspection for licensure
or as a result of an emergency during off-duty hours, such as
weekends, evenings or holidays, shall reimburse the Township for
the reasonable costs of the inspection regardless of the license fee.
D. A person conducting an itinerant retail food establishment shall secure
a certificate, permit or license; or, if such person is the holder of a
certificate, permit or license issued by the Board of Health of another
jurisdiction, said certificate, permit or license may be approved by this
Board of Health, and there shall be a fee of $40 charged in each case for
such approval. [Amended 11-7-1988 by Ord. No. 88-326]
E. A certificate, permit, license or approval of permit may be suspended or
revoked for a violation by the holder of any provision of this article or
code after an opportunity for a hearing by the Board of Health or its
authorized representative.
F. A certificate, permit, license or approval of a permit issued by another
Board of Health is not transferable.
§ 142-4 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 142-6
140:375
§ 142-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of or order promulgated under this
article or code established herein shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to
a penalty of not less than $2 nor more than $100 for each violation. Each
day a particular violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 142-6 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 142-6
140:376
ARTICLE II
Hours
[Adopted 6-5-1972 by Ord. No. 72-6, Ch. 7, Art. 7, of the former
Revised Ordinances]
§ 142-7. Hours of operation.
All stores, establishments or places of business for the sale of meats,
groceries or provisions for consumption off the premises, located within the
Township of Cedar Grove, shall be closed to the public, and business therein
shall be and is hereby prohibited, before the hour of 7:00 a.m. and after the
hour of 11:00 p.m. on all days.
§ 142-8. Sales prohibited during certain hours. [Amended 1-3-2000
by Ord. No. 99-521]
No person, firm or corporation shall sell or offer to sell in any store,
establishment or place of business located within the Township of Cedar
Grove any meats, groceries or provisions for consumption off the premises,
before the hour of 7:00 a.m. or after the hour of 11:00 p.m. of any day.
Nothing in this section shall prohibit the sale of milk or bread at any time
during the day.
§ 142-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-30-1984 by Ord. No.
84-222]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000
or to imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days, or
both such fine and imprisonment. Each day upon which any such violation
shall occur shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 142-7 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 142-9
140:377

ARTICLE III
Food Handler's Certificate
[Adopted 6-21-1976 by Ord. No. 76-12 as part of Ch. 11, Art. 2, of
the former Revised Ordinances]
§ 142-10. Certificate required. [Amended 9-7-1976 by Ord. No.
76-12(a)]
Any person engaged or employed in the business or service of preparing,
processing or serving food or drink intended for human consumption at a
retail level shall apply to the Cedar Grove Health Department within seven
days of the commencement of his said employment or engagement for a
food handler's certificate and shall successfully complete all requirements
for obtaining said certificate, including attendance at the next regularly
scheduled food handler's training course given by the Township's Health
Department or a state or county health agency, as required by § 142-11
herein.
§ 142-11. Course of instruction required.
The food handler's certificate shall not be issued or granted to any person
unless the person seeking such food handler's certificate shall have first
completed a course of general instruction in health education, sanitation,
personal hygiene, food protection, dishwashing procedures and other
related health matters.
§ 142-12. Fees; disposition of moneys. [Amended 9-7-1976 by Ord.
No. 76-12(a)]
Application for the food handler's certificate shall include a fee of $2
payable to the Township of Cedar Grove. Moneys shall be held in trust to
reimburse Essex County.
§ 142-13. Certificates not transferable.
No person to whom a food handler's certificate is issued or granted shall
give, loan, transfer or permit the same to be used by any other person, for
any purpose whatsoever.
§ 142-14. Records of employees to be maintained by employer.
All employers engaged in the business or service of preparing and
processing food intended for human consumption shall at all times keep
and maintain accurate records of the name and address of each employee,
date of employment and the date of issuance and certificate number of said
food handler's certificate, which records shall be available at all times for
inspection by the Health Officer or his duly authorized representatives.
§ 142-10 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 142-15
140:379
§ 142-15. Employment of persons without certificates prohibited.
No employer shall continue to employ any person in connection with the
preparation, processing or service of food or drink intended for human
consumption at retail unless the person so employed shall have applied
for and obtained a food handler's certificate within the periods specified in
§ 142-10 herein.
§ 142-16. Renewal of certificates.
All owners or managers or supervisors shall renew their food handler's
certificates annually.
§ 142-17. Approval of other courses of instruction.
A food handler's certificate may be granted to persons taking a comparable
course of instruction in another municipality approved by the Health
Department, Township of Cedar Grove.
§ 142-18. Exemptions.
This article requiring a food handler's certificate shall not apply to persons
engaging in food handler's activities on behalf of nonprofit institutions,
churches or other charitable organizations unless the said food handling
activities are conducted on a regular recurring basis. All governmental
agencies and institutions except local school districts, shall be exempt from
the provisions of this article.
§ 142-19. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-30-1984 by Ord. No.
84-222]
A. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
B. In addition, a certificate issued pursuant to this article may be revoked
or suspended when any certificate holder, who is the owner of the
property for which the food handlers' certificate is issued, has failed to
pay the taxes due on the property for at least three consecutive
quarters. [Added 5-6-1991 by Ord. No. 91-383]
§ 142-15 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 142-19
140:380
ARTICLE IV
Rest Room Facilities
[Adopted 2-4-1980 by Ord. No. 80-122]
§ 142-20. Requirements for facilities.
Any restaurant or establishment serving food to the public in Cedar Grove
and having a seating capacity of more than eight customers on stools,
chairs, benches or a combination of seating arrangements which allows
more than eight customers to sit at once will be required to have rest
room facilities accessible to patrons at all times when the food-serving
establishment is open to the public. These rest room facilities will be subject
to inspection requirements of the Cedar Grove Health Department and the
State of New Jersey.
§ 142-20 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 142-20
140:381

ARTICLE V
Mobile Retail Food Establishments
[Adopted 4-1-1991 as part of Ord. No. 91-380]
§ 142-21. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOBILE RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT (hereinafter referred to as a
"mobile unit") — Any movable restaurant, truck, van, trailer, cart, bicycle
or other movable unit, including hand-carried portable containers in or on
which food or beverage is transported, stored or prepared for retail sale or
given away at temporary or permanent locations.
§ 142-22. Compliance required.
All mobile retail food establishments shall comply with all provisions of
Chapter XII of the New Jersey State Sanitary Code which are applicable to
its operation, provided that the Cedar Grove Health Officer may augment
such requirements when needed to assure the service of safe food, may
prohibit the sale of certain potentially hazardous food and may modify
specific requirements for physical facilities when, in his opinion, no
imminent health hazard will result.
§ 142-23. License required.
§ 142-24. Parking.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a mobile unit without first
obtaining a license therefor granted and issued in the manner
hereinafter set forth in this article.
B. No license shall be issued for a mobile unit unless and until the number
of such licenses issued and outstanding is eight or fewer, it being the
intent of this subsection that not more than eight mobile unit licenses
shall be issued and outstanding at the same time. [Amended
12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 13-762]
C. The annual fee for a mobile retail food establishment license shall be
$100. [Amended 10-7-2013 by Ord. No. 13-760]
D. In addition, the recipient of a mobile retail food establishment license
must obtain a food handler's certificate prior to the obtaining of the
license obtained pursuant to this article, which food handler's
certificate is to be obtained in accordance with the provisions of Article
III, §§ 142-10 to 142-19, of this chapter.
A. No person who holds a license in accordance with the provisions of this
article shall park a mobile unit upon a public roadway or street or
§ 142-21 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 142-24
140:383
§ 142-25. Hours of operation.
The operation of mobile units shall be prohibited before the hour of 7:00
a.m. and after the hour of 9:00 p.m. on all days.
§ 142-26. Restricted locations.
All mobile retail food establishments shall be restricted as follows:
§ 142-27. Exceptions.
The following exceptions to the provisions of this article shall be permitted:
§ 142-28. Littering.67
It is unlawful for any person to throw, drop, discard or otherwise place litter
of any nature upon any public or private property, other than in a litter
container.
sidewalk for the purpose of or during the process of soliciting sales or
business or displaying food for sale.
B. Notwithstanding the above, a mobile unit may park upon a public
roadway or street for the purpose of or during the process of selling or
to deliver food to buyers, consumers or other persons. In such cases, no
mobile unit shall remain at any location for more than 30 minutes.
A. No mobile unit shall park, stand or stop on private property.
B. No mobile unit shall park, stand or stop in any public recreation area,
except as provided herein below.
C. No mobile unit shall park, stand or stop within 200 feet of any school.
A. This article shall not apply to mobile retail food establishments
operated by nonprofit institutions and organizations, churches or other
charitable organizations and municipal governmental offices.
B. Mobile units shall be permitted in public recreation areas within the
municipality upon the approval of the Township Council and upon
obtaining an additional license for this purpose and payment of a
license fee of $200.
C. Mobile units shall be permitted on private property with the approval of
the property owner for the purpose of or during the process of soliciting
sales or business or selling food to employees of the property owner
only. In such cases, no mobile unit shall remain at any property for more
than one hour.
67.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 168, Littering.
§ 142-24 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 142-29
140:384
§ 142-29. Suspension or revocation of license.
A license issued pursuant to this article may be suspended or revoked for
a violation by the holder of any of the provisions of this article or code
after an opportunity for a hearing by the Board of Health or its authorized
representative.
§ 142-30. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-23-2006 by Ord.
No. 06-656]
A. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions
of this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not exceeding
$2,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both
such fine and imprisonment. Each day upon which such violation shall
occur shall be deemed a separate offense.
B. In addition to any other penalty, the license may be suspended or
revoked.
§ 142-29 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 142-30
140:385
Chapter 146
GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 100.
Outdoor burning — See Ch. 107.
Littering — See Ch. 168.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 179.
Property maintenance — See Chs. 197 and
198.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Regulation of dumping — See N.J.S.A.
40:67-1g.
Clean Communities and Recycling Act — See
N.J.S.A. 13:1E-92 et seq.
Source separation of marketable waste — See
N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.11 et seq.
§ 142-30 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 142-30
140:386
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted by 2-4-1963, Ch. 13, Art. 4, of the former Revised
Ordinances]
§ 146-1. Definitions. [Amended 4-1-1963]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
REFUSE — Includes refuse, rubbish, debris, trash, garbage, offal, ashes,
paper, junk, scrap, outworn utensils, motor vehicles or parts of motor
vehicles which cannot be readily operated under their own power or which
require substantial repairs or which are unfit for reconditioning and any
outworn, discarded or waste matter or material of any kind. The reference
in this definition to motor vehicles shall not apply to businesses lawfully
operating within the provisions of Chapter 268, Zoning.
§ 146-2. Improper disposal prohibited. [Amended 4-1-1963]
No person shall dump, throw, store or otherwise dispose of or permit to be
dumped, thrown, stored or otherwise disposed of any refuse, as defined in
§ 146-1, upon any field, vacant lot, building plot, street, highway or sidewalk
area or any other place within the Township.
§ 146-2.1. Hours of placement for collection. [Added 12-7-1992 by
Ord. No. 92-410]
No person shall place or cause to be placed any garbage, refuse, rubbish
or recyclables at curbside for collection any sooner than sunset on the day
preceding the date scheduled for the collection of such garbage, refuse,
rubbish or recyclables, and all garbage and recycling containers placed at
curbside for collection shall be removed from curbside not later than 7:00
p.m. on the date on which collection is made.
§ 146-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-30-1984 by Ord. No.
84-222]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days, or both.
§ 146-1 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 146-3
140:387

ARTICLE II
Garbage Collection District No. 1
[Adopted 3-3-1980 by Ord. No. 80-125; amended in its entirety
5-6-1991 by Ord. No. 91-381]
§ 146-4. Establishment.
The territory or area contained within the limits of the Township of Cedar
Grove be and is hereby set off, created and established as Garbage
Collection District No. 1.
§ 146-5. Methods of collection.
Collection shall be performed in the manner set forth in the specifications
prepared by the Township and the contract awarded pursuant thereto to the
successful bidder according to the Local Public Contracts Law68 for a period
not to exceed five years.
§ 146-6. Collection of costs by taxation.
There shall be raised by levying and collection at the same time and in the
same manner as other Township taxes, within the limits of said Garbage
Collection District No. 1, sufficient moneys to provide for the payment of
the costs of removing and disposing of the garbage, refuse, trash and other
refuse matter from said District. The Tax Collector of the Township of Cedar
Grove shall pay said sum to the Chief Financial Officer, and said sum so
raised and collected shall be applied to the purpose for which it is raised.
§ 146-7. Collection as a lien on property.
All moneys assessed and levied as aforesaid shall be a lien upon the lands
and premises against which they shall be assessed, in the same manner that
taxes are made a lien against lands in the Township of Cedar Grove, and
the payment thereof shall be enforced within the same time and the same
manner and by the same proceeding as the payment of taxes is enforced in
the Township of Cedar Grove as provided by statute.
§ 146-7.1. Amount to be raised by taxation.
The amount to be levied each year for the Garbage Collection District No.
1 shall be established in accordance with an ordinance adopted by the
governing body setting forth the amount required to be raised for said
purposes.
68.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
§ 146-4 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 146-7.1
140:389

ARTICLE III
Recycling
[Adopted 5-19-1986 by Ord. No. 86-267]
§ 146-8. Definitions. [Amended 11-20-1989 by Ord. No. 89-351;
9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 91-387; 6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 02-579;
8-8-2016 by Ord. No. 16-799]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALUMINUM BEVERAGE CONTAINERS — All containers normally used in
the consumption of alcoholic and nonalcoholic beverages both in the home
and in retail establishments dispensing the same for on- or off-premises
consumption, the same being made entirely of aluminum.
BIMETAL (TIN/STEEL) CANS — Aluminum and tin or tin-plated steel food
and beverage containers, including those for fruits, vegetables, juices and
pet food.
COMMERCIAL SOURCE — Wholesale, retail, service or manufacturing
establishments, including but not limited to restaurants, markets, offices,
retail and wholesale outlets, industrial establishments and theaters.
FERROUS SCRAP — Metal that is magnetic and rusts such as structural
steel or cast iron components.
GLASS FOOD AND BEVERAGE CONTAINERS — All containers and objects
commonly used in residential and nonresidential premises, such as bottles,
jars, glasses, jugs and all other vessels made entirely and exclusively of
glass.
INSTITUTIONAL SOURCES — Churches, synagogues, colleges, schools,
municipal or municipally supported bodies, not-for-profit organizations and
the like.
LEAD ACID BATTERIES (VEHICLE BATTERIES) — Types that contain lead
and lead oxide with the sulfuric acid electrolyte produces a voltage.
LEAVES — Foliage material naturally formed from trees and bushes that are
suitable for composting and mulching.
MIXED OFFICE PAPER — A combination of paper products found in an
office environment; typically, it means high-grade papers such as copier
paper, computer printout, and stationery. It also includes magazines,
catalogs, brochures, white envelopes, advertising flyers and most mail.
OLD CORRUGATED CONTAINERS — All corrugated cardboard of the type
commonly used for boxes, shipping containers and packing material having
exterior cardboard plies separated by air spaces created by one or more
fabricated cardboard plies.
§ 146-8 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 146-9
140:391
§ 146-9. Mandatory separation of materials. [Amended 6-17-2002
by Ord. No. 02-579; 8-8-2016 by Ord. No. 16-799]
There is hereby established a program for the mandatory source separation
from the municipal solid waste stream by the single-family and multifamily
residential, commercial, office park, industrial, institutional and
governmental solid waste generators of the Township at the point of
generation of the following items:
Residential: Commercial: Institutional:
Newspapers Newspapers Newspapers
Mixed paper (i.e., junk
mail, office paper, all
marketable grades)
Office paper (all
marketable grades)
Office paper (all
marketable grades)
Old corrugated
containers
Old corrugated
containers
Old corrugated
containers
Glass food and
beverage containers
Glass food and
beverage containers
Glass food and beverage
containers
Aluminum beverage
containers
Aluminum beverage
containers
Aluminum beverage
containers
Leaves Leaves Leaves
Used motor oil Used motor oil Used motor oil
White goods White goods White goods
Lead acid batteries
(vehicle batteries)
Lead acid batteries
(vehicle batteries)
Lead acid batteries
(vehicle batteries)
Plastics (#1 and #2) Plastics (#1 and #2) Plastics (#1 and #2)
Steel/tin containers Steel/tin containers Steel/tin containers
Ferrous scrap Ferrous scrap Ferrous scrap
And such other recyclable material to be added or deleted as designated
recyclables by the County of Essex pursuant to a duly adopted amendment
to the County Solid Waste Management Plan approved by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection.
§ 146-10. Ownership of recyclables; unauthorized collection.
A. From the time of placement at the curb by any person of recyclables for
collection by the Township of Cedar Grove or its authorized
representative, pursuant to the regulations established herein, such
recyclables shall become the property of the Township of Cedar Grove
or its authorized agent.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation not authorized
by the Township of Cedar Grove to collect or pick up or cause to be
collected or picked up any such recyclables for any purpose
whatsoever. Each such collection in violation hereof from one or more
§ 146-9 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 146-10
140:392
§ 146-11. Methods of disposal. [Amended 6-17-2002 by Ord. No.
02-579]
All designated materials shall be disposed of in the manner set forth in the
regulations of the Township of Cedar Grove. Such regulations may include
but need not be limited to curbside collection and the municipal dropoff
center. At no time shall the Township or its agent or designee be required to
enter onto private property to retrieve designated materials.
residences shall constitute a separate and distinct offense, punishable
as hereinafter provided.
A. Residential properties. The occupant, lessee, owner or their designee
shall place at curbside in a recyclable container or otherwise bundled
or stacked, separated designated materials in the following manner:
(1) Used newspaper shall be separated and secured in bundles, not to
exceed 12 inches in height. Such bundles shall be either placed in
plastic bags weighing not more than 30 pounds or secured with
string or twine only.
(2) Aluminum, glass, plastic and tin materials shall be rinsed and
commingled in a recyclable container and placed at curbside for
collection in accordance with the schedule established by the
Township.
(3) Mixed paper products shall be secured in bundles or as otherwise
designated by the Township.
(4) Corrugated cardboard must be clean, flattened and tied in bundles
with twine. Bundles may not exceed four feet zero inches by four
feet zero inches or weigh over 50 pounds.
(5) Motor oil, tires and car batteries shall be disposed of at service
stations, automotive repair facilities or in any other lawful manner
at the resident's own expense.
(6) All designated materials may be dropped off at the municipal
dropoff center in the manner described above during normal
operating hours to be established by the Township.
(7) The following items must be source-separated and disposed of at
the resident's expense:
(a) Construction debris;
(b) Concrete material;
(c) Demolition material;
(d) Hazardous materials;
(e) Industrial by-products; and
§ 146-10 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 146-11
140:393
§ 146-12. Administration and enforcement.
The Township Manager is authorized and directed to administer the
provisions of this article. This article shall be enforced by the Code
Enforcement Officer or the Township Health Officer or the Cedar Grove
Police Department.
§ 146-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-17-2002 by Ord. No.
02-579; 8-8-2016 by Ord. No. 16-799]
(f) Roofing material.
(g) Used motor oil. [Added 8-8-2016 by Ord. No. 16-799]
B. Commercial and institutional properties. All lessees, occupants, owners
or their designee shall comply with the procedures set forth in
Subsection A of this regulation. In the alternative, commercial and
institutional residents may contract independently and at their own
expense with a private scavenger service for the removal of designated
recyclable materials. Upon selecting this alternative, the resident shall
provide the Township with proof of compliance with the mandatory
recycling of designated material. Such proof shall include a copy of the
contract with a scavenger contractor and a copy of the tonnage slip of
the actual weight of designated materials disposed of at an authorized
recovery facility. This mandatory reporting shall be provided to the
Township within six months of the promulgation of these regulations
and every six months thereafter.
C. At the option and expense of the resident, designated materials may be
disposed of by any other lawful means, including but not limited to
contributions of the material to charitable drives, subject to the
mandatory reporting requirements. However, under no circumstances
shall designated materials be picked up curbside by anyone other than
the Township of Cedar Grove or its authorized agents without prior
written approval by the Township.
A. Any person, firm or organization found guilty of violating a provision of
this article shall, upon conviction, forfeit and pay a fine of $75 for the
first offense, $150 for the second offense and, for the third and any
subsequent offenses, shall be subject to one or more of the following: a
minimum fine of $250 but not exceeding $1,250, a term of
imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or a period of community service
not exceeding 90 days.
B. In addition to the foregoing penalties, where a container includes
designated recycling material mixed with solid waste, the container will
not be collected.
C. Fines levied and collected pursuant to the provisions of this article shall
be immediately deposited into the Municipal Recycling Trust Fund (or
equivalent).
§ 146-11 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 146-13
140:394
ARTICLE IV
Source Separation of Leaves
[Adopted 10-21-1991 by Ord. No. 91-389]
§ 146-14. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CURB — The area behind the curbline and off the paved surface of a public
roadway.
LEAF BAGS — Biodegradable paper bags which can be composted together
with leaves and have been approved for use by the Township. Excluded is
any type of plastic bag.
LEAVES — Includes leaves generated from residential or commercial
premises located within the Township which have been source-separated
from solid waste.
SOLID WASTE — Includes all garbage and rubbish normally placed at the
curb by residents of the Township for regular collection.
§ 146-15. General provisions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place leaves for collection or disposal
as solid waste, and all persons occupying residential or commercial
premises within the municipality shall separate leaves from solid waste
generated at such premises and, unless leaves are stored or recycled for
composting or mulching by the generator, place the leaves for collection in
the manner provided by this article.
§ 146-16. Manner of collection.
§ 146-17. Restrictions on placement of leaves.
A. Leaves may be raked to the curb and piled at the curbline of municipal
roadways for collection by the municipality from October 1 through
December 31.
B. Leaves may be raked to the curb and piled at the curbline of county
roadways for collection by Essex County in accordance with the
collection schedule developed and promulgated by Essex County each
year.
C. In addition to the above, leaves may be put in biodegradable paper leaf
bags and placed at the curb of any public roadway for collection by the
municipality from October 1 through December 31 and from May 1
through June 30.
A. Leaf piles shall not include debris such as branches, stones, wood or
any other foreign matter which may damage the municipality's
mechanical leaf collection equipment.
§ 146-14 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 146-17
140:395
§ 146-18. Administration and enforcement.
The Township Manager is authorized to administer the provisions of this
article. This article shall be enforced by the Cedar Grove Police Department,
Code Enforcement Officer or the Director of Public Works.
§ 146-19. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-23-2006 by Ord.
No. 06-656]
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any of the
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not
exceeding $2,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or
both such fine and imprisonment. Each day upon which such violation shall
occur shall be deemed a separate offense.
B. Leaves shall not be piled by any individual upon any catch basin or
around any fire hydrant or within 10 feet of an intersection.
C. Leaves shall not be placed in the roadway through the use of air
blowers or other mechanical equipment.
D. Leaves shall not be piled on New Jersey State Highway No. 23
(Pompton Avenue).
§ 146-17 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 146-19
140:396
Chapter 148
GASOLINE STATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 119.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 137.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 197.
Zoning — See Ch. 268.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Authority to regulate — See N.J.S.A. 40:52-1e.
§ 148-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any automobile, truck, motorcycle, motor scooter or
other self-propelled vehicle not operated on tracks or trolleys.
MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE STATION — Any area of land, including
structures thereon, that is used for the sale of gasoline or other motor
vehicle fuel and oil and other lubricating substances, including any sale
of motor vehicle accessories, and which may include facilities used or
designed to be used for polishing, greasing, washing, spraying, dry
cleaning, repairing or providing similar services. "Motor vehicle service
station" shall be deemed to include a gasoline station as defined in Chapter
268, Zoning, as amended and supplemented.
§ 148-2. License required.
No person shall conduct or operate a motor vehicle service station within
the Township without first obtaining a license therefor from the Township in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 148-3. Record of applications and licenses to be maintained.
The Township Clerk shall keep a record of all applications submitted and all
licenses issued under this chapter.
§ 148-4. Application procedure.
A. All applications for a motor vehicle service station license shall be made
in writing, under oath, upon forms furnished by the Township Clerk.
The applicant shall set forth completely the information therein
requested and file said application with the Township Clerk. The
application shall be accompanied by the license fee prescribed in
§ 148-6.
§ 146-19 GASOLINE STATIONS § 148-4
148:397
§ 148-5. Approval; issuance of license.
If, after an investigation by the Building Inspector and the Police
Department, it shall appear that the applicant is of good character and
reputation and that the statements set forth in the application are correct,
the Building Inspector and the Chief of Police shall endorse their respective
approval on the said application. In such case, and upon payment of the
license fee prescribed by § 148-6, the Township Clerk shall issue to the
applicant a license for a motor vehicle service station.
§ 148-6. Fee. [Amended 12-21-1970 by Ord. No. 70-21; 11-5-1973 by
Ord. No. 73-24; 10-6-1975 by Ord. No. 75-11; 11-7-1988 by Ord. No.
88-326]
The fee for a motor vehicle service station license shall be $100 per year or
any part thereof.
§ 148-7. Term of license.
The license for a motor vehicle service station shall be issued for a term of
one year, commencing as of January 1 and expiring on December 31 of the
year of its issuance, unless sooner surrendered or revoked.
§ 148-8. License not transferable.
§ 148-9. Outside storage of materials and outside repairs restricted;
limitations on illumination.
B. The application shall set forth:
(1) If an individual: the name and address of the applicant.
(2) If a partnership: the name and residence of each partner.
(3) If a corporation or other organization: the name, date and state
under whose laws such corporation or organization was organized
and the names of the principal officers and local representatives
and their residences and business addresses.
(4) The name and residence of the operator, if different from the
owner.
(5) Such other information as may be required in the application.
A. The license issued under this chapter shall authorize the named
licensee to conduct or operate a motor vehicle service station only on
the premises specified in the license.
B. No license issued under this chapter shall be transferred or assigned or
used by any person other than the one to whom it is issued.
§ 148-4 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 148-9
148:398
§ 148-10. Sale of motor vehicles prohibited.
No motor vehicles shall be sold or displayed for sale on the licensed
premises.
§ 148-11. Maintenance of facilities.
Every licensee under this chapter shall keep and maintain:
§ 148-12. Restrictions on hours of operation. [Amended 3-15-1965
by Ord. No. 65-3; 4-5-1965 by Ord. No. 65-3(a); 3-17-1969 by Ord.
No. 69-4]
No motor vehicle service station located within 50 feet of any property used
for residential purposes shall be operated between the hours of 11:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m.
§ 148-13. Suspension or revocation of license. [Amended
12-17-1962]
In addition to the penalty prescribed in § 148-15 hereof, any license issued
under this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the Council upon
complaint of the Building Inspector if, after hearing upon 10 days' written
notice of the time and place thereof, the Council finds that the licensee:
A. No supplies or materials shall be kept outside the station building
unless stored in metal racks or cabinets not to exceed seven feet in
height; provided, however, no used parts of motor vehicles or
inoperative vehicles or used tires shall be stored or displayed at any
time outside the station building.
B. No repair work shall be performed outside the station building except
for incidental minor repairs.
C. No electric lights shall be installed or arranged on any poles which
exceed 16 feet in height, and all such illumination shall be shaded
properly so as to protect adjoining properties and property owners
therefrom.
A. The sidewalks and driveways surrounding the licensed premises in a
safe condition and free from ice, sleet and snow.
B. All building and toilet facilities on the licensed premises in clean, neat
and sanitary condition and free from accumulation of refuse, and all
plumbing fixtures in workable operation.
C. Drainage refuse, grease dripping or other waste materials in containers
approved by the National Board of Fire Underwriters.
D. Proper fire extinguishing apparatus on the premises.
E. All vehicles on the licensed premises stored in such manner as to be
readily removed in case of fire or other emergency.
§ 148-9 GASOLINE STATIONS § 148-13
148:399
§ 148-14. Enforcement official.
The Building Inspector is hereby authorized and designated to enforce this
chapter. He shall have the authority to inspect, during reasonable hours
and as often as he deems necessary, any motor vehicle service station.
The person conducting or operating said motor vehicle service station
shall permit and give free access to all parts thereof for purposes of said
inspection by the Building Inspector.
§ 148-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-17-1962;
7-30-1984 by Ord. No. 84-222; 10-23-2006 by Ord. No. 06-656]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000 or by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 150
GAS PIPING AND APPLIANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 119. Fire prevention — See Ch. 137.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Adoption of codes by reference — See N.J.S.A.
40:49-5.1.
§ 150-1. Adoption of standards by reference; amendments; copies
on file.
A. Has made false representations of material statements in the
application for such license; or
B. Knowingly violates or permits or countenances the violation of:
(1) Any provision of this chapter; or
(2) Any state law or ordinance concerning the theft, larceny,
conversion or operation, without the owner's consent, of any motor
vehicle.
C. In addition, a license issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked or
suspended when any licensee, who is the owner of the property upon
which the licensed business is conducted, has failed to pay the taxes
due on the property for at least three consecutive quarters. [Added
5-6-1991 by Ord. No. 91-383]
§ 148-13 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 150-1
150:400
§ 150-2. Plumbing Inspector to observe tests.
Any tests required to be performed pursuant to the Standard Code for the
Installation of Gas Appliances and Gas Piping shall be conducted in the
presence of the Plumbing Inspector.
§ 150-3. Permit required.
Any person proposing to install pipes for conducting gas to be used for
illuminating or fuel purposes or to install any gas burning appliance in
any building in the Township shall, before making such installation, apply
for and obtain a permit from the Township Health Department for such
installation. No permit shall be issued except to the owner-occupant of a
single-family residence where the work is to be done on such residence or
to a plumber duly licensed by the Township.
§ 150-4. Application procedure; fees. [Amended 11-17-1969 by Ord.
No. 69-18]
Application for a permit shall be made by filing with the Township Health
Department plans and specifications for the proposed work with suitable
and necessary drawings of the work to be performed, accompanied by a
minimum fee of $10 for up to four fixtures or meters, plus a $2 fee for
each additional fixture or meter. Said specifications and descriptions shall
be made on forms furnished by the Township Health Department and shall
A. The whole of that certain printed code entitled "Standards of the
National Board of Fire Underwriters for the Installation of Gas
Appliances and Gas Piping as Recommended by the National Fire
Protection Association" and further identified as "NBFU No. 54 (August,
1959)," hereinafter referred to as the "Standard Code for the
Installation of Gas Appliances and Gas Piping," is hereby adopted as the
minimum standards regulating and controlling the installation of gas
appliances and gas piping within the Township, save and except the last
sentence of Section 1.1 of the aforesaid code, which is amended to read
as follows: "The word 'tubing' refers only to semirigid tubing of
seamless copper, brass or steel that is acceptable under these
standards."
B. The definitions, standards, practices, requirements, directions,
prohibitions and specifications set forth in the said Standard Code for
the Installation of Gas Appliances and Gas Piping, as amended, are
hereby incorporated in and made a part of this chapter as though set
forth in full herein.
C. Ten copies of said Standard Code for the Installation of Gas Appliances
and Gas Piping have been placed on file in the office of the Township
Clerk and in the office of the Township Health Officer and shall remain
on file in each of said offices for the use and examination of the public
so long as this chapter remains in force.
§ 150-1 GAS PIPING AND APPLIANCES § 150-4
150:401
show clearly the number of outlets to be provided and the size of the pipes
to be used to supply each outlet.
§ 150-5. Reinspection fee.
The fee for each reinspection of work caused by the failure of the permittee
to complete the work in accordance with the Standard Code for the
Installation of Gas Appliances and Gas Piping or the permit issued under
this chapter shall be the same as the minimum permit fee.
§ 150-6. Time limits for completion of work.
Any permit issued under this chapter shall terminate and become invalid:
§ 150-7. Nonapplicability to public utilities.
The provisions of §§ 150-3 to 150-6, both inclusive, shall not be construed to
apply to the connection, disconnection, adjustment, maintenance or repair
of any gas meters, appliances or equipment, nor to gas piping related
thereto, by a public utility engaged in supplying gas to consumers within
the Township or to any employees of such public utility while so engaged in
the performance of their duties as such employees.
§ 150-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-30-1984 by Ord. No.
84-222; 10-23-2006 by Ord. No. 06-656]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000 or by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 153
GOLF COURSES AND DRIVING RANGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Places of amusement — See Ch. 88. Zoning — See Ch. 268.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Adoption of police ordinances — See N.J.S.A.
40:69A-29.
A. If the work authorized by said permit is not commenced within 60 days
from the date of issuance of the permit; or
B. If the said work has not been completed within one year from the date
of issuance of the permit.
§ 150-4 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 150-8
153:402
§ 153-1. License required.
No person shall conduct for profit a miniature golf course, putting course
or driving tee or driving range within the Township without having first
obtained a license for that purpose from the Township Clerk.
§ 153-2. Unlicensed use prohibited.
No owner, occupant or other person having possession or care of any plot
or lot of land or premises within the Township shall suffer or permit the
operating or conducting of any miniature golf course, putting course or
driving tees or driving ranges for profit unless a license therefor has first
been obtained by the operator thereof.
§ 153-3. Application procedure; survey.
All applications for licenses under this chapter shall be made in writing in
the form prescribed or approved by the Township Clerk. The application
shall be accompanied by a survey showing the dimensions of the property
on which it is to be operated, the location of the miniature golf course and,
if it is a driving range, the location of the teeing grounds.
§ 153-4. Grounds for denial of license.
The Township Clerk may deny the application for any of the following
reasons:
§ 153-5. Fees. [Amended 12-15-1947]
The fee per annum for a license under this chapter shall be:
A. That the location and use of the property covered by the application
does not conform to all applicable ordinances of the Township,
including this chapter.
B. That the applicant is not a proper or fit person to be licensed or is
unable to conduct the operation for which the license is sought.
C. That the location of the miniature golf course, putting course or driving
tee or driving range will be a hazard to life or property.
D. That the operation of said enterprise will affect the health, morals or
safety of the public.
E. That the property covered by the application is not sufficiently large to
contain the activity without creating a nuisance to nearby property
owners.
F. That a prior license issued to the applicant of the type required by this
chapter had been suspended or revoked.
§ 150-8 GOLF COURSES AND DRIVING RANGES § 153-5
153:403
§ 153-6. Term of license.
No license shall be issued for a period longer than the calendar year. Each
license shall expire on December 31 of the year in which issued.
§ 153-7. Hours of operation. [Amended 12-15-1947; 8-21-1950]
§ 153-8. Appeals. [Added 1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 77-64]
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Township Clerk may appeal such
decision to the Township Council by notifying the Township Clerk of the
intent to appeal within 10 days of the applicant's receipt of such adverse
decision. The Township Council shall then schedule a hearing on such
appeal within 30 days of receipt of the notice to appeal, at which time the
applicant may present such evidence as he desires to establish his grounds
for appeal. Said appeal shall be decided by a majority vote of the Council
and this decision will be considered final.
§ 153-9. Revocation or suspension of license. [Amended
12-17-1962]
In addition to the penalty prescribed in § 153-10, any license issued under
this chapter may be revoked or suspended by the Council, after notice and
hearing, upon any of the following grounds:
A. Miniature golf course: $250.
B. Putting course: $250.
C. Driving tee or driving range: $600. [Amended 10-6-1975 by Ord. No.
75-11]
A. All licensed miniature golf courses and putting courses shall close at
12:30 a.m. each day except Sunday, and at 1:00 a.m. on Sunday, and
remain closed until 8:00 a.m. following the aforesaid closing hours.
B. All licensed driving tees or driving ranges shall close at 1:30 a.m. each
day and remain closed until 8:00 a.m., except that any driving tee
located within 300 feet of any residence shall close at 12:30 a.m. each
day.
A. The licensee has created a nuisance in the operation of the licensed
activity.
B. The licensee has made false statements in the application for a license
or in its accompanying documents.
C. The licensee has violated any of the provisions of this chapter.
D. Such other grounds as may be deemed advisable for the public welfare.
§ 153-5 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 153-10
153:404
§ 153-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-17-1962;
7-30-1984 by Ord. No. 84-222; 10-23-2006 by Ord. No. 06-656]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000 or by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 158
HOUSING STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 105.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 119.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 137.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 179.
Residential property maintenance — See Ch.
198.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Adoption of standard codes by
reference — See N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1.
§ 158-1. Title.
This chapter may be cited as the "Housing Code of the Township of Cedar
Grove."
§ 158-2. Definitions.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
NEW JERSEY STATE HOUSING CODE — Refers to that certain code
approved by the State Department of Conservation and Economic
Development and the State Department of Health and filed in the office
of the Secretary of State on January 31, 1962, prescribing the standards
to guide the public officer of a municipality authorized by the ordinance
adopting the said code to enforce the same, in determining the fitness
of a building for human habitation, use or occupancy.
B. Whenever the following words, terms or phrases are used in the New
Jersey State Housing Code, they shall have the meanings herein given:
BOARD OF HEALTH — The Department of Health of the Township of
Cedar Grove.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Cedar Grove.
§ 153-10 HOUSING STANDARDS § 158-2
158:405
§ 158-3. Adoption of standards by reference; copies on file.
§ 158-4. Compliance with standard code required.
No person shall occupy as owner or occupant or rent to another for
occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein,
which does not conform to the applicable provisions of the New Jersey State
Housing Code.
§ 158-5. Enforcement official.
The Township Health Officer shall be and he is hereby designated as the
officer to exercise the powers prescribed by this chapter and to enforce
the provisions thereof. The Council may by resolution from time to time, at
its discretion, transfer to some other Township employee or employees the
functions and duties of such enforcement officer. Such person or persons
shall serve in such capacity without any additional salary.
§ 158-6. Promulgation of rules and regulations.
The Health Officer is hereby authorized and empowered to make, adopt and
enforce such written rules and regulations as he may deem necessary for
the proper enforcement of the provisions of this chapter; provided, however,
that such rules and regulations shall not be in conflict with the provisions of
this chapter nor in anywise alter, amend or supersede any of the provisions
thereof. The Health Officer shall file in his office and in the office of the
PUBLIC OFFICER — The Health Officer of the Township or such other
employee as may hereafter be designated by the Township Council.
C. Except as otherwise modified by the provisions of Subsection B of this
section, the words, terms or phrases used in this chapter and defined in
Section 2 of the State Housing Code shall have the meanings given in
such State Housing Code.
A. Pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1946, c. 21, as amended by P.L. 1948,
c. 276 (N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1 et seq.), the State Housing Code is hereby
adopted and established as constituting the standards to be used in
determining whether dwellings in the Township are safe and sanitary
and fit for human habitation, use, rental or occupancy.
B. The said State Housing Code is hereby incorporated in this chapter by
reference and made a part hereof as though it had been set forth herein
at length, a printed copy thereof having been annexed to this chapter
when it was adopted by ordinance, passed July 2, 1962, adopting said
state code.
C. Ten copies of said State Housing Code have been placed on file in the
office of the Township Clerk and in the office of the enforcing officer and
shall there remain on file for the use and examination of the public so
long as this chapter shall remain in effect.
§ 158-2 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 158-6
158:406
Township Clerk a certified copy of all rules and regulations which he may
adopt.
§ 158-7. Inspections; right of entry.
§ 158-8. Access to owners.
Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall give the owner thereof,
or his agent or employee, access to any part of such dwelling or dwelling
unit, or its premises, at all reasonable times for the purpose of making
such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with the
provisions of this chapter or with any lawful rule or regulation adopted or
any lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 158-9. Service of notice of violations.
A. The Health Officer is hereby authorized and directed to make
inspections to determine the condition of dwellings, dwelling units,
rooming units and premises located within the Township in order that
he may perform his duty of safeguarding the health and safety of the
occupants of dwellings and of the general public.
B. For the purpose of making the inspections referred to in Subsection A of
this section, the Health Officer is hereby authorized to enter, examine
and survey, at all reasonable times, all dwelling units, rooming units
and premises.
C. The owner or occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit and rooming
unit, or the person in charge thereof, shall give the Health Officer free
access to such dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit and its premises
at all reasonable times for the purpose of such inspection, examination
and survey.
A. Whenever the Health Officer determines that there are reasonable
grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of
this chapter, or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, he
shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person or persons
responsible therefor as provided in Subsections B and C of this section.
Any notice served pursuant to this section shall automatically be
deemed and become an order, unless a written petition for a hearing is
filed in the office of the Health Officer within 10 days after such service
of notice, as provided in § 158-10A.
B. Notice of violations.
(1) Notice of violations given pursuant to Subsection A hereof shall:
(a) Be in writing.
(b) Contain a statement of the alleged violation or violations.
§ 158-6 HOUSING STANDARDS § 158-9
158:407
§ 158-10. Right of hearing; hearing procedure and effect; records.
§ 158-11. Emergency orders.
(c) Specify a reasonable time at which the violation or violations
shall be abated, corrected or eliminated.
(2) At the option of the Health Officer, the notice of violation or
violations may contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken,
will abate, correct or eliminate the violation or violations alleged in
the notice.
C. A copy of the notice of violation given pursuant to Subsections A and B
hereof shall be served upon the owner or his agent or the occupant, as
the case may require, personally or by registered or certified mail
addressed to him at his last known address or by posting said copy in a
conspicuous place in or about the dwelling affected by such notice or by
any other method authorized or required by the laws of this state.
A. Any person given notice pursuant to § 158-9 of a violation of this
chapter or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto shall be
entitled to a hearing upon the matter before the Health Officer if a
written petition, briefly setting forth the grounds for a hearing, is filed
in the office of the Health Officer within 10 days of the service of the
notice. Upon receipt of the petition, the Health Officer shall fix a time
and place for the hearing, but not later than 10 days after the filing of
the petition, and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof.
B. The hearing shall be commenced before the Health Officer within 10
days after the filing of the petition unless, on application of the
petitioner and a showing of good cause, the Health Officer grants a
postponement thereof to a fixed date which he deems reasonable under
the circumstances.
C. At the hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard
and to show why such notice should be modified or withdrawn.
D. The Health Officer after the hearing shall sustain, modify or withdraw
the notice in accordance with his findings as to whether the provisions
of this chapter and of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant
thereto have been complied with. If the Health Officer sustains or
modifies such notice, it shall be deemed to be and have the effect of an
order.
E. The proceedings at such hearing, including the findings and decision of
the Health Officer, shall be summarized and reduced to writing and
entered as a matter of public record in the office of the Health Officer.
Such record shall also include a copy of every notice or order issued in
connection with the matter.
A. Whenever the Health Officer finds that in any dwelling, dwelling unit,
rooming unit and premises located within the Township a condition
§ 158-9 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 158-11
158:408
§ 158-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-17-1962;
7-30-1984 by Ord. No. 84-222; 10-23-2006 by Ord. No. 06-656]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or of the rules and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000 or by imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 161
HYDRANTS AND SPRINKLERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 23.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 119.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 137.
Gas piping and appliances — See Ch. 150.
Housing standards — See Ch. 158.
Water — See Ch. 259.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Adoption of standard codes by
reference — See N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1.
§ 161-1. Restrictions on use of hydrants and water system.
exists in violation of this chapter or the rules and regulations adopted
pursuant thereto which presents such immediate and serious threat
to the health and safety of the occupants thereof or of the general
public as to require emergency action for their protection, he shall,
without notice or hearing, issue and cause to be served an order in the
mode specified in § 158-9 of this chapter, reciting the existence of the
conditions creating the emergency and requiring that such corrective
action be taken as he deems necessary to meet the emergency and
as specified in the order. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
chapter to the contrary such order shall be effective immediately upon
service.
B. The person to whom the order referred to in Subsection A of this
section is directed shall comply therewith forthwith, unless within 48
hours of the service of the order he petitions in writing the Health
Officer to afford him a hearing as soon as possible for the purpose of
reviewing such order. At the conclusion of such hearing, the Health
Officer, depending upon his findings, shall continue the order in effect;
or modify it, including, but not by way of limitation, the time for
compliance therewith; or rescind it. A record of the proceedings of such
hearing shall be taken and entered as provided in § 158-10 hereof.
§ 158-11 HYDRANTS AND SPRINKLERS § 161-1
161:409
§ 161-2. Fire hose attachments required; restrictions on use.
Where pipes are provided for fire protection on any premises or where hose
connections for fire apparatus are provided on any pipe, each connection
or opening on said pipes, except sprinkler heads, shall have not less than
50 feet of fire hose, with standard thread as specified and approved by
the Township constantly attached thereto. No water shall be taken or used
through such pipes, openings or hose for any purpose other than for fighting
or extinguishing fires or for testing such fire apparatus after obtaining a
special permit from the Township Engineer to make such a test. Each such
test must be conducted under the supervision of Township personnel.
§ 161-3. Installation of sprinkler systems.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person other than a duly authorized agent or
employee of the Township or a member of the Fire Department while
engaged in the performance of his regular duties, and for uses and
purposes of such Department, to open or attempt to open any of the fire
hydrants or valves connected with any such waterworks system of the
Township without such person first obtaining written permission from
the proper officers of the Township.
B. No person shall in any manner obstruct or prevent free access to or
tamper with or injure, or damage by causing or permitting a vehicle to
come in contact with, any fire hydrant; or place or store temporarily or
otherwise any object, material, snow, debris or structure of any kind
within a distance of 10 feet of any fire hydrant. Any such obstruction,
when discovered, may be removed at once by the Township at the
expense of the person responsible for the obstruction, and such
removal shall not be deemed to be in lieu of the penalty provided in
§ 161-4.
A. Application for a connection to the water main for the purpose of
installing a sprinkler system shall be made to the Township. The fee for
the installation of the connection running to the curbline shall be
charged as prescribed in § 259-11E of the Code of the Township of
Cedar Grove. The installation shall be performed in accordance with all
Township water regulations and ordinances.69
B. Requirements for the installation of sprinkler systems for fire
protection shall be in accordance with that certain printed code entitled
"Standard of the National Board of Fire Underwriters for the
Installation of Sprinkler Systems As Recommended by the National Fire
Protection Association (NBFU No. 13, July 1960)," the whole of which
code is hereby adopted, and incorporated herein and made a part of this
subsection as though set forth at length, as the recognized municipal
standards and policy for the installation of sprinkler systems. Ten
copies of said code have been placed on file in the office of the Township
Clerk and in the office of the Township Engineer and shall remain on file
69.Editor's Note: See Ch. 259, Water.
§ 161-1 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 161-3
161:410
§ 161-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-30-1984 by Ord. No.
84-222; 10-23-2006 by Ord. No. 06-656]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or of any of the
regulations provided for therein shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished
by a fine not exceeding $2,000 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding
90 days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 162
INSURANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Payment of claims — See Ch. 10. Fire prevention — See Ch. 137.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Prohibition of payment of claims without
submission of certain documents — See
N.J.S.A. 17:36-8 through 17:36-13.
in each of said offices for the use and examination of the public so long
as this subsection remains in force.
§ 161-3 INSURANCE § 161-4
162:411

ARTICLE I
Fire Insurance Claims
[Adopted 8-6-1979 by Ord. No. 79-95]
§ 162-1. Payment of claims on property involving unpaid liens.
No insurance company which has issued or renewed any fire insurance
policy after the adoption of this article and after the filing thereof with
the State Commissioner of Insurance shall pay to a claimant under said
fire insurance policy any claim in excess of $2,500 for fire damages on
any real estate located in the Township of Cedar Grove until such time
as all taxes, assessments and all other municipal liens or charges due
and payable appearing on the official certificate of search shall have been
paid either by the owner of such real estate or by the insurance company,
pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 184 of the Public Laws of 1978,70
or until the Township of Cedar Grove submits to the insurance company a
copy of a resolution adopted pursuant to the said public law allowing the
application of the insurance proceeds to the restoration or improvement of
the damaged property by the owner.
§ 162-2. Filing of copy of article.
A copy of this article shall be submitted, upon final adoption, to the State
Commission of Insurance in accordance with Chapter 184 of the Public
Laws of 1978.
70.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 17:36-8 et seq.
§ 162-1 INSURANCE § 162-2
162:413
Chapter 165
LIBRARY, USE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public Library Board — See Ch. 40.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Free public libraries — See N.J.S.A. 40:54-1 et
seq.
General powers — See N.J.S.A. 40:69A-29.
§ 165-1. Return of articles after notice to do so.
No person shall detain or fail to return any book, periodical, pamphlet,
artistic reproduction, phonograph recording, audiovisual material or any
other article borrowed from the Free Public Library of the Township of
Cedar Grove after 30 days have elapsed from the date of posting notice
by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a notice demanding return
thereof, addressed to said person at the last address furnished.
§ 165-2. Defacing, damaging or destroying articles prohibited.
No person shall cut, tear, deface, disfigure, damage or destroy any book,
periodical, pamphlet, artistic reproduction, phonograph recording,
audiovisual material or other article, or any part thereof, which is borrowed
from, owned by or is in the custody of such library.
§ 165-3. Adoption of additional rules and regulations; posting.
The Library Board shall adopt and post in a conspicuous place in the Free
Public Library building rules, regulations and procedures governing the
borrowing of books, periodicals, pamphlets or any other item or article
which may be available for such borrowing to the public.
§ 165-4. Compliance with rules and regulations required.
No person shall remove any book, periodical, pamphlet, artistic
reproduction, phonograph recording, audiovisual material or any other item
or article from the Free Public Library building without complying with the
rules, regulations and procedures of the library for borrowing such items or
articles.
§ 165-5. Conditions for filing complaint.
The Library Director is authorized to file a complaint in the Municipal Court
under the following conditions:
§ 162-2 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 165-5
165:414
§ 165-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-23-2006 by Ord. No.
06-656]
Any person who violates or refuses to comply with the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not to exceed
$500.
Chapter 168
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 100.
Outdoor burning — See Ch. 107.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 146.
Housing standards — See Ch. 158.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 179.
Property maintenance — See Chs. 197 and
198.
Use of recreation areas — See Ch. 205.
Sewers — See Ch. 217.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
General powers — See N.J.S.A. 40:69A-29.
§ 168-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LITTER — Any used or unconsumed substance or waste material that
has been discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber,
paper or other natural or synthetic material, or any combination thereof,
including, but not limited to, any bottle, jar or can, or any top, cap or
detachable tab of any bottle, jar or can, any unlighted cigarette, cigar,
match or any flaming or glowing material or any garbage, trash, refuse,
debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspapers,
magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or other packaging
or construction material, but does not include the waste of the primary
A. A certified letter, return receipt requested, shall be sent by the library
administration after six weeks, informing the person that the book or
material is overdue and that he is subject to prosecution pursuant to
this chapter.
B. In the case of a minor, the letter shall be sent to the parents of the minor
involved.
C. The book, material or article shall be overdue for at least two months.
§ 165-5 LITTERING § 168-1
168:415
processes of mining or other extraction processes, logging, sawmilling,
farming or manufacturing.[Added 9-11-2006 by Ord. No. 06-652]
LITTER RECEPTACLE — A container suitable for the depositing of
litter.[Added 9-11-2006 by Ord. No. 06-652]
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.[Added 9-11-2006 by Ord. No. 06-652]
PRIVATE PROPERTY or PRIVATE PREMISES — Includes any
noncommercial property or premises used for residential or recreational
purposes.[Added 9-11-2006 by Ord. No. 06-652]
PUBLIC PLACE or PUBLIC PLACES — Include sidewalks, gutters, streets or
other public places within the Township.
§ 168-2. Throwing materials on public or private property
prohibited. [Amended 10-20-2003 by Ord. No. 03-600; 9-11-2006 by
Ord. No. 06-652]
No person shall throw, place or leave, or permit or cause to be thrown,
placed, or left, directly or indirectly, any rubbish, refuse, waste, garbage,
ashes, paper or other material, including, but not limited to, any signs, into
or upon any of the public places or private property within the Township.
§ 168-3. Scattering of papers and written matter prohibited. [Added
9-11-2006 by Ord. No. 06-652]
No person shall strew about or cause to be strewn about any newspaper,
paper, periodical, book, magazine, circular, card or pamphlet in or upon any
public places or private property within the Township.
§ 168-4. Throwing or depositing sharp objects prohibited. [Added
9-11-2006 by Ord. No. 06-652]
No person shall throw, place or deposit any glass, wire, tin cans, tacks or
other sharp, injurious or cutting substance in or upon any public places or
private property within the Township.
§ 168-5. Litter from vehicles. [Added 9-11-2006 by Ord. No. 06-652]
A. No person shall throw or drop any bundle, object, article or debris of
any nature from a vehicle, whether in motion or not, when such vehicle
is on any public or private property within the Township, other than in a
litter receptacle.
B. No person shall drive or move any truck within the Township unless
such vehicle shall be so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load,
contents or litter from falling or being deposited upon any street, alley
or other public place or on private property.
§ 168-1 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 168-5
168:416
§ 168-6. Provision not applicable in certain instances. [Added
9-11-2006 by Ord. No. 06-652]
No provision of this chapter shall be deemed to apply to any person duly
authorized by state or municipal law to do any of the acts prohibited by
this chapter or to any person who places sand or ashes upon ice which has
formed upon any public place or private property.
§ 168-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-17-1962; 7-30-1984
by Ord. No. 84-222; 10-23-2006 by Ord. No. 06-656]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000 or by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 169
MASSAGE BUSINESSES
§ 169-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to insure the health and safety of all persons
involved in massage businesses establishments within the Township of
Cedar Grove.
§ 169-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this section, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
EMPLOYEE — Any and all persons, other than the massage practitioners,
who work at a massage establishment, who receive compensation directly
from the permittee and who have no physical contact with the customers
and clients.
MASSAGE — Any method of pressure on or friction against or stroking,
kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating of the
external soft parts of the body with the hands or with the aid of any
mechanical electrical apparatus or appliances with or without such
supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder,
C. No person shall drive or move any vehicle or truck within the Township
whose wheels or tires shall carry onto or deposit in any street, alley or
other public place in the Township any mud, dirt, sticky substance,
litter or foreign matter of any kind.
D. Whenever litter is thrown, dropped, discarded or allowed to fall from a
vehicle in violation of this section, the operator or owner, or both, of the
vehicle shall also be deemed to have violated this section.
§ 168-5 LITTERING § 169-2
168:417
creams, lotions, ointments or other similar preparations commonly used in
this practice.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment having a fixed place of
business where any person, firm, association or corporation engages in or
carries on or permits to be engaged in or carried on any of the activities
mentioned in this section. This includes any establishment engaged in or
carrying on or permitting the practice of massage therapy.
MASSAGE PRACTITIONER(S) — Any person, including a trainee, who,
for any consideration whatsoever, engages in the practice of massage as
herein defined, including but not limited to subcontractors, subtenants or
temporary employees.
OUT-CALL MASSAGE SERVICE — Massage therapy which is performed by
a massage practitioner in a venue other than a massage establishment.
PATRON — Any person who receives a massage under such circumstances
that it is reasonably expected that he or she will pay money or give any
other consideration therefor.
PERMITTEE — The operator of a massage establishment and out-call
massage service.
§ 169-3. Permits required.
§ 169-4. Application fees.
Every applicant for a permit to maintain, operate or conduct a massage
establishment, including out-call massage services, shall file a complete
application with the Township Health Department upon a form provided by
said Township Health Department and pay an annual filing fee as follows:
A. No person shall engage in or carry on the business of massage unless
he or she has a valid massage establishment permit issued by the
Township of Cedar Grove pursuant to the provisions of this section for
each and every separate office or place of business.
B. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to eliminate any
requirements under the laws or regulations of federal, state, or local
government.
A. For one massage practitioner, the fee shall be $250 per year.
B. For each additional massage practitioner, the fee shall be $100 per year.
C. All fees are nonrefundable.
D. If at any time after the initial permit is granted additional massage
practitioners begin providing services at the massage establishment, all
of the information required herein must be submitted to the Health
Department within 10 days and the additional fee paid.
§ 169-2 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 169-4
168:418
§ 169-5. Application for permit.
Any person desiring a massage establishment permit shall file a written
application with the Township Health Department on a form to be furnished
by the Township Health Department. The applicant shall accompany the
application with a tender of the correct fee set forth in § 169-4 above and
shall, in addition, furnish the following:
E. In addition to the above fee, each massage practitioner must pay the fee
required in § 169-5E(7) to obtain a criminal background check.
A. The type of ownership of the business, i.e., whether individual,
partnership, corporation, limited-liability corporation, or otherwise.
B. The name, style and designation under which the business or practice is
to be conducted.
C. The business address and all telephone numbers of all massage
establishments where the business is to be conducted.
D. A complete list of the names, residence addresses and emergency
telephone numbers of all massage practitioners and employees in the
business and the name, residence addresses and emergency telephone
numbers of the manager or other person principally in charge of the
operation of the business.
E. The following personal information concerning the applicant, if an
individual; concerning each stockholder holding more than 10% of the
stock of the corporation, each officer and each director or managing
agent, if the applicant is a corporation; concerning the partners,
including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership; the
manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the
business, and all massage practitioners and employees:
(1) The name, complete residence address and residence/emergency
telephone number.
(2) The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present
address of the applicant.
(3) Written proof of age.
(4) Height, weight, color of hair and eyes and sex.
(5) Two front-face portrait photographs taken within 30 days of the
date of the application and two inches by two inches in size.
(6) The massage or similar business history and experience, including
but not limited to whether or not such person has previously
operated in this or another municipality or state under a license or
permit or has had such license or permit denied, revoked or
suspended and the reason therefor and the business activities or
§ 169-4 LITTERING § 169-5
168:419
§ 169-6. Building requirements; Inspections.
occupations subsequent to such action for denial, suspension or
revocation.
(7) All criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic violations,
fully disclosing the jurisdiction in which convicted and the offense
for which convicted and circumstances thereof. The applicant must
consent to a fingerprint check for the purpose of a criminal
background check. The procedure for applicant fingerprint checks
shall adhere to established New Jersey State Police policy for
criminal background checks and shall be conducted under the
supervision of the Police Department.
(8) A certification from the Massage, Bodywork and Somatic Therapy
Examining Committee, as set forth in N.J.A.C. 13:37-16 et seq.
(9) A sworn statement indicating that all massage, bodywork and
somatic therapists employed or to be employed by the business or
otherwise permitted to work at the business have certifications
from the Massage, Bodywork and Somatic Therapy Examining
Committee, as set forth in N.J.A.C. 13:37-16 et seq.
(10) A statement, in writing, from a licensed physician in the state that
he or she has examined the applicant and believes the applicant to
be free of all communicable diseases.
(11) Authorization for the Township and its agents and employees to
seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the
statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of the
applicant for the permit.
(12) The names and addresses of three adult residents of the county
who will serve as character references. These references must be
persons other than relatives and business associates.
(13) A written declaration by the applicant, under penalty of perjury,
that the foregoing information contained in the application is true
and correct, said declaration being duly dated and signed in the
Township.
A. No massage establishment shall be issued a permit to be operated,
established or maintained in the Township unless an inspection by the
Health Officer, Building Inspector and Fire Inspector reveals that the
establishment complies with each of the following minimum
requirements:
(1) Construction of rooms used for toilets, tubs, steam baths, and
showers shall be made waterproof with approved waterproof
materials and shall be installed in accordance with the New Jersey
Uniform Construction Code.71
§ 169-5 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 169-6
168:420
(2) All massage tables, bathtubs, shower stalls or bath areas and floors
shall have surfaces which may be readily disinfected.
(3) Adequate bathing, dressing and locker facilities shall be provided
for the patrons to be served at any given time. In the event that
male and female patrons are to be served simultaneously, separate
bathing, dressing, locker and massage room facilities shall be
provided.
(4) The premises shall have adequate equipment for disinfecting and
sanitizing nondisposable instruments and materials used in
administering massages. Such nondisposable instruments and
materials shall be disinfected after use on each patron.
(5) Closed cabinets shall be provided and used for the storage of clean
linen, towels and other materials used in connection with
administering massages. All soiled linens, towels and other
materials shall be kept in properly covered containers or cabinets,
which containers or cabinets shall be kept separate from the clean
storage areas.
(6) Toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient locations. When
employees and patrons of different sexes are on the premises at the
same time, separate toilet facilities shall be provided for each sex.
A single water closet per sex shall be provided for each 20 or more
employees or patrons of that sex on the premises at any one time.
Urinals may be substituted for half of the water closets for the male
patrons after one water closet has been provided. Toilets shall be
designated as to the sex accommodated therein.
(7) Lavatories or washbasins provided with both hot and cold running
water shall be installed in either the toilet room or a vestibule
immediately adjacent thereto. Lavatories or washbasins shall be
provided with soap and a dispenser and with disposable or singleuse
towels.
(8) The premises shall be equipped with a service sink for custodial
services.
(9) The premises shall meet the Building Code,72 Fire Code73 of the
Township and all other applicable laws and regulations.
B. The Health Officer, the Building Inspector or the Fire Inspector shall
certify that the proposed massage establishment complies with all the
requirements of this section and shall send such certification to the
Director of Health and Welfare.
71.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
72.Editor's Note: See Ch. 102, Building Construction.
73.Editor's Note: See Ch. 137, Fire Prevention, Art. I, Fire Prevention Standards.
§ 169-6 LITTERING § 169-7
168:421
§ 169-7. Referral of application.
The Health Department, upon receiving an application for a massage
establishment permit, shall refer the application to the Construction
Official, the Fire Department, the Police Department and the Township
Zoning Department, which departments shall inspect the premises
proposed to be operated as a massage establishment and shall make written
recommendation to the Health Department concerning the laws and codes
that they administer.
§ 169-8. Issuance or refusal of permit.
The Health Department may issue a permit within 14 days following receipt
of a completed application and the certifications set forth in §§ 169-6 and
169-7 above if all requirements for a massage establishment described in
this chapter are met, unless it finds that:
§ 169-9. Operating requirements.
A. The correct permit fee has not been tendered to the Township and, in
the case of a check or bank draft, honored with payment upon
presentation.
B. The operation as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not
comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited to the
building, zoning and health regulations.
C. The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent
statement of fact in the permit application or in any document required
by the Township in conjunction therewith.
D. The applicant has had a massage business, massage practitioner's or
other similar permit or license denied, revoked or suspended for any of
the above causes by the Township or any other state or local agency
within five years prior to the date of the application.
E. The applicant, if an individual, any of the officers and directors or
managing director, if the applicant is a corporation or limited-liability
corporation, any of the partners, including limited partners, if the
applicant is a partnership, or the manager or other person principally in
charge of the operation of the business is not over the age of 18 years.
F. The applicant, if an individual, any of the stockholders holding more
than 10% of the stock of the corporation or any of the officers or
directors or managing directors, if the applicant is a corporation, any of
the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a
partnership, or the manager or other person principally in charge of the
operation of the business has been convicted of a felony, an offense
involving sexual misconduct with children, prostitution, soliciting for
purpose of prostitution, pandering, keeping a place of prostitution, any
crime involving dishonesty, fraud or deceit or other offenses opposed to
decency and morality.
§ 169-7 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 169-9
168:422
A. All massage establishments are to be kept in accordance with the
Infection Control Precautions as outlined in N.J.A.C. 13:37-16.8.
B. Every portion of the massage establishment, including appliances and
apparatus, shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary condition.
C. Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted in the reception
area in a location available to all prospective customers.
D. All employees, including massage practitioners and employees, shall be
clean and wear clean, nontransparent outergarments. A separate
dressing room for each sex must be available on the premises, and each
dressing room shall contain a tub or shower in good working order and
individual lockers for each employee and customer. Doors to such
dressing rooms shall open inward and shall be self-closing.
E. All massage establishments shall be provided with clean, laundered
sheets and towels in sufficient quantity, which shall be laundered after
each use thereof and stored in a sanitary manner.
F. The genital area of patrons must be covered by towels, cloths or
undergarments when in the presence of an employee or massage
practitioners.
G. It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly, in a massage
establishment, to place his or her hand upon or to touch with any part of
his or her body or to fondle in any manner or to massage a genital area
of any other person.
H. No massage practitioner, employee or operator shall perform, offer or
agree to perform any act which would require the touching of the
patron's sexual or genital area.
I. All massage practitioners and employees shall refrain, under all
circumstances, from initiating or engaging in any sexual conduct,
sexual activities, or sexualizing behavior involving a client, even if the
client attempts to sexualize the relationship.
J. All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms and all
other physical facilities shall be in good repair and maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor
rooms or steam or vapor cabinets and shower compartments and toilet
rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day that the business is in
operation. Bathtubs and showers shall be thoroughly cleaned after each
use. When carpeting is used on the floors, it shall be kept dry.
K. Oils, creams, lotions and other preparations used in administering
massages shall be kept in clean, closed containers or cabinets.
L. Eating in the massage work areas shall not be permitted. Animals,
except for Seeing Eye dogs, shall not be permitted in the massage work
area.
§ 169-9 LITTERING § 169-9
168:423
§ 169-10. Sanitation and safety requirements.
§ 169-11. Revocation or suspension of permit.
Any permit issued for a massage establishment or out-call massage service
may be revoked or suspended by the Health Department after a hearing,
for good cause or in any case where any of the provisions of this section
are violated or where any employee or the permittee, including a massage
practitioner, is engaged in any condition which violates any of the state
or local laws or ordinances at the permittee's place of business and the
permittee has actual or constructive knowledge of such violations or the
permittee should have actual or constructive knowledge by due diligence
or in any case where the permittee refuses to permit any duly authorized
police officer or health inspector of the Township of Cedar Grove to inspect
the premises or the operations therein. Such permit may also be revoked
or suspended by the Township of Cedar Grove, upon the direction of the
M. Each massage practitioner shall wash his or her hands in hot running
water, using a proper soap or disinfectant, before administering a
massage to each patron.
N. Insurance. All massage practitioners and massage establishments shall
maintain and post proof of appropriate liability insurance coverage with
a reputable company licensed by the State of New Jersey in an amount
of not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence and in the aggregate for all
claims caused by personal injury. A certificate of insurance in
acceptable form shall be provided to the Health Department within 10
days of the issuance of the permit set forth in § 169-3 above.
O. Hours of operation. The hours of operation for all licensed businesses
shall be between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
A. All premises used by permittees hereunder shall be periodically
inspected by the Health Department and Building Department or their
authorized representatives for safety of the structure and adequacy of
plumbing, ventilation, heating and illumination. The walls shall be clean
and painted with washable, mold-resistant paint in all rooms where
water or steam baths are given. Floors shall be free from any
accumulation of dust, dirt or refuse. All equipment used in the massage
operation shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Towels,
linen and items for the personal use of operators and patients shall be
clean and freshly laundered. Towels, cloths and sheets shall not be used
for more than one patron. Heavy, white paper may be substituted for
sheets, provided that such paper is changed for every patron. No
massage service or practice shall be carried on within any cubicle, room
or booth or any area within a massage establishment which is fitted
with a door capable of being locked.
B. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to eliminate other
requirements of statute or ordinance concerning the maintenance of
premises or to preclude authorized inspection thereof.
§ 169-9 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 169-11
168:424
Director of Health that such business is being managed, conducted or
maintained without regard for the public health or health of patrons or
customers or without due regard to proper sanitation and hygiene.
§ 169-12. Register to be kept.
The operator of a massage establishment or an out-call massage service
must maintain a register of all persons employed as massage practitioners.
Such register shall be available for inspection at all times during regular
business hours.
§ 169-13. Responsibilities of permittee.
The permit holder shall be responsible for all actions which occur on the
premises, whether by massage practitioners, employees, subcontractors, or
other persons on the premises.
§ 169-14. Display of permits and certifications.
All massage establishments shall post their massage establishment permit
in the hallway entrance in a conspicuous location at all times. All massage,
bodywork and somatic therapy practitioners shall display their
certifications in view of clients.
§ 169-15. Appointment book to be kept.
Every person who operates a massage business or practices or provides a
massage shall, at all times, keep an appointment book in which the name
of each and every patron shall be entered, together with the time, date and
place of service, the service provided, the fees charged, and the name of the
massage practitioner who provided the services. Such appointment book
shall be available at all times for inspection by the Health Department's
authorized representatives, and this appointment book shall be maintained
for a period of seven years from the date of the most recent entry.
§ 169-16. Inspections.
The Health Department, the Police Department and the Fire Department
shall, from time to time, at least annually, announced or unannounced,
make an inspection of each massage establishment granted a permit under
the provisions of this chapter for the purpose of determining whether the
provisions of this chapter are complied with. Such inspections shall be made
at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner. It shall be unlawful for any
permittee to fail to allow such inspection officer access to the premises or
to hinder such officer in any manner.
§ 169-17. Minors prohibited; exception.
No person shall permit any person under the age of 18 years to receive
a massage without advanced written permission of his or her parent,
§ 169-11 LITTERING § 169-17
168:425
caregiver or guardian, or a parent, caregiver or guardian must be present
in the room during the time of the massage.
§ 169-18. Alcoholic beverages prohibited.
No person shall sell, give, dispense, provide or keep or permit the sale or
consumption of alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises.
§ 169-19. Unlawful acts.
§ 169-20. Permit specifications not to be changed.
No person granted a permit pursuant to this section shall operate under
any name or conduct his or her business under any designation for any
location not specified in his or her permit. This section shall in no way effect
the permittee's ability to provide out-call service should the permittee be
otherwise in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 169-21. Transferability.
Massage establishment permits are not transferable, separate or divisible,
and such authority as a permit confers shall be conferred only on the
permittee named therein for the location specified therein only.
§ 169-22. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to massage or physical therapy
treatments given:
§ 169-23. Rules and regulations.
The Director of Health may, after a public hearing, make and enforce
reasonable rules and regulations not in conflict with, but to carry out, the
intent of this chapter.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to massage any other person or give
or administer any of the other things mentioned in this chapter which
violate the provisions of this chapter or which violate any municipal or
state law or ordinance. Any violation of this chapter shall be deemed
grounds for revocation of the permit granted hereunder.
B. Any massage practitioner engaged in massage at an unlicensed
massage establishment shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter.
A. In the office of a licensed physician, chiropractor or physical therapist.
B. In a regularly established medical center, hospital or sanatorium having
a staff which includes licensed physicians, chiropractors and/or
physical therapists.
C. By any licensed physician, chiropractor or physical therapist in the
residence of his or her patient.
§ 169-17 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 169-24
168:426
§ 169-24. Existing establishments.
All persons who presently operate a massage establishment must apply for
a permit within 90 days of the effective date of this chapter. Applications for
renewal of permits must be filed not more than two months nor less than
one month prior to termination of an existing permit.
§ 169-25. False statements in application deemed a violation.
Any person who shall make false statements in any application for a permit
under this chapter or in any record that he is required to maintain under
this chapter shall be guilty of violating this chapter.
§ 169-26. License required to practice massage.
§ 169-27. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or permits, aids or abets the violation of any
provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a
fine not exceeding $2,000 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90
days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 173
MOTELS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch 137.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 197.
Zoning — See Ch 268.
A. No person shall engage in the practice of massage as a licensed
massage therapist or present, call or represent oneself as a licensed
massage therapist unless licensed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:11-53 et seq.
B. No person shall assume, represent, or use the title or designation
"massage or bodywork therapist," "licensed massage and bodywork
therapist" or any title or designation which includes the words
"massage," "bodywork," "masseur," "masseuse," "shiatsu,"
"acupressure," "ac-cupressure," "accu-pressure," "nuad bo'rarn,"
"amma," "anma," "chi nei tsang," "tuina," "polarity educator," "polarity
therapist," "polarity therapy," "polarity practitioner," or any of the
abbreviations, "MT," "BT," "MBT," "MBST," "CMBT," "COBT," "CMT,"
"LBT," "LMBST," "LMBT," "LABT," "LOBT," "AB," "ABT," "OB," "RPP," or
"LMT," unless licensed under N.J.S.A. 45:11-53 et seq.
§ 169-24 MOTELS § 173-1
173:427
§ 173-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOTEL — A series of attached sleeping units with entrances to each such
sleeping unit from a center or interior hall and containing not less than
100 such sleeping units, with each sleeping unit containing a bathroom
and closet space, and constructed on not less than six acres of land and
providing for dining facilities, as well as public meeting rooms.
OWNER or OPERATOR — The owner, manager, tenant or any person owning
or in charge of the motel and shall include natural persons, firms or
corporations.
PERSON — Person, persons, partnerships, firms, company, corporation,
tenant, owner, lessee, licensee or their agents.
SLEEPING UNIT — A room or suite of rooms in a motel occupied or
designed for living or sleeping purposes and containing closet space and a
bathroom.
§ 173-2. License required; fee; issuance of license.
§ 173-3. Grounds for refusal of license.
No license shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of a crime
involving moral turpitude nor shall any license be issued to any corporation
in which any stockholder holding 5% or more of the stock thereof, or in
which any director or officer, shall have been convicted of a crime involving
moral turpitude. No licensee shall employ in or about the licensed premises
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, operate or maintain or
permit to be established, operated or maintained, upon any property
owned or controlled by him, a motel within the limits of the Township of
Cedar Grove, without having first secured a license therefor from the
Township Clerk. Such license shall be for a period of one year,
commencing on January 1 and terminating on December 31 of said year,
and shall be renewable for additional periods of one year. Licenses shall
not be transferable from one person to another.
B. The application for such license or the renewal thereof shall be filed
with the Clerk of the Township and shall be accompanied by a fee of $5
for each unit. The application for license or renewal thereof shall be
made on printed forms furnished by the Clerk of the Township and shall
include the name and address of the owner of the motel, the legal
description of the premises upon which the motel is or will be located as
will readily identify and locate the premises, the number of units and
the experience of the owner or manager in the motel business.
C. The Township Clerk is authorized to issue a license after the license has
been approved by the Township Council.
§ 173-1 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 173-3
173:428
any person convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude within a period of
five years from the date of conviction.
§ 173-4. Management duties.
§ 173-5. Sanitary facilities; inspection of premises.
A. In every motel there shall be set aside a portion of the building for an
office for the person in charge of said motel. A copy of the motel license
and of this chapter shall be posted therein, and the motel register shall
at all times be kept in said office.
B. It is hereby made the duty of the attendant or person in charge,
together with the licensee, to:
(1) Keep at all times a register of all guests, which shall be open at all
times to inspection by state and federal officers and officers of the
Township of Cedar Grove, showing for all guests:
(a) Names and addresses for each guest for which
accommodations are afforded.
(b) Dates of entrance and departure.
(c) License number, make and type of all automobiles.
(d) States issuing such automobile licenses.
(2) Maintain the motel in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition at all
times.
(3) See that the provisions of this chapter are complied with and
enforced and report promptly to the proper authorities any
violations of this chapter or any other violations of law which may
come to his attention.
(4) Report to the Health Inspector all cases of persons or animals
affected or suspected of being affected with any communicable
disease.
(5) Maintain in convenient places, approved by the Fire Department,
hand fire extinguishers in good operating condition in the ratio of
one to each 10 sleeping units.
(6) Prohibit the use of any sleeping unit by a number of occupants
greater than that which is authorized by the Fire Prevention
Bureau.
A. The Health Inspector shall inspect all motels as often as shall be
necessary and in any event not less than once every four months in each
calendar year. If after such inspection it is found by the Health
Inspector that the motel is being conducted in an unclean or unsanitary
manner or in violation of this chapter or any other ordinance of the
§ 173-3 MOTELS § 173-5
173:429
§ 173-6. Maximum charges; display of rates on outdoor signs
prohibited.
Chapter 176
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 81.
Places of amusement — See Ch. 88.
Animals — See Ch. 91.
Curfew — See Ch. 122.
Nuisances — See Ch. 179.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 188.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 190.
§ 176-1. Legislative findings; declaration of purpose.
The Council hereby finds and declares that:
Township, the Health Inspector shall report such conditions to the
Township Manager who shall thereupon notify the owner or operator of
said motel of such condition and that such owner or operator shall have
five days from the date of the receipt of notice from the Manager to
remedy such condition; and, if after the said five-day period the owner
or operator fails to remedy such condition, the Township Manager shall
report such facts to the Council which, after public hearing, shall have
the power to cancel the said license.
B. Each motel unit shall have a complete bathroom, including flush toilet,
sink and bath or shower. Floors of bathrooms shall be constructed of
concrete tile or similar materials which are impervious to water. Each
bathroom shall be provided with an adequate supply of hot and cold
running water, soap, individual towels and toilet paper at all times.
A. It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of a motel to charge a
price greater than the motel's accommodation price as displayed within
the sleeping units.
B. It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of a motel to post or allow
to remain posted, on any outdoor advertising sign, rates for
accommodations in such motel.
A. The making, creation or maintenance of such loud, unnecessary,
unnatural or unusual noises which are prolonged, unusual and
unnatural in their time, place and use affect and are a detriment to
public health, quality of life, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity
of the residents of the Township.
§ 173-5 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 176-1
173:430
§ 176-2. Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. Terms
not defined in this chapter have the same meaning as those defined in
N.J.A.C. 7:29.
CONSTRUCTION — Any site preparation, assembly, erection, repair,
alteration or similar action, including demolition of buildings or structures.
DEMOLITION — Any dismantling, destruction or removal of buildings,
structures, or roadways.
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
EMERGENCY WORK — Any work or action necessary to deliver essential
public services, including, but not limited to, repairing water, gas,
electricity, telephone, sewer facilities, or public transportation facilities,
removing fallen trees on public rights-of-way, dredging navigational
waterways, or abating life-threatening conditions.
IMPULSIVE SOUND — Either a single pressure peak or a single burst
(multiple pressure peaks) that has a duration of less than one second.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle that is propelled other than by human or
animal power on land.
MUFFLER — A properly functioning sound-dissipative device or system for
abating the sound of escaping gasses on equipment where such a device is
part of the normal configuration of the equipment.
MULTI-DWELLING-UNIT BUILDING — Any building comprising two or
more dwelling units, including, but not limited to, apartments,
condominiums, co-ops, multiple-family houses, townhouses, and attached
residences.
MULTI-USE PROPERTY — Any distinct parcel of land that is used for more
than one category of activity. Examples include, but are not limited to:
B. A substantial body of science and technology exists by which excessive
sound may be abated.
C. The people have a right to, and should be ensured of, an environment
free from excessive sound.
D. The provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained in this chapter
are necessary in the public interest, embody the public policy of this
Township and are for the purpose of securing and promoting the public
health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare, prosperity and the peace
and quiet of the Township and its inhabitants.
E. This chapter shall apply to the control of sound originating from
sources within the Township of Cedar Grove.
A commercial, residential, industrial or public service property having
boilers, incinerators, elevators, automatic garage doors, air
A.
§ 176-1 MOTELS § 176-2
173:431
NOISE CONTROL OFFICER — An employee of:
PLAINLY AUDIBLE — Any sound that can be detected by a person using
his or her unaided hearing faculties. As an example, if the sound source
under investigation is a portable or personal vehicular sound amplification
or reproduction device, the detection of the rhythmic bass component of the
music is sufficient to verify plainly audible sound. The noise control officer
need not determine the title, specific words, or the artist performing the
song.
PRIVATE RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
sidewalk, alley or easement that is owned, leased, or controlled by a nongovernmental
entity.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
sidewalk, alley or easement that is owned, leased, or controlled by a
governmental entity.
PUBLIC SPACE — Any real property or structures thereon that are owned,
leased, or controlled by a governmental entity.
REAL PROPERTY LINE — Either:
WEEKDAY — Any day that is not a federal holiday, and beginning on Monday
at 7:00 a.m. and ending on the following Friday at 6:00 p.m.
conditioners, laundry rooms, utility provisions, or health and
recreational facilities, or other similar devices or areas, either in the
interior or on the exterior of the building, which may be a source of
elevated sound levels at another category on the same distinct parcel
of land; or
A building which is both commercial (usually on the ground floor) and
residential property located above, behind, below or adjacent.
B.
A local, county or regional health agency which is certified pursuant
to the County Environmental Health Act (N.J.S.A. 26:3A2-21 et seq.) to
perform noise enforcement activities; or
A.
A Township police officer or other Township employee who has received
noise enforcement training, is currently certified in noise enforcement,
is acting within the scope of his or her designated jurisdiction, and is
authorized to issue a summons.
B.
The imaginary line, including its vertical extension that separates one
parcel of real property from another;
A.
The vertical and horizontal boundaries of a dwelling unit that is part of
a multi-dwelling-unit building; or
B.
On a multi-use property, the interface between the two portions of the
property on which different categories of activity are being performed
(e.g., if the multi-use property is a building which is residential upstairs
and commercial downstairs, then the real property line would be the
interface between the residential area and the commercial area).
C.
§ 176-2 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 176-2
173:432
WEEKENDS — Beginning on Friday at 6:00 p.m. and ending on the
following Monday at 7:00 a.m.
§ 176-3. Applicability
§ 176-4. Noise control officers.
A. This chapter applies to sound from the following property categories:
(1) Industrial facilities;
(2) Commercial facilities;
(3) Public service facilities;
(4) Community service facilities;
(5) Residential properties;
(6) Multi-use properties;
(7) Public and private rights-of-way;
(8) Public spaces; and
(9) Multi-dwelling-unit buildings.
B. This chapter applies to sound received at the following property
categories:
(1) Commercial facilities;
(2) Public service facilities;
(3) Community service facilities;
(4) Residential properties;
(5) Multi-use properties; and
(6) Multi-dwelling-unit buildings.
C. Sound from stationary emergency signaling devices shall be regulated
in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.4, except that the testing of the
electromechanical functioning of a stationary emergency signaling
device shall not meet or exceed 10 seconds.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by noise control
officers. A person shall be qualified to be a noise control officer if the
person meets the criteria set forth in the definition above and
completes, at a frequency specified by the Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP) in N.J.A.C. 7:29-2.11, noise
certification and recertification courses which are offered by the
Department of Environmental Sciences of Cook College, Rutgers, the
State University of New Jersey or any other noise certification or
§ 176-2 MOTELS § 176-4
173:433
§ 176-5. Maximum permissible sound levels.
recertification course which is offered by an accredited university and
approved by the DEP.
B. Sound measurements made by a noise control officer shall conform to
the procedures set forth at N.J.A.C. 7:29-2, except that interior sound
level measurements shall also conform with the procedures set forth in
§ 176-5B and C of this regulation and with the definition of "real
property line" as contained herein.
C. Noise control officers shall have the power to:
(1) Review public and private projects, subject to mandatory review or
approval by other departments or boards, for compliance with this
chapter; and
(2) Investigate and pursue possible violations of this chapter for sound
levels which equal or exceed the sound levels set forth in Tables I
and II,74 when measured at a receiving property located within the
designated jurisdiction of the noise control officer, in accordance
with § 176-10 below.
(3) Cooperate with noise control officers of adjacent municipalities in
enforcing one another's municipal noise ordinances.
A. No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the operation of any
source of sound on any source property listed in § 176-3A above in such
a manner as to create a sound level that equals or exceeds the sound
level limits set forth in Tables I and II at §§ 176-6 and 176-7 when
measured at or within the real property line of any of the receiving
properties listed in § 176-3B, except as specified in Subsection B below.
B. When measuring total sound or residual sound within a multi-use
property, or within a residential unit when the property line between it
and the source property is a common wall, all exterior doors and
windows shall be closed and the measurements shall be taken in the
center of the room most affected by the noise. Residual sound shall be
measured in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:29-2.9(b)2. When measuring
total sound or residual sound, all sound sources within the dwelling unit
must be shut off (e.g., television, stereo). Measurements shall not be
taken in areas which receive only casual use, such as hallways, closets
and bathrooms.
C. Indoor measurements shall only be taken if the sound source is on or
within the same property as the receiving property, as in the case of a
multi-use property (e.g., sound generated within a commercial unit of a
multi-use property building and received within a residential unit of the
same building) or multi-dwelling-unit building. The allowable sound
level standards for indoors are as shown in Tables I and II.
74.Editor's Note: See §§ 176-6 and 176-7.
§ 176-4 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 176-5
173:434
§ 176-6. Table I: Maximum Permissible A-Weighted Sound Levels.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the operation of any source of
sound on any source property listed in § 176-3A above in such a manner as
to create a sound level that equals or exceeds the sound levels listed below.
D. Impulsive sound (Note: either one of the following must be adopted.)
(1) Impulsive sound shall not equal or exceed 80 decibels at all times;
or
(2) Impulsive sound which repeats four or more times in any hour shall
be measured as impulsive sound and shall meet the requirements
as shown in Table I.
A. Outdoors
Receiving
Property
Category
Residential
property, or
residential portion
of a multi-use
property
Commercial facility,
public service facility,
non-residential portion of
a multi-use property, or
community service facility
Time 7:00 a.m.
to 10:00
p.m.
10:00 p.m.
to 7:00
a.m.
24 hours
Maximum Aweighted
sound
level standard,
dB
65 50 65
B. Indoors.
Receiving
Property
Category
Residential
property, or
residential portion
of a multi-use
property
Commercial facility,* or
nonresidential portion of
a multi-use property
Time 7:00 a.m.
to 10:00
p.m.
10:00
p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
24 hours
Maximum Aweighted
sound
level standard,
dB
55 40 55
Note:
*In those instances when a commercial facility shares a common wall/
ceiling/floor with another commercial facility that is producing the
sound.
§ 176-5 MOTELS § 176-7
173:435
§ 176-7. Table II: Maximum Permissible Octave Band Sound
Pressure Levels In Decibels.
A. No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the operation of any
source of sound on any source property listed in § 176-3A above in such
a manner as to create a sound pressure level that equals or exceeds the
sound levels listed below in one or more octave bands.
B. When octave measurements are made, the sound from the source must
be constant in level and character. If octave band sound pressure level
variations exceed plus or minus two dB in the bands containing the
principal source frequencies, the measurement must be discontinued.
C. Maximum Permissible Octave Band Sound Pressure Table:
Receiving
Property
Category
Residential
property, or
residential
portion of a
multi-use
property
Residential
property, or
residential
portion of a
multi-use
property
Commercial
facility,
public or
community
service
facility,
nonresidential
portion of
a multiuse
property
Commercial
facility,*
or
nonesidential
portion of
a multiuse
property
Outdoors Indoors Outdoors Indoors
Octave
Band
Center
Frequency,
Hz
Octave Band
Sound
Pressure Level,
dB
Octave Band
Sound
Pressure
Level, dB
Octave
Band
Sound
Pressure
Level, dB
Octave
Band
Sound
Pressure
Level, dB
Time 7:00
a.m. to
10:00
p.m.
10:00
p.m. to
7:00
a.m.
7:00 a.m.
to 10:00
p.m.
10:00
p.m.
to
7:00
a.m.
24 hours 24 hours
31.5 96 86 86 76 96 86
63 82 71 72 61 82 72
125 74 61 64 51 74 64
250 67 53 57 43 67 57
500 63 48 53 38 63 53
1,000 60 45 50 35 60 50
2,000 57 42 47 32 57 47
4,000 55 40 45 30 55 45
§ 176-7 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 176-7
173:436
§ 176-8. Restricted uses and activities.
Receiving
Property
Category
Residential
property, or
residential
portion of a
multi-use
property
Residential
property, or
residential
portion of a
multi-use
property
Commercial
facility,
public or
community
service
facility,
nonresidential
portion of
a multiuse
property
Commercial
facility,*
or
nonesidential
portion of
a multiuse
property
8,000 53 38 43 28 53 43
Note:
*In those instances when a commercial facility shares a common wall/
ceiling/floor with another commercial facility that is producing the
sound.
A. Except as provided in Subsection C below, the provisions of this chapter
shall not apply to the exceptions listed at N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.5.
B. Construction and demolition activities are exempt from the sound level
limits set forth in Tables I and II, except as provided for in Subsection C
below.
C. Notwithstanding the provisions of Tables I and II at §§ 176-6 and 176-7,
the following standards shall apply to the activities or sources of sound
set forth below:
(1) Self-contained, portable, hand-held music devices, nonportable
devices, radios, televisions, phonographs or sound amplification or
reproduction equipment shall not be operated in such a manner as
to be plainly audible at a distance of 25 feet in any direction from
the operator between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., sound from such
equipment shall not be plainly audible by any person other than the
operator.
(2) Personal or commercial vehicular music amplification or
reproduction equipment shall not be operated in such a manner
that it is plainly audible at a residential property line between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(3) Personal vehicular music amplification equipment shall not be
operated in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of
25 feet in any direction from the operator between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
§ 176-7 MOTELS § 176-8
173:437
(4) The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated
of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph,
loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the
producing or reproducing of sound or emitting of loud and raucous
noises which are cast upon the public streets for the purpose of
commercial advertising.
(5) Birds, dogs or other animals: owning, possessing or harboring any
pet animal that frequently or for continued duration makes sounds
that create a noise disturbance across a residential property line.
For the purpose of this provision, a noise disturbance from a pet
animal shall be defined as that created by a pet animal making
noise continually for 10 minutes or intermittently for 30 minutes
unless provoked. At all times, the limits set forth at Tables I and II
do not apply.
(6) The creation of a loud or excessive noise audible at a distance of 25
feet in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the
opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers.
(7) Construction, excavation, erection, alteration, repairing,
demolition activity, or landscaping, excluding emergency work as
decided by the Township Engineer, shall not be performed between
the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays or between the
hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Saturdays and federal holidays,
unless such activities can meet the limits set forth in Tables I and II.
All motorized equipment used in construction and demolition
activity shall be operated with a muffler. At all other times, the
limits set forth in Tables I and II do not apply to construction and
demolition activities. Sunday work is prohibited, except for the
general repair or maintenance of the property owner's property by
the homeowner only. No contractor work is permitted. [Amended
8-14-2017 by Ord. No. 17-814]
(8) Noncommercial or nonindustrial power tools and landscaping and
yard maintenance equipment shall not be operated between the
hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., unless such activities can meet
the applicable limits set forth in Tables I and II. All motorized
equipment used in these activities shall be operated with a muffler.
At all other times, the limits set forth in Tables I and II do not apply
to noncommercial or non-industrial power tools and landscaping
and yard maintenance equipment.
(9) Commercial or industrial power tools and landscaping and yard
maintenance equipment, excluding emergency work, shall not be
operated on a residential property or within 250 feet of a
residential property line when operated on commercial or
industrial property, between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
on weekdays, or between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on
weekends or federal holidays, unless such activities can meet the
limits set forth in Tables I and II. In addition, commercial or
§ 176-8 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 176-8
173:438
§ 176-9. Exceptions.
The prohibitions contained in this chapter shall not apply to the sources
listed in N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.5.
§ 176-10. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
industrial power tools and landscaping and yard maintenance
equipment, excluding emergency work, utilized on commercial or
industrial property shall meet the limits set forth in Tables I and
II between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. All motorized
equipment used in these activities shall be operated with a muffler.
At all other times, the limits set forth in Tables I and II do not apply
to commercial or industrial power tools and landscaping and yard
maintenance equipment.
(10) Mechanical sweeping or vacuuming equipment or other
mechanical equipment used for the maintenance of commercial
parking lots. Notwithstanding the provisions contained in the
various subsections of this section, the operation of mechanical
sweeping, vacuuming or other equipment used for the cleaning or
maintenance of commercial parking lots must adhere to the 65
decibel daytime limit (between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00
p.m.) and 50 decibel nighttime limit (between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m.) on weekdays. [Amended 8-3-2009 by Ord.
No. 09-699]
(11) Motorized snow blowers, snow throwers, and lawn equipment with
attached snow plows shall be operated at all times with a muffler.
(12) An exterior burglar alarm of a building or motor vehicle must be
activated in such a manner that the burglar alarm terminates its
operation within five minutes for continuous airborne sound and 15
minutes for impulsive sound after it has been activated.
A. Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be cause for an
enforcement document to be issued to the violator by the Township
Police Department or other designated noise control officer according
to procedures set forth at N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.7. The recipient of an
enforcement document shall be entitled to a hearing in the municipal
court having jurisdiction to contest such action.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
a civil penalty for each offense of not more than $3,000. If the violation
is of a continuing nature, each day during which it occurs shall
constitute an additional, separate, and distinct offense.
C. No provision of this chapter shall be construed to impair any common
law or statutory cause of action, or legal remedy therefrom, of any
person for injury or damage arising from any violation of this chapter or
from other law.
§ 176-8 MOTELS § 176-11
173:439
§ 176-11. Severability and repealer
Chapter 179
NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH
GENERAL REFERENCES
Advisory Health Council — See Ch. 31.
Animals — See Ch. 91.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 100.
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 105.
Outdoor burning — See Ch. 107.
Food-handling establishments — See Ch. 142.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 146.
Housing standards — See Ch. 158.
Littering — See Ch. 168.
Noise — See Ch. 176.
Property maintenance — See Chs. 197 and
198.
Individual sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
213.
Sewers — See Ch. 217.
Private swimming pools — See Ch. 237.
Public swimming pools — See Ch. 239.
Wells, cisterns and holes — See Ch. 265.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Adoption of health codes by reference — See
N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 et seq.
A. If any provision or portion of a provision of this chapter is held to be
unconstitutional, preempted by federal or state law, or otherwise
invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions
of the chapter shall not be invalidated.
B. All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent with any
provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed as to the extent of such
inconsistencies.
§ 176-11 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 176-11
179:440
ARTICLE I
Public Health Nuisance Code
§ 179-1. Definitions.
§ 179-2. Adoption of standard code by reference; copies on file.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PUBLIC HEALTH NUISANCE CODE OF NEW JERSEY (1953) — That
certain code approved by the State Department of Health on September
16, 1953, for adoption by reference by local Boards of Health in
accordance with law, being a code:
Defining and prohibiting certain matters, things, conditions or acts
and each of them as a nuisance.
(1)
(2) Prohibiting certain noises or sounds.
(3) Requiring proper heating of apartments.
(4) Prohibiting lease or rental of certain buildings.
Prohibiting spitting in or upon public buildings, conveyances or
sidewalks.
(5)
(6) Authorizing the inspection of premises by an enforcing official.
Providing for the removal or abatement of certain nuisances and
recovery of expenses incurred by the Board of Health in removing
or abating such nuisances.
(7)
B. Whenever the following words, terms or phrases are used in the Public
Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953), they shall have the
following meanings herein given:
BOARD OF HEALTH — The Department of Health of the Township of
Cedar Grove.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Cedar Grove.
A. Pursuant to and in accordance with the Public Health and Sanitation
Codes Adoption by Reference Act (N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 to 26:3-69.6),
there is hereby established and adopted as the Public Health Nuisance
Code of the Township the whole of the Public Health Nuisance Code of
New Jersey (1953). A printed copy of said code is annexed to and
incorporated by reference in the ordinance adopting this chapter,
passed on May 19, 1958, adopting said code.
B. The Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953) is hereby
incorporated in this chapter by reference and made a part hereof as
fully as though it had been set forth at length herein.
§ 179-1 NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH § 179-2
179:441
§ 179-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-17-1962; 7-30-1984
by Ord. No. 84-222; 10-23-2006 by Ord. No. 06-656]
Any person who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this
chapter, including the Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953)
incorporated herein by reference, or notice issued pursuant thereto, shall,
upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000 or by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
C. ln accordance with law, 10 printed copies of the Public Health Nuisance
Code of New Jersey (1953) have been placed on file in the office of the
Township Clerk and in the office of the Health Officer of the Township
and shall remain on file in said offices for the use and examination of the
public so long as this chapter shall remain in effect.
§ 179-2 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 179-3
179:442
ARTICLE II
Controlled Dangerous Substances
[Added 5-7-1979 by Ord. No. 79-88]
§ 179-4. Advertisement, display or sale of paraphernalia.
No person shall advertise, display, sell or offer to sell any type of
eyedropper, spoon, pipe, testing kit, rolling paper or other paraphernalia or
appliances designed for or ordinarily used in smoking, testing, weighing,
measuring, injecting, cooking or sniffing marijuana, cocaine, opium, hashish
or other controlled dangerous substance as defined by N.J.S.A. 24:21-1 et
seq.
§ 179-5. Maintenance of premises for certain uses.
It shall constitute a public nuisance to maintain any building, conveyance
or premises whatever which is resorted to by persons for the manufacture,
distribution, dispensing, administration or use of any type of eyedropper,
spoon, pipe, testing kit, rolling paper or other paraphernalia or appliances
designed for or ordinarily used in smoking, testing, weighing, measuring,
injecting, cooking or sniffing marijuana, cocaine, opium, hashish or other
controlled dangerous substances as defined by N.J.S.A. 24:21-1 et seq.
§ 179-4 NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH § 179-5
179:443
Chapter 181
NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Chs. 197 and
198.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 234.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Establishment of house numbering system
and requirement — See N.J.S.A. 40:67-1j.
§ 181-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING — Includes all houses and dwellings, stores and business places
and other buildings which shall front upon any street in the Township.
§ 181-2. Numbers to be assigned on Tax Maps.
The Township Engineer shall plot upon the Tax Maps of the Township all
the properties which now or shall hereafter front upon any street, and
designate and assign a number therefor in compliance with the numbering
system prescribed in § 181-3.
§ 181-3. System.
§ 181-4. Buildings to bear assigned number.
All buildings now or hereafter erected within the Township shall bear, in
figures, the street numbers assigned to said buildings on the Tax Maps of
the Township. Such figure shall be of a minimum height of 2 1/2 inches and
A. All even numbers shall be on the northerly and westerly side of said
streets. All odd numbers shall be on the easterly and southerly side of
said streets.
B. On all streets running north and south the numbers shall begin at the
southerly end and run north. On all streets running east and west the
numbering shall be as follows:
(1) In the case of streets on the easterly side of Pompton Avenue, the
numbers shall begin at the westerly end and run east.
(2) In the case of streets on the westerly side of Pompton Avenue, the
numbers shall begin at the easterly end and run west.
§ 179-5 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 181-4
181:444
shall be placed in such conspicuous location as to be plainly visible from a
point opposite said building, distant from the property line at least 50 feet.
§ 181-5. Owners responsibility; more than one building on tract.
It shall be the duty of the owner of any property upon which any building is
located to apply to the Assessor of the Township for the correct number of
the building as it is indicated on the Tax Map of the Township. The Assessor
shall furnish to said property owner the correct number of the property.
The property owner shall thereupon place and affix to the front of the said
building the said number according to the requirements in § 181-4. Where
there are two or more buildings upon a duly numbered tract, the owner,
after consultation with the Township Engineer, shall number each building
and add thereto the designation A, B or C, as the case may be.
§ 181-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-17-1962; 7-30-1984
by Ord. No. 84-222; 10-23-2006 by Ord. No. 06-656]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000 or by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 183
OUTDOOR APPLICATION OF FERTILIZER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 271. Stormwater management — See Ch. 228.
§ 183-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the outdoor application of
fertilizer so as to reduce the overall amount of excess nutrients entering
waterways, thereby helping to protect and improve service water quality
and prevent degradation of the environment. This chapter does not apply to
fertilizer application on commercial farms.
§ 183-2. Findings.
The Township hereby finds and determines that:
A. Elevated levels of nutrients, particularly phosphorus, in surface water
bodies can result in excessive and accelerated growth of algae and
aquatic plants (eutrophication). Excessive plant growth can result in
diurnal variations and extremes in dissolved oxygen and pH, which, in
turn, can be detrimental to aquatic life. As algae and plant materials die
off, the decay process creates a further demand on dissolved oxygen
§ 181-4 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 183-2
181:445
§ 183-3. Definitions and word usage.
levels. The presence of excessive plant matter can also restrict use of
the affected water for recreation and water supply.
B. Fertilizer applied immediately prior to a runoff-producing rainfall
outside the growing season or to impervious surfaces is most likely to
be carried away by means of runoff without accomplishing the desired
objective of supporting target vegetation growth. Therefore, the
management of the type, amount, and techniques for fertilizer
application is necessary as one tool to protect water resources.
C. This chapter does not apply to application of fertilizer on commercial
farms, but commercial farmers are expected to implement best
management practices in accordance with conservation management
plans or resource conservation plans developed for the farm by the
Natural Resources Conservation Service and approved by the Soil
Conservation District Board.
A. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
B. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words,
and their derivations shall have the meanings defined herein unless
otherwise stated:
BUFFER — The land area, 25 feet in width, adjacent to any water body.
However, in situations that warrant additional flexibility—specifically,
where lot sizes are exceptionally small or where the twenty-five-foot
buffer constitutes the majority of the available property—the required
buffer may be reduced to 10 feet in width, with the additional
requirement that a drop spreader be used for fertilizer application.
COMMERCIAL FARM — A farm management unit producing
agricultural or horticultural products worth $2,500 or more annually.
FERTILIZER — Fertilizer material, mixed fertilizer, or any other
substance containing one or more recognized plant nutrients, which is
used for its plant nutrient content, which is designed for use or claimed
to have value in promoting plant growth, and which is sold, offered for
sale, or intended for sale.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer
of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water. This
term shall be used to include any highway, street, sidewalk, parking lot,
driveway, or other material that prevents infiltration of water into the
soil.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to the
jurisdiction of this Township.
PHOSPHOROUS FERTILIZER — Any fertilizer that contains
phosphorus (P205) with a guaranteed analysis of greater than zero,
except that it shall not be considered to include animal (including
§ 183-2 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 183-3
181:446
§ 183-4. Prohibited conduct.
No person may do or cause any of the following to occur:
§ 183-5. Design standard.
human) or vegetable manures, agricultural liming materials, or wood
ashes that have not been amended to increase their nutrient content.
SOILS TEST — A technical analysis of soil conducted by an accredited
soil-testing laboratory following the protocol for such a testing
established by Rutgers Cooperative Research and Extension.
WATER BODY — A collection of or body of surface waters, such as a
lake, river, stream, creek, pond, or any other accumulation of standing
water.
A. Apply fertilizer when:
(1) A runoff-producing rainfall is either occurring or predicted; or
(2) Soils are saturated and a potential for fertilizer movement off site
exists.
B. Apply fertilizer to an impervious surface. Fertilizer inadvertently
applied to an impervious surface must be swept or blown back into the
target service or returned to either its original or another appropriate
container for reuse.
C. Apply fertilizer within the buffer of any water body.
D. Apply fertilizer more than 15 days prior to March 1 or anytime after
November 15. March 1 to November 15 shall be recognized as the
"growing season" within which fertilizer may be used.
A. No person may apply phosphorous fertilizer in outdoor areas except as
needed for a soils test for the specific soils and target vegetation and in
accordance with the associated annual fertilizer recommendation
issued by Rutgers Cooperative Research Extension.
B. Exceptions. It shall be permissible for persons to apply phosphorous
fertilizer:
(1) That is needed for:
(a) Establishing vegetation for the first time, such as after land
disturbance, provided that the application is in accordance
with the requirements established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and
implementing rules; or
(b) Establishing or repairing a turf area in accordance with good
soil practices.
§ 183-3 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 183-5
181:447
§ 183-6. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Township Manager's office, Township
Engineer, Police Department, and other representatives or employees duly
designated by the Township of Cedar Grove.
§ 183-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500 per violation, with each day or
documented act or occurrence to be considered a separate violation.
Chapter 184
PARADES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 55.
Noise — See Ch. 176.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 251.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Regulation of parades — See N.J.S.A. 40:67-1I.
§ 184-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Parade Ordinance of
the Township of Cedar Grove."
§ 184-2. Activities not regulated.
Nothing in this chapter shall apply or be construed to apply to:
(2) That delivers liquid or granular fertilizer under the soil's surface,
directly to the feeder roots.
(3) To residential container plantings, flowerbeds, or vegetable
gardens.
A. Funeral processions.
B. Students going to and from classes or participating in educational
activities, provided that such conduct is under the immediate direction
and supervision of the proper school authorities.
C. A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions.
§ 183-5 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 184-3
184:448
§ 184-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PARADE — Any parade, march, pageant, procession of any kind or any
similar display in or upon any street, park or other public place in the
Township.
PARADE PERMIT — A permit as required by this chapter.
§ 184-4. Permit required.
No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade
unless a parade permit shall have first been issued by the Township Clerk
after approval thereof in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 184-5. Application for permit; fee; waiver of fee. [Amended
8-20-1962]
§ 184-6. Time for filing application; consideration of late
application.
§ 184-7. Criteria for permit approval.
The Chief of Police shall approve the issuance by the Township Clerk of a
parade permit when, from consideration of the application and from such
other information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds that:
A. A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file a written
application with the Chief of Police on forms furnished by such officer.
B. The fee for a parade permit shall be $10, which fee shall be paid at the
time of filing the application. Upon the showing of good cause, the
Council may waive the payment of the permit fee.
A. An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the Chief of Police
not less than 10 days nor more than 20 days before the date on which it
is proposed to conduct the parade
B. Upon good cause shown, the Chief of Police may consider any
application for a parade permit filed less than 10 days before the date
such parade is proposed to be conducted.
A. The conduct of the parade:
(1) Will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of
other traffic contiguous to its route.
(2) Will not require diversion of Township employees so as to prevent
the furnishing of essential police, fire and health services in the
Township.
§ 184-3 PARADES § 184-7
184:449
§ 184-8. Time limit for approval or denial of permit by the Chief of
Police.
Within five days after the filing of an application for a parade permit, the
Chief of Police shall act upon the application by approving or denying the
issuance of a permit. Upon approval of the application, the Township Clerk
shall issue the permit. If the application is not approved, the Chief of Police
shall forthwith notify the applicant and provide him with the reasons for
denial.
§ 184-9. Alternate permit; notice of acceptance by applicant.
§ 184-10. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the denial by the Chief of Police of a parade
permit shall have the right to appeal such action to the Council within five
days after notice of the denial. The Council shall act on the appeal within
five days after receipt of the notice of appeal. If the Council approves the
issuance of the parade permit, the Township Clerk shall issue the permit.
§ 184-11. Information to be included on permit.
Each permit issued under this chapter shall state the following information:
(3) Is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property,
provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance.
B. The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any
commercial products, goods or events and is not designed to be held
purely for private profit.
A. In denying an application for a parade permit, the Chief of Police is
empowered and authorized to approve the issuance, by the Township
Clerk, of a permit, hereinafter referred to as the "alternate permit," for
the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time or over a route different
from that named by the applicant. If the applicant files, within three
days after the notice of such action, a written notice of acceptance of
such proposed alternate permit, the Township Clerk shall issue the
permit.
B. Such alternate parade permit shall conform to all the requirements of
and have the same effect as and be deemed to be a parade permit
issued pursuant to this chapter.
A. Starting and finishing time.
B. The portions of the streets to be traversed and occupied by the parade.
C. Such other information as the Chief of Police shall find necessary to the
enforcement of this chapter.
§ 184-7 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 184-12
184:450
§ 184-12. Responsibility of permittee.
The holder of a permit under this chapter shall comply with all permit
directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances.
§ 184-13. Possession of permit required during the parade.
The parade chairman or other person heading or leading the parade shall
carry the parade permit upon his person during the conduct of the parade.
§ 184-14. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-20-1962;
12-17-1962; 7-30-1984 by Ord. No. 84-22210-23-2006 by Ord. No.
06-656]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000 or by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days, or both.
Chapter 186
PARENTAL SUPERVISION OF MINORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curfew — See Ch. 122.
Cigarette vending machines — See Ch. 117.
Loitering by minors — See Ch. 188, Art. III.
§ 186-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter shall be to provide for parental supervision of
minors and establishing penalties for the lack thereof in the Township of
Cedar Grove, County of Essex, State of New Jersey.
§ 186-2. Definitions.
As used herein, the following definitions shall apply to the following terms:
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
PARENT — Either or both parents of a minor, the legal guardian(s) of
such minor or any other person(s) having the care of custody of the minor
committing the violation of the public peace. However, the term "parent"
shall not apply to parents, legal guardians or other persons whose custody
and control over such minor has been removed by court order, decree or
judgment or military service of such minor.
VIOLATION OF THE PUBLIC PEACE — Includes any of the following acts:
defacing, damaging or destroying public or private property of another
within the Township of Cedar Grove; committing an assault and battery
upon another in the Township of Cedar Grove; consuming and/or possessing
§ 184-12 PARADES § 186-2
184:451
alcoholic beverages in a public place in the Township; breaking and
entering or entering without breaking into the property of another with
the intention of stealing money or anything of value; possession and/or use
of a controlled dangerous substance, as the same shall be defined under
Title 24, Revised Statutes of New Jersey; violation of a Township ordinance;
or juvenile delinquency based upon any of the above offenses.[Amended
9-10-2018 by Ord. No. 18-832]
§ 186-3. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any parent to assist, aid, abet or encourage a minor
to commit a violation of the public peace or for the parent to fail or neglect
to exercise reasonable supervision and control over the conduct of such
minor, as defined herein, either by overt act, by failure to act or by lack of
supervision and control over such minor.
§ 186-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-30-1984 by Ord. No.
84-222; 10-23-2006 by Ord. No. 06-656]
Any parent who shall violate the terms of this chapter shall be subject to
punishment by a fine not exceeding $2,000 or by imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 90 days, or both, in the discretion of the court.
Chapter 188
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 55.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 83.
Places of amusement — See Ch. 88.
Curfew — See Ch. 122.
Noise — See Ch. 176.
Parades — See Ch. 184.
Use of recreation areas — See Ch. 205.
Weapons — See Ch. 262.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Authority to maintain order — See N.J.S.A.
40:48-1(6).
General powers — See N.J.S.A. 40:69A-29.
§ 186-2 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 186-4
184:452
ARTICLE I
Gambling and Disorderly Conduct
[Adopted by 1-18-1960, Ch. 13, Art. 1, of the former Revised
Ordinances]
§ 188-1. Maintaining premises for gambling or animal fight
prohibited.
No person shall set up, keep or maintain or permit to be set up, kept or
maintained in any house or premises occupied by him any faro table, faro
bank, roulette or other device or game of chance or hazard or address for
the purpose of gaming, or any boxing ring, cockpit or other place for the
exhibition of animals in fight.
§ 188-2. Entry by police and destruction of devices authorized.
It shall be the duty of the Township police and they are hereby authorized
and empowered to enter upon any premises wherein instruments or devices
employed in gaming, as described in § 188-1, shall be used contrary to the
provisions of this article. Except in the case of ball alleys, bowling alleys and
billiard tables, the police are hereby authorized and empowered to carry
away and destroy such instruments or devices employed in said gaming.
§ 188-3. Prohibited games, practices and conduct.
No person shall:
§ 188-4. Keeping or maintaining of a disorderly house prohibited.
No person shall keep or maintain a disorderly house including, but not by
way of limitation, a house of prostitution or ill fame.
A. Deal, play or engage in faro, roulette or other device or game of chance.
B. Buy or sell what is commonly known as a "pool" or any interest or share
in any such pool.
C. Make or take what is commonly known as a "book" upon the running,
pacing or trotting of any horse, mare, gelding or other animal or any
game, racing or contest.
D. Have in his possession any ticket, slip or other writing or printing of an
interest or share or showing or indicating an interest, share, bet or
pledge in any pool, lottery, racing or numbers game.
E. Keep or attend a place to which persons may resort for engaging in any
such acts or for betting upon the event of any horse race or other race
or contest.
F. Aid, abet, assist or participate in any such pool, lottery, race or other
contest.
§ 188-1 PARADES § 188-5
184:453
§ 188-5. Use of premises by disorderly persons prohibited.
No person shall allow or permit his house, shop, store or other place to be
used, frequented or resorted to by riotous or disorderly persons, prostitutes,
gamblers, vagrants or mendicants.
§ 188-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-17-1962; 7-30-1984
by Ord. No. 84-222]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 188-5 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 188-6
184:454
ARTICLE II
Resisting or Interfering with Police Officer
[Adopted by 3-18-1946, Ch. 13, Art. 9, of the former Revised
Ordinances]
§ 188-7. Interference with police officer during performance of
duties prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
§ 188-8. Violations and penalties. [Added 12-17-1962; amended
7-30-1984 by Ord. No. 84-222]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days, or both.
A. Resist any police officer or member of the Police Department in the
discharge of his duties or in any way to interfere with or hinder or
prevent him from discharging his duties as such officer or member or to
threaten him or attempt so to do.
B. In any manner to assist any person in the custody of any police officer or
member of the Police Department to escape or attempt to escape from
such custody or attempt to rescue any person so in custody.
§ 188-7 PARADES § 188-8
184:455

ARTICLE III
Loitering
[Adopted 4-6-1964; Ch. 13, Art. 12, of the former Revised
Ordinances; amended 1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 77-64]
§ 188-9. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LOITERING — Remaining idle in essentially one location, and includes the
concepts of spending time idly, loafing or walking about aimlessly and also
includes the colloquial expression "hanging around."
PARENT or GUARDIAN — Includes any adult person having care or custody
of a minor, whether by reason of blood relationship, the order of any court
or otherwise.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public has access, and includes
any street, highway, road, alley or sidewalk. It shall also include the front
or the neighborhood of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern or other place
of business and public grounds, areas and parks, as well as parking lots
or other vacant private property not owned by or under the control of the
person charged with violating this article or, in the case of a minor, not
owned by or under the control of his parent or guardian.
§ 188-10. Loitering prohibited.
No person shall loiter in a public place in such manner as to:
§ 188-11. Enforcement.
Whenever any police officer shall, in the exercise of reasonable judgment,
decide that the presence of any person in any public place is causing or is
likely to cause any of the conditions enumerated in § 188-10, he may, if he
deems it necessary for the preservation of the public peace and safety, order
that person to leave that place. Any person who shall refuse to leave after
being ordered to do so by a police officer shall be guilty of a violation of this
article.
A. Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace.
B. Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the
comfort and repose of any person.
C. Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles.
D. Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in any public
place as defined in § 188-9. This subsection will include the making of
unsolicited remarks of an offensive, disgusting or insulting nature or
which are calculated to annoy or disturb the person to whom or in
whose hearing they are made.
§ 188-9 PARADES § 188-12
184:457
§ 188-12. Loitering by minors.
No parent or guardian of a minor under the age of 18 years shall knowingly
permit that minor to loiter in violation of this article.
§ 188-13. Notice to parent or guardian of loitering by minors.
Whenever any minor under the age of 18 years is charged with a violation of
this article, his parent or guardian shall be notified of this fact by the Chief
of Police or any other person designated by him to give such notice.
§ 188-14. Presumption on second violation.
If at any time within 30 days following the giving of notice as provided in
§ 188-13 the minor to whom such notice relates again violates this article, it
shall be presumed in the absence of evidence to the contrary that the minor
did so with the knowledge and permission of his parent or guardian.
§ 188-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-30-1984 by Ord. No.
84-222; 12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 13-764]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000 or imprisonment for
a period not exceeding 90 days, or both.
§ 188-12 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 188-15
184:458
ARTICLE IV
Rewards for Information
[Adopted 12-20-1971 by Ord. No. 71-15, Ch. 2, Art. 15, of the former
Revised Ordinances]
§ 188-16. Rewards authorized.
The Township of Cedar Grove will offer a reward not to exceed $100 to
any person or persons who supply information and are instrumental in
the arrest and conviction of any person or persons who shall willfully or
maliciously destroy, damage, or deface any real or personal property of
another, either of a public or private nature, subject to the provisions of
Chapter 153, Title 2A, of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated.
§ 188-16 PARADES § 188-16
184:459

ARTICLE V
Display of Obscene Material
[Adopted 1-9-1995 by Ord. No. 94-454]
§ 188-17. Restrictions on display of merchandise.
It shall be a petty disorderly persons offense for a retailer to display or
permit to be displayed at his business premises any obscene material as
defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:34-3, as may be amended from time to time, at a
height of less than five feet or without a blinder or covering placed or
printed on the front of the material displayed. A retailer shall be such
person as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:34-3.1, as may be amended from time
to time. The public display of the obscene material shall constitute
presumptive evidence that the retailer knowingly made or permitted the
display.
§ 188-17 PARADES § 188-17
184:461

ARTICLE VI
Prohibition Against Urinating and Defecating in Public Places;
Public Nudity
[Adopted 12-20-1999 by Ord. No. 99-518]
§ 188-18. Prohibited activities.
§ 188-19. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-23-2006 by Ord.
No. 06-656]
Any person violating this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished
by a fine not exceeding $2,000, or imprisonment for a period not exceeding
90 days, or both.
A. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
PUBLIC PLACE — Those areas traditionally reserved for use by the
public including, but not limited to streets, sidewalks, parks, open
spaces, commercial parking lots, vehicles of mass transportation,
property owned by the Township, county, state, or any other sovereign
entity. An otherwise private place may become a public place if a permit
seeking permission for the general public to access the property for
a specific purpose is granted. In this instance, the location is a public
place only for the duration of the permit's validity.
PUBLIC VIEW — The area visible to persons in or on a public place.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate in any public
place, or in public view within the Township of Cedar Grove.
C. No person shall appear, travel on any street, avenue, highway, or road
located in the Township, or appear in any public place or any business
open to the public in the Township, in a state of nudity. A person shall be
found in a state of nudity when a person exposes to public view his or
her genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or female breasts.
§ 188-18 PARADES § 188-19
184:463

ARTICLE VII
Garage Sales
[Adopted 3-6-2006 by Ord. No. 06-638]
§ 188-20. Permit required.
No person shall, within the limits of the Township allow, suffer or permit
the display for sale of any goods, wares or merchandise upon the streets,
walkways or sidewalks of the Township, or upon private property in any
residential district, as defined in the Zoning Ordinance.75 A sale of used
goods, wares and merchandise, commonly known as a "garage sale," "lawn
sale" or "attic sale," may be permitted in any residential district as defined
in the Zoning Ordinance upon a permit from the Zoning Officer, which
permit shall be valid for not more than two consecutive days. Unless such
sale is held within two months of the date of the permit, such permit shall
expire by limitation. Each owner-applicant may apply for said permit not
more than twice each calendar year. The fee for such permit shall be $5.
§ 188-21. Hours of sale.
All garage sales shall be conducted only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m.
§ 188-22. Signs; location of sales.
No signs advertising the sale shall be posted on any place other than the
premises where the sale is to be held. The sign shall not be larger than two
feet by two feet in size and may not be displayed on any premises earlier
than one week before the sale and shall be removed within 24 hours after
the sale. Sales shall be conducted only in the residence, garage, driveway
or rear yard.
§ 188-23. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-9-2009 by Ord. No.
09-694]
Any violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine up to $2,000. Each
day that the violation exists shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 188-24. Sale of mattresses, bedsprings, cots, lounges and sofas.
It shall be unlawful for any person to offer for sale any mattress, bedspring,
cot, lounge or sofa in any garage sale authorized under this article without
first complying with N.J.S.A. § 26:10-1 through § 26:10-18 with respect to
the labeling, sterilizing, and disinfecting of any mattress, bedspring, cot,
lounge or sofa.
75.Editor's Note: See Ch. 268, Zoning.
§ 188-20 PARADES § 188-24
184:465
Chapter 190
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 55.
Littering — See Ch 168.
Noise — See Ch. 176.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 179.
Use of recreation areas — See Ch. 205.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 230.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Regulation of hucksters — See N.J.S.A.
40:48-1(12).
Power to license — See N.J.S.A. 40:52-1c.
§ 190-1. Definitions. [Amended 1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 77-64]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SOLICIT BUSINESS or SOLICITING BUSINESS or SOLICITING — The
same as canvassing or canvassing business, peddling or peddling business
and shall, when done by personal approach, include the following:
SOLICITOR'S LICENSE or CANVASSING LICENSE or PEDDLER'S
LICENSE — Refers to the license issued under this chapter.
§ 190-2. Purpose. [Amended 1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 77-64]
The purpose of this chapter is to license and regulate the business of
soliciting, canvassing and peddling in the Township.
§ 190-3. Nonapplicability.
Except as otherwise provided in this section, nothing contained in this
chapter shall be construed to apply to any of the following acts:
Seeking or endeavoring to sell any goods, wares, securities,
merchandise or services whatsoever by sample, description or
otherwise.
A.
Taking orders for such goods, wares, securities, merchandise or
services for either present or future delivery with or without a payment
in whole or in part.
B.
Advertising goods, wares, securities, merchandise or services for sale
by passing or circulating handbills.
C.
A. Soliciting done by the legal owner, lessee or agent of same upon the
property owned or leased by the solicitor.
§ 188-24 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 190-3
184:466
§ 190-4. License required.
No person shall solicit business in the Township without first having
obtained a solicitor's license issued by the Township Clerk in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 190-5. Information and documents to be submitted with
application.
B. Soliciting done for the purpose of sale of personal property at wholesale
to retailers in such articles.
C. Delivery of newspapers, advertising circulars or goods in the regular
course of business, or the collection of payments therefor.
D. The services of public utilities and their duly authorized agents or
representatives, provided that such exemption for public utilities shall
not apply to the selling of other than public utility services.
E. Soliciting by any religious or charitable organization provided that any
such organization registers with the Chief of Police before commencing
solicitation.
F. Soliciting by persons lawfully exempt by state statute or federal law
from the licensing requirements set forth herein or by persons lawfully
entitled to conduct a business wherein a license or certificate has been
granted by any department, board, commission or agency of the State
of New Jersey or of the Township.
A. Every applicant for a solicitor's license shall file with the Chief of Police
a written application, signed and verified by him, on forms supplied by
the Township.
B. The application shall state:
(1) The name, permanent home address, birth date, social security
number, and telephone number of the applicant. [Amended
8-12-2019 by Ord. No. 19-846]
(2) The places of the applicant's residence during and for each of the
three years preceding the filing of the application.
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the manufacturer or
dealer represented by the applicant.
(4) The names and addresses of the persons from whom the goods,
wares, securities, merchandise or service to be offered by the
applicant were or are to be purchased.
(5) Such other information as the Chief of Police may reasonably
require.
§ 190-3 PARADES § 190-5
184:467
§ 190-6. Investigation and verification of application. [Amended
9-10-2018 by Ord. No. 18-831]
Within 30 days of receiving the application for a solicitor's license, the
Chief of Police shall complete an investigation and verify the information
respecting the moral character and business responsibility of the applicant.
§ 190-7. Standards for approval or rejection of application.
C. The application shall be accompanied by the following documents and
information:
(1) A letter from the manufacturer or dealer, referred to in Subsection
B(3) above, authorizing the applicant to act as its representative.
(2) A description of the goods, wares, securities, merchandise or
services to be offered for sale.
(3) Three business references.
(4) The number of arrests, if any, for disorderly conduct, violation of
ordinances, misdemeanors or crimes; the nature of the offenses for
which arrested; and the history of any such case to its final
disposition.
(5) Two recent photographs of the applicant 1 1/2 inches by 1 1/2
inches.
(6) Driver's license or other state or federal government-issued
identification. [Amended 8-12-2019 by Ord. No. 19-846]
(7) A letter from the manufacturer or dealer represented by the
applicant indicating whether or not it has performed a background
check on the individual, and, if so, affirming that the individual
successfully passed same, and stating that the manufacturer or
dealer will assume responsibility for the actions of the applicant.
[Added 8-12-2019 by Ord. No. 19-846]
A. If, after investigation, the Chief of Police concludes that the applicant's
character and business responsibility are satisfactory, he shall signify
his approval of the application on the reverse side thereof; otherwise he
shall note his rejection thereon.
B. If, after an investigation, the applicant's character or business
responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the Chief of Police shall
endorse on such application his disapproval and his reasons therefor
and return the said application to the Township Clerk. Any
determination by the Chief of Police that an application shall be
disapproved shall be based on one or more of the following findings
with respect to the applicant or, in the case of solicitation of
contributions, any of the organization's officers, managers or agents:
[Added 1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 77-64]
§ 190-5 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 190-7
184:468
§ 190-8. Issuance of license.
Following the written approval of the application by the Chief of Police and
the payment of the fee prescribed by § 190-9 hereof, the Township Clerk
shall issue a solicitor's license to and in the name of the applicant.
§ 190-9. Fees. [Amended 2-1-1982 by Ord. No. 82-172; 11-7-1988 by
Ord. No. 88-326; 9-10-2018 by Ord. No. 18-831]
The fees for all licenses required by the provisions of this chapter shall be
$50 for up to a maximum of one year.
§ 190-10. Issuance of identification card; deposit.
§ 190-11. Term and expiration date of license. [Amended
10-15-1962]
All licenses and identification cards issued under this chapter shall expire
on December 31 of the year of their issuance unless sooner surrendered or
revoked.
(1) Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude.
(2) Prior violation of a peddling or soliciting ordinance.
(3) Previous fraudulent acts or conduct.
(4) Record of breaches of solicited contracts.76
C. In the absence of any such finding, the Chief of Police shall find the
application satisfactory and shall endorse his approval on the
application and return the application to the Township Clerk. [Added
1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 77-64]
A. At the time of the issuance of the license and upon posting the deposit
required by Subsection B of this section, an identification card shall be
issued to the licensee by the Chief of Police or, in his absence, by the
officer in charge at police headquarters. The identification card shall
bear a number corresponding with the number of the license and shall
contain the name and photograph of the applicant, together with the
words "Township of Cedar Grove Canvassing License."
B. Prior to the issuance of the identification card, the licensee shall post
with the Chief of Police a cash deposit of $5, which deposit shall be
returned to the licensee when the identification card is surrendered as
required in § 190-16 hereof.
76.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(5), regarding evidence of bad character, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 9-10-2018 by Ord. No. 18-831.
§ 190-7 PARADES § 190-12
184:469
§ 190-12. Licenses not transferable.
Licenses issued under this chapter shall not be transferable.
§ 190-13. Display of license and identification card.
Each licensee shall carry his license with him and shall produce it at the
request of any resident of the Township from whom the licensee is soliciting
business. Each licensee shall display his identification card at all times
while actually engaged in canvassing or soliciting.
§ 190-14. Hours. [Amended 1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 77-64; 9-10-2018
by Ord. No. 18-831; 8-12-2019 by Ord. No. 19-846]
Soliciting, peddling and canvassing shall be conducted only between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
§ 190-15. Standards of conduct. [Amended 6-15-1970 by Ord. No.
No. 70-6]
§ 190-16. Surrender of license and identification card.
Upon expiration or revocation of the license, the licensee shall surrender
the license and the identification card forthwith to the officer in charge at
police headquarters, at which time the deposit on the identification card
shall be returned to the licensee.
§ 190-17. Grounds for suspension or revocation of license.
A. Licensees shall be courteous and shall conduct themselves in a lawful
manner at all times. Canvassing shall be done at the front door unless
directed otherwise by the homeowner.
B. No person or persons, whether licensed under the terms or provisions
of this chapter or unlicensed, shall scatter, throw or deposit any
newspapers, handbills, advertisements, circulars, pamphlets or other
printed matter in and about the streets, sidewalks, parks and public
places within the Township of Cedar Grove or upon the premises of any
resident or property owner; but such newspapers, handbills,
advertisements, circulars, pamphlets or other printed matter shall be
handed in person to an occupant of such house or deposited in a
receptacle placed on said property for such purposes or at any other
location so designated by the homeowner or occupant.
A. Licenses issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the
Chief of Police upon any of the following grounds:
(1) Violation of the terms and conditions of the license.
(2) Making false statements or giving false information in the
application or documents accompanying the application.
§ 190-12 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 190-17
184:470
§ 190-18. Appeals. [Added 1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 77-64]
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Township Clerk and/or the Chief
of Police may appeal such decision to the Township Council by notifying
the Township Clerk of the intent to appeal within 10 days of the applicant's
receipt of such adverse decision. The Township Council shall then schedule
a hearing on such appeal within 30 days of receipt of the notice to appeal,
at which time the applicant may present such evidence as he desires to
establish his grounds for appeal. Said appeal shall be decided by a majority
vote of the Council, and this decision shall be considered final.
§ 190-19. Violations and penalties. [Added 10-15-1962; amended
12-17-1962]
§ 190-20. "Do not knock" list established. [Added 8-12-2019 by Ord.
No. 19-846]
A "do not knock" list is hereby established and is to be maintained by
the Township Clerk listing properties for which the owners, tenants, or
residents do not wish to have solicitors visit the property for the purpose
of soliciting. Any person who owns or rents property within the Township
may register for their property to be included on the "do not knock" list
by registering with the Township Clerk's office. Registration shall be
accomplished in person at the Township Clerk's office in writing by
providing proof of ownership, tenancy, or residency and a notarized letter
from the property owner, tenant, or resident of the property indicating the
person's relationship to the property and that the person wishes for the
property to be included on the "do not knock" list.
(3) Violation of any provision of this chapter.
(4) Violation of any federal or state statutes or of any of the Township
ordinances.
B. Within 30 days of notice of suspension or revocation given to the
licensee and upon his request, the licensee shall be granted a hearing
before the Council, after which the Council shall determine whether to
affirm or set aside the suspension or revocation action of the Chief of
Police.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000 or by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues. [Amended 7-30-1984 by Ord. No.
84-222; 10-23-2006 by Ord. No. 06-656]
B. In addition to the penalty provided in Subsection A of this section,
licenses under this chapter may be suspended or revoked as provided in
§ 190-17.
§ 190-17 PARADES § 190-21
184:471
§ 190-21. Maintenance of "do not knock" list. [Added 8-12-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-846]
§ 190-22. Copies of "do not knock" list; notarized letters kept on
file. [Added 8-12-2019 by Ord. No. 19-846]
§ 190-23. Solicitation prohibited at residences on "do not knock"
list. [Added 8-12-2019 by Ord. No. 19-846]
It is prohibited for any person to conduct any commercial solicitation at any
property listed on the "do not knock" registry. Any person who violates this
section shall be subject to the penalties listed in § 190-19.
Chapter 194
PLUMBING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 105.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 119.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 137.
Gas piping and appliances — See Ch. 150.
Housing standards — See Ch. 158.
Hydrants and sprinklers — See Ch. 161.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 179.
Individual sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
213.
Sewers — See Ch. 217.
Private swimming pools — See Ch. 237.
Public swimming pools — See Ch. 239.
Water — See Ch. 259.
Wells, cisterns and holes — See Ch. 265.
A. The "do not knock" list shall be maintained by the Township Clerk and
consist solely of property addresses with no further identifying
information concerning ownership of the property.
B. The Tax Assessor shall notify the Township Clerk of any change in
ownership of property within the Township on a quarterly basis (four
times per year). The Township Clerk shall remove from the "do not
knock" list any property which has changed ownership.
C. Other than by sale of property, a property, once listed, may only be
removed from the registry by submitting a written, sworn, and
notarized request to the Township Clerk.
A. The Township Clerk, or his or her designee, shall provide an up-to-date
copy of the "do not knock" list to every applicant to whom a license is
issued pursuant to this chapter.
B. Copies of all notarized letters registering a property for the "do not
knock" list and the accompanying proof of ownership, tenancy, or
residency shall be kept on file by the Township Clerk.
§ 190-21 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 190-23
184:472
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Adoption of plumbing codes by
reference — See N.J.S.A. 26:3-31.1 et seq.
Adoption of construction codes by
reference — See N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1.
§ 194-1. Definitions.
§ 194-2. Adoption of standards by reference; copies on file.
§ 194-3. Fees.
The following are the fees which shall be charged and received under
this chapter, including the Plumbing Code of New Jersey (Revised 1964),
incorporated herein by reference:
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PLUMBING CODE OF NEW JERSEY (REVISED 1964) — That certain
code approved by the State Department of Health for adoption by
reference by local Boards of Health in accordance with law, being a
code:
Regulating the installation, maintenance, repair and control of the
plumbing of buildings, and the connection thereof with outside
sewers, cesspools or other receptacles.
(1)
Regulating the practice of plumbing and the issuance of licenses to
practice plumbing.
(2)
B. Whenever the words or terms "Board of Health" or "administrative
authority" are used in the Plumbing Code of New Jersey (Revised 1964),
they shall mean and refer to the Department of Health of the Township.
A. Pursuant to and in accordance with Chapter 275 of the Laws of 1948
(N.J.S.A. 26:3-31.1 et seq.), there is hereby established and adopted as
the Plumbing Code of the Township the whole of the Plumbing Code of
New Jersey (Revised 1964). A printed copy of said code is annexed to
and incorporated by reference in the ordinance adopting this chapter,
passed on November 17, 1969, adopting said code.
B. The Plumbing Code of New Jersey (Revised 1964) is hereby
incorporated in this chapter by reference and made a part hereof as
fully as though it had been set forth at length herein.
C. In accordance with law, three printed copies of the Plumbing Code of
New Jersey (Revised 1964) have been placed on file in the office of the
Township Clerk and in the office of the Health Officer and shall remain
on file in said offices for the use and examination of the public so long as
this chapter shall remain in effect.
A. For examination of any applicant for a license as a master plumber: $70.
§ 190-23 PARADES § 194-3
184:473
§ 194-4. Time limits for commencement and completion of work.
Any permit issued under this chapter, including the Plumbing Code of New
Jersey (Revised 1964), incorporated herein by reference, shall terminate
and become invalid if the work authorized by said permit is not commenced
within 60 days from the date of issuance of the permit or if the said work
has not been completed within one year from the date of the issuance of the
permit.
§ 194-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-30-1984 by Ord. No.
84-222; 10-23-2006 by Ord. No. 06-656]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, including the
Plumbing Code of New Jersey (Revised 1964), incorporated herein by
reference, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not
exceeding $2,000 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or
both. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 196
PRIVATE STORM DRAIN INLET RETROFITTING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 271. Stormwater management — See Ch. 228.
§ 196-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to:
B. For issuance and annual renewal of a license as a master plumber: $50.
C. For filing of plans for proposed plumbing work: $2.
D. For issuance of a permit for proposed plumbing construction or
alteration:
(1) For the first four fixtures proposed in the approved plan for
construction or alteration: $10.
(2) For each additional fixture proposed in the said approved plan: $3.
E. For issuance of a permit for the replacement of a plumbing fixture: $10.
[Amended 2-1-1982 by Ord. No. 82-173]
F. For each reinspection of plumbing work caused by the failure of the
licensee to comply with the provisions of the code or permit issued: $10.
§ 194-3 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 196-1
184:474
§ 196-2. Definitions.
§ 196-3. Prohibited conduct.
A. Require the retrofitting of existing storm drain inlets which are in direct
contact with repaving, repairing, reconstruction, or resurfacing or
alterations of facilities on private property;
B. Prevent the discharge of solids and floatables to the municipal separate
storm sewer systems operated by the Township so as to protect public
health, safety, and welfare; and
C. Prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
A. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
B. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words,
and their derivations shall have the meanings defined herein unless
otherwise stated:
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A
conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the
Township and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater. MS4s do not include combined sewer systems, which are
sewer systems that are designed to carry sanitary sewage at all times
to collect and transport stormwater from streets and other sources.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to the
jurisdiction of this Township.
SOLID AND FLOATABLE MATERIALS — Sediment, debris, trash, and
other floating, suspended, or settleable solids.
STORM DRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to collect
stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curbopening
inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs,
streams, and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural
or artificial, subject to the jurisdiction of this Township.
A. No person in control of private property shall authorize the repaving,
repairing, resurfacing, reconstructing, or altering of any service that is
in direct contact with an existing storm drain inlet on that property.
(1) "Repairing" shall not include the repair of individual potholes.
(2) "Resurfacing" shall include top coating or chip sealing with asphalt
emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen.
§ 196-1 PARADES § 196-3
184:475
§ 196-4. Design standard.
B. The conduct in Subsection A shall be permitted if the storm drain inlet
either:
(1) Already meets the design standard hereinafter prescribed by
§ 196-4 to control passage of solid and floatable materials; or
(2) Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard hereinafter
prescribed by § 196-4 prior to the completion of the project.
C. This section shall not apply to persons in control of a residential lot with
one single-family house.
A. Storm drain inlets identified in § 196-3 above shall comply with the
standard provided by this section to control passage of solid and
floatable materials through storm drain inlets.
B. Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever they
use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water body
under that grate:
(1) The New Jersey Department of Transportation bicycle-safe grate,
which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the New Jersey Department of
Transportation Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways
Planning and Design Guidelines; or
(2) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate has an
area of no more than seven square inches or is no greater than 0.5
inch across the smallest dimension.
C. Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate
inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination
inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and
grates of spacer bars in slotted drain. Examples of ground surfaces
include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways, parking areas,
bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open channels, and
stormwater basin floors.
D. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in
that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening
has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than seven
square inches or be no greater than two inches across the smallest
dimension.
E. This standard does not apply where:
(1) The Township Engineer agrees that this standard would cause
inadequate hydraulic performance that cannot practically be
overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that meet
these standards;
§ 196-3 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 196-4
184:476
§ 196-5. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Township Manager's office, Township
Engineer, and Police and Building Departments of the Township of Cedar
Grove.
§ 196-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500 for each storm drain inlet that
is not retrofitted to meet the design standard.
Chapter 197
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 100.
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 105.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 119.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 137.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 146.
Housing standards — See Ch. 158.
Hydrants and sprinklers — See Ch. 161.
Littering — See Ch. 168.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 179.
Shopping carts — See Ch. 221.
Trees — See Ch. 246.
Wells, cisterns and holes — See Ch. 265.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
General power to adopt police
ordinances — See N.J.S.A. 40:69A-29.
(2) Flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end-of-pipe netting
facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin hood) that
is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and
floatable materials that cannot pass through one of the following:
(a) A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches wide
(this option does not apply for outfall netting facilities); or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
(3) Flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel bars with
one-inch spacing between the bars; or
(4) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places
Rules, N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(e), that action to meet this standard is an
undertaking that constitutes encroachment or will damage or
destroy New Jersey Register-listed historic property.
§ 196-4 PARADES § 196-6
184:477

ARTICLE I
Multifamily, Commercial and Industrial Properties
[Adopted 9-18-1972 by Ord. No. 72-11, Ch. 13, Art. 15, of the former
Revised Ordinances]
§ 197-1. Purpose, title and definitions. [Amended 6-16-1986 by Ord.
No. 86-266; 12-1-2003 by Ord. No. 03-604]
A. This article shall regulate the maintenance of multifamily, commercial,
community service, industrial and public service facility properties, fix
penalties for violations and be commonly known as the "Multifamily and
Nonresidential Property Maintenance Code."
B. The following words and terms, when used in this article, shall have the
following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
COMMERCIAL FACILITY — Any premises, property, or facility involving
traffic in goods or furnishing of services for sale or profit, including, but
not limited to:
COMMUNITY SERVICE FACILITY — Any nonresidential facility used to
provide services to the public, including, but not limited to:
(1) Banking and other financial institutions;
(2) Dining establishments;
(3) Retail establishments;
(4) Wholesale establishments;
(5) Recreation or entertainment establishments;
(6) Office buildings;
(7) Transportation;
(8) Warehouses; and
Establishments providing accommodations which exceed six
dwelling units, including, but not limited to, apartments, co-ops,
hotels, motels and dormitories, when they are the source of the
sound that is being investigated and the source of sound is a
heating, air-conditioning or pool filter unit or system.
(9)
(1) Club meeting halls, offices and facilities;
(2) Organization offices and facilities;
(3) Facilities for the support and practice of religion;
(4) Public, private and parochial schools; and
(5) Hospitals.
§ 197-1 PARADES § 197-1
184:479
INDUSTRIAL FACILITY — Any activity and its related premises,
property, facilities or equipment involving the fabrication, manufacture
or production of durable or nondurable goods.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — Property used for human habitation of
two or more families, including, but not limited to:
PERSON — Any individual, public or private corporation, political
subdivision, governmental agency, department or bureau of the state,
municipality, industry or association, including condominium or co-op
associations, limited liability corporations and partnerships and limited
liability partnerships.
PUBLIC SERVICE FACILITY — Any facility and its related premises,
property or equipment used to provide governmental services to the
public, including, but not limited to:
PUBLIC UTILITY LAND — All real property, waters and facilities owned
or leased by any entity regulated by the New Jersey Board of Public
Utilities.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Property used for human habitation,
unless the habitation is a condition of employment, including, but not
limited to:
TOWNSHIP LAND — All real property, waters and facilities owned or
leased by the Township of Cedar Grove, including, but not limited to,
work areas, parks, forests, recreational areas, natural areas, marinas,
(1) Private property used for human habitation;
(2) Commercial living accommodations;
Recreational and entertainment property used for human
habitation; and
(3)
(4) Community service property used for human habitation.
(1) Maintenance centers;
Offices and buildings of agencies or instrumentalities of
government;
(2)
(3) Waste collection centers;
(4) Waste recycling centers; and
(5) Water and sewage facilities.
(1) Private property used for human habitation;
(2) Commercial living accommodations;
Recreational and entertainment property used for human
habitation; and
(3)
(4) Community service property used for human habitation.
§ 197-1 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 197-1
184:480
§ 197-2. Standards for structural soundness and general
maintenance.
§ 197-3. Standards for maintenance of exterior of premises.
golf courses, botanical gardens, historic sites, wildlife management
areas or reservoir lands.
A. Every multifamily dwelling, industrial facility, commercial facility,
community service facility, public service facility or public utility land
and accessory structures and every part thereof shall be kept
structurally sound and in a state of good repair to avoid safety, health or
fire hazards, including exterior walls, sidings and roofs, and shall be
kept free from defects. [Amended 12-1-2003 by Ord. No. 03-604]
B. All exposed surfaces susceptible to decay shall be kept at all times
painted or otherwise provided with a protective coating sufficient to
prevent deterioration. Damaged materials must be repaired or
replaced. Places showing signs of rot, leakage, deterioration or
corrosion, weathering or seepage are to be restored and protected.
C. Structural soundness and general maintenance violation complaints
may be brought by any resident, the Township Building Inspector or the
Code Enforcement Officer. [Amended 6-16-1986 by Ord. No.
86-266]
A. Landscaping. Premises shall be kept landscaped in accordance with or
equal to the original landscape site plan as approved by the Planning
Board. Bushes, lawns, hedges, trees and all other features included in
the approved landscape plan shall be maintained and kept from
becoming overgrown and unsightly or in any form of neglect or
disrepair. In the absence of an approved landscape site plan, it shall be
considered a violation of this provision to allow grass to grow in excess
of 10 inches in height. Landscaping violation complaints may be
brought by any resident, the Township Police Department, the
Township Building Inspector, the Township Code Enforcement Officer
or any agent of the Township. [Amended 6-16-1986 by Ord. No.
86-266; 12-1-2003 by Ord. No. 03-604]
B. Fences. All fences shall be maintained and kept in a good state of repair.
All exposed surfaces susceptible to decay shall be kept at all times
painted or otherwise provided with a protective coating sufficient to
prevent deterioration. Fence violation complaints may be brought by
any resident, the Township Building Inspector or the Code Enforcement
Officer. [Amended 6-16-1986 by Ord. No. 86-266]
C. Parking lots.
(1) All parking lots shall be maintained, where applicable, according to
the original site plan. The surface of the pavement shall be kept in a
good state of repair, free from potholes, defects, debris, rubbish,
§ 197-1 PARADES § 197-3
184:481
rocks and litter. Parking lot violation complaints may be brought
by any resident or the Township Health Officer or the Township
Building Inspector. [Amended 9-18-1978 by Ord. No. 78-77]
(2) Additionally, all parking lots and driveways shall be cleared of all
snow and ice within 12 hours of daylight after the same shall cease
to have fallen or to have formed thereon or, in the case of ice which
may be so frozen to make removal impracticable, shall be
thoroughly covered with sand within the same period. Violation
complaints may be brought by any resident, the municipality's
Code Enforcement Officer or Cedar Grove Police Department.
[Added 8-2-1993 by Ord. No. 93-422]
D. Refuse and natural growth. [Amended 6-16-1986 by Ord. No.
86-266; 11-21-1988 by Ord. No. 88-328; 5-6-1996 by Ord. No.
96-472; 4-2-2001 by Ord. No. 01-557]
(1) The exterior of the premises and all structures thereon shall be
kept free of all nuisances and any hazards to the safety of
occupants, pedestrians and other persons utilizing the premises
and free of unsanitary conditions, and any of the foregoing shall be
promptly removed and abated by the owner or operator. It shall be
the duty of the owner or operator to keep the premises free of
hazards, which include but are not limited to the following:
(a) Refuse. Brush, weeds, broken glass, stumps, roots, obnoxious
growth, filth, garbage, trash, refuse and debris.
(b) Natural growth. Dead and dying trees and/or limbs or other
natural growth, which by reason of rotting or deteriorating
conditions or storm damage constitute a hazard to persons in
the vicinity thereof, shall be removed and replaced with a new
planting. Trees, shrubs and plantings shall be kept pruned and
trimmed to prevent such conditions.
(c) Litter. Paper products, packing and shipping materials and
other litter.
(2) All cuttings, clippings, and waste materials generated within the
Township shall be disposed only at the customer's location or at
such other location as may be designated and directed by a duly
authorized representative of the Township's Department of
Community Development. Disposal of any cuttings, clippings or
waste materials generated from beyond the Township is prohibited
within the Township's boundaries.
(3) No leaves shall be piled more than three feet from the curb of his or
her property in which he or she is working during the leaf
collection periods designated by the Director of Community
Development. During other periods of the year, these materials
must be disposed of in accord with Subsection D(2) of this section.
§ 197-3 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 197-3
184:482
§ 197-4. Standards for maintenance of interior of premises.
(4) Refuse and natural growth violation complaints may be brought by
any resident, the Township Health Officer or Code Enforcement
Officer.
E. Signs. All permanent signs and billboards exposed to public view,
permitted by reason of other regulations or a lawful nonconforming
use, shall be maintained in good repair. Any signs which have become
excessively weathered or faded or those upon which the paint has
peeled or cracked shall, with their supporting members, be removed
forthwith or painted and put into a good state of repair. All nonoperative
or broken electrical signs shall be repaired or shall, with their
supporting members, be removed forthwith. Sign violation complaints
may be brought by any resident, the Township Building Inspector or the
Code Enforcement Officer. [Amended 6-16-1986 by No. 86-266]
F. Walkways. All walkways shall be kept structurally sound and in a state
of good repair. Additionally, snow and ice shall be removed from
walkways within 12 hours of daylight after the same shall cease to have
fallen or to have formed thereon or, in the case of ice which may be
frozen to make removal impracticable, shall be thoroughly covered with
sand within the same period. Violation complaints may be brought by
any resident or the municipality's Code Enforcement Officer. [Added
8-2-1993 by Ord. No. 93-422]
A. Stairs and railings. Interior stairs of every structure used for human
habitation shall be structurally sound and free from defects.
Handrailings or banisters shall be provided for all stairs, balconies, fire
escapes and stairwells, and the handrails or banisters shall be securely
attached, maintained free from defects and shall be of sufficient height
to guard against accidents and to be appropriate for use by persons of
normal height utilizing the stairway. Stairs shall be adequately lighted
in all places for 24 hours per day on each floor to permit safe use for
persons ascending or descending. Stair and railing violation complaints
may be brought by any resident or the Township Building Inspector.
B. Walls and ceilings. Walls and ceilings shall be considered to be in good
repair when clean and free from cracks, breaks, loose plaster and
similar conditions. Walls shall be provided with paint or paper, sealing
material or other protective covering so that the said walls and ceilings
shall be kept clean, free of visible foreign matter, sanitary and wellmaintained
at all times. Wall and ceiling violation complaints may be
brought by any resident or the Township Building Inspector.
C. Heating. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, every person
who shall have contracted or undertaken, or shall be bound to heat or to
furnish heat for any building, or portion thereof, occupied as a
multifamily dwelling shall heat, or furnish such heat, for every occupied
room in such building or portion thereof so that a minimum
temperature of 68 degrees Fahrenheit shall be maintained therein
§ 197-3 PARADES § 197-4
184:483
§ 197-5. Lighting standards. [Added 7-2-1973 by Ord. No. 7211(a)]
§ 197-6. Written notice; correction of violations upon notice.
[Amended 7-1-1974 by Ord. No. 72-11(b); 10-1-1984 by Ord. No.
84-227; 11-21-1988 by Ord. No. 88-328]
Prior to the start of proceedings before a court of proper jurisdiction,
written notice containing the nature of the violation shall be served upon
the owner and/or occupant. Service of the notice shall be made in person or
by certified mail, return receipt requested. In the event that service cannot
be effectuated by certified mail, service may be made by first-class mail
with postage prepaid mailed to the last known address of the person to be
served. Service shall be effective upon mailing, and the date of mailing or
between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. and a minimum
temperature of 60 degrees Fahrenheit shall be maintained therein
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. in any building, or
portion thereof, occupied as a multifamily dwelling throughout the year.
Violation complaints may be brought by any resident, the municipality's
Code Enforcement Officer or Health Officer. [Added 9-8-1997 by Ord.
97-489]
A. In all multifamily units, excluding two-dwelling units, every portion of
each stairway, hall cellar, basement, landing, furnace room, utility room
and garage, parking space and all similar nonhabitable space shall have
artificial light available at all times, with a minimum illumination as
hereinafter enumerated per square foot in the darkest portions with
control switches operable in each of said portions of the building:
(1) Stairway: 20 footcandles of light.
(2) Hall cellar: 10 footcandles of light.
(3) Basement: 20 footcandles of light.
(4) Laundry: 20 footcandles of light.
(5) Furnace room: 20 footcandles of light.
(6) Utility room and garage: 10 footcandles of light.
(7) Parking space: 20 footcandles of light.
(8) All other similar nonhabitable space: 10 footcandles of light.
B. In all multifamily units, excluding two-family units, every portion of any
interior or exterior passageway, including the outside entrance of a
garage and outdoor parking area, shall be illuminated artificially,
between the hours from 1/2 hour before sunset to 1/2 hour after
sunrise, with an illumination of at least 30 footcandles per square foot
in the darkest portion of the normally traveled stairs and passageways
to enable persons of normal vision to traverse from such areas safely to
the point of egress from the garage and outdoor parking areas.
§ 197-4 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 197-6
184:484
personal service shall be the beginning date for computation of the time
limits hereinafter established. Upon service of a notice of violation of this
article, the owner and/or occupant must correct the defective condition
within seven days, except in the case of a litter violation pursuant to
§ 197-3D(1)(c), which shall be corrected within three days, provided that
service of the required notice is made in person, or such later time as the
Township official enforcing the chapter shall agree, in writing.
§ 197-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-2-1973 by Ord. No.
72-11(a); 7-30-1984 by Ord. No. 84-222; 10-23-2006 by Ord. No.
06-656]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000 or by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 197-6 PARADES § 197-7
184:485

ARTICLE II
Dumpsters
[Adopted 9-11-2000 by Ord. No. 00-537]
§ 197-8. Dumpster required; removal of debris daily; permit; fee.
[Amended 5-3-2004 by Ord. No. 04-609]
§ 197-9. Removal of dumpsters. [Amended 5-3-2004 by Ord. No.
04-609]
All dumpsters placed in the Township right-of-way or roadway shall be
removed within five days of the issuance of the permit. An extension of up
to five additional five-day periods may be requested from the Cedar Grove
Police Department.
§ 197-10. Destruction of roads and property prohibited.
Any dumpster placed within the Township of Cedar Grove shall not damage
or destroy any roadway, curbing, sidewalk and/or any other property.
§ 197-11. Dumpsters in roadways; proximity to buildings.
All dumpsters placed in the roadway shall have safety reflectors, and their
placement shall be approved by the Cedar Grove Police Department. No
dumpster shall be placed within 15 feet a building.
§ 197-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-23-2006 by Ord.
No. 06-656]
Any violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine of up to $2,000 or
by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. Each day that
the violation exists shall constitute a separate violation.
A. All persons requesting to place a dumpster within the Township shall be
required to obtain a permit from the Building Department. The
placement of such dumpster shall not create a hazard.
B. All construction, landscaping or demolition projects that generate
waste shall be required either to have a dumpster on site or the waste,
such as scrap wood, masonry and/or other debris, shall be removed
daily as in order not to create a hazard. No debris shall be left on the
grounds overnight.
C. There shall be a permit fee of $100 for each dumpster placed in the
roadway or right-of-way. For dumpsters placed in the driveway area,
there shall be a permit fee of $25.
§ 197-8 PARADES § 197-13
184:487
§ 197-13. Enforcement.
The enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the Office of the
Construction Code Enforcement, Engineering Department, Fire Prevention
Bureau and/or the Police Department.
§ 197-13 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 197-13
184:488
ARTICLE III
Storage Containers
[Adopted 3-17-2008 by Ord. No. 08-685]
§ 197-14. Permit; fee.
§ 197-15. Placement of containers.
The following conditions shall apply to the placement of containers subject
to this article:
A. All persons desiring to place a storage container and/or a container
trailer for storage ("container") within the Township shall be required
to obtain a permit for each such container.
B. All persons shall complete an application and pay the requisite fee. The
application shall indicate the address where the container will be
placed and a description of the location on the property where the
container will be placed. Application for a container placed in a
nonresidential zone shall be accompanied with a survey or site plan
depicting the location of the container. [Amended 10-7-2019 by Ord.
No. 19-848]
C. All permit applications shall be submitted to the Building Department
and all permits are subject to its approval.
D. There shall be a fee of $25 for each container in a residential zone
within the Township. There shall be a fee of $250 for each container for
storage or storage trailer in nonresidential zones within the Township.
[Amended 10-7-2019 by Ord. No. 19-848]
A. (Reserved)77
B. No part of any container shall cover a sidewalk, road or right-of-way.
C. No part of any container shall be placed on public property.
D. The placement of all containers shall not hamper or impede access to
the site for any emergency vehicle(s). The placement shall not hamper
the operation of any fire protection device(s). [Amended 10-7-2019
by Ord. No. 19-848]
E. All containers shall be placed a minimum of eight feet off the property
line.
F. No container shall be more than 10 feet wide and 20 feet long.
G. All areas surrounding any container shall be maintained in a neat and
clean condition.
77.Former Subsection A, regarding designation of placement locations by the Police
Department, was repealed 10-7-2019 by Ord. No. 19-848.
§ 197-14 PARADES § 197-15
184:489
§ 197-16. Removal of containers.
All containers subject to this article shall be removed within 90 days of the
issuance of the permit. A thirty-day extension may be obtained from the
Building Department by submitting a written request and for good cause
shown.
§ 197-17. Contents of containers.
Containers shall only be used for the storage of nonperishable household
items, such as furniture and clothing. The following items are expressly
prohibited from the containers subject to this article:
§ 197-18. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine of up to $2,000
or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or both. Each day
that the violation exists shall constitute a separate violation. If necessary,
the Township may remove a container and impound it at the permit holder's
expense.
§ 197-19. Enforcement.
The enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the office
of Construction Code Enforcement, the Engineering Department, the Fire
Prevention Bureau and/or the Police Department.
H. Containers shall be subject to periodic inspections. Any container
containing hazardous and/or flammable material shall be maintained in
conjunction with the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code and NFPA. [Added
10-7-2019 by Ord. No. 19-848]
A. Food;
B. Building or construction materials;
C. Garbage; and
D. Any other item or material subject to decay.
§ 197-15 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 197-19
184:490
Chapter 198
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE, RESIDENTIAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 100.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 146.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 179.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 197.
Wells, cisterns and holes — See Ch. 265.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
General powers of municipalities governed by
optional form of government — See N.J.S.A.
40:69A-29.
§ 198-1. Purpose and title.
This chapter shall regulate the maintenance of one- and two-family
residential properties, fix penalties for violations and be commonly known
as the "Residential Property Maintenance Code."
§ 198-2. Maintenance of structures required.
§ 198-3. Maintenance of grounds required.
A. Every dwelling, and every part thereof, including but not limited to the
exterior walls, siding, roofs, windows, exterior doors, porches, shutters,
gutters and downspouts, awnings, external stairs and chimneys, and all
accessory structures, including fences, walkways, driveways, storage
sheds and any accessory structure built upon or above the ground, and
every part thereof, shall be kept structurally sound and in a state of
good repair.
B. All exposed surfaces of the aforesaid buildings and structures which are
susceptible to decay shall be kept at all times painted as otherwise
provided with a finished protective coating sufficient to prevent
deterioration. Damaged materials must be repaired or replaced. Places
showing signs of rot, leakage, deterioration or corrosion, weathering or
seepage are to be restored and protected.
C. The aforesaid shall also be maintained so that the appearance of the
premises and structures shall not constitute a blight factor for adjoining
property owners nor an element leading to the progressive
deterioration of the neighborhood.
A. Landscaping. Shrubbery, lawns, hedges and other landscaping shall be
maintained and kept from becoming overgrown and unsightly or in any
form of neglect or disrepair.
§ 197-19 PARADES § 198-3
184:491
§ 198-4. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer of the
Township of Cedar Grove or the Township Building Inspector.
§ 198-5. Notification of violation; remedy required. [Amended
11-21-1988 by Ord. No. 88-329]
Prior to the start of proceedings before a court of proper jurisdiction, a
Township official charged with the enforcement of this chapter shall cause
a written notice containing the nature of the violation to be served upon
the owner and/or occupant of the property. Service of the notice shall be
made in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested. In the event
that service cannot be effectuated by certified mail, service may be made
by first class mail with postage prepaid, mailed to the last known address
of the person to be served. Service shall be deemed effective upon mailing,
and the date of such mailing or personal service shall be the beginning date
for computation of the time limits hereinafter established. Upon service of
any notice of violation of § 198-2 of this chapter relating to maintenance of
structures, the owner and/or occupant must correct the defective condition
within 30 days, or such further time as the Township official enforcing the
chapter shall agree, in writing. Upon service of any notice of violation of
§ 198-3 of this chapter relating to maintenance of grounds, the owner and/
or occupant must correct the defective condition within 10 days, or such
further time as the Township official enforcing the chapter shall agree, in
writing.
§ 198-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-23-2006 by Ord. No.
06-656]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof. be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000 or by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
B. Refuse. The grounds and exterior of the premises and all structures
thereon shall be kept free of all nuisances, unsanitary conditions and
any hazards to the safety of occupants, pedestrians and other persons
utilizing the premises. Brush, weeds, broken glass, obnoxious growths,
garbage, trash, rubbish, abandoned appliances, household furnishings,
vehicles or parts thereof, including boats and trailers, which vehicles or
parts thereof are or have been junked, abandoned, dismantled or are in
a state of visible disrepair, or vehicles exposed to public view which do
not have a valid registration and license plate and have no inspection
sticker or an inspection sticker for which more than 60 days have
elapsed, and debris of any description or nature shall be promptly
removed from any premise. lot, field or parcel of land. Holes,
excavations, breaks, projections and obstructions shall be promptly
removed or repaired.
§ 198-3 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 198-7
184:492
§ 198-7. Maintenance of abandoned residential properties. [Added
12-5-2016 by Ord. No. 16-801]
A. Purpose. The Township Council has determined that vacant and
abandoned property within the Township of Cedar Grove pose a hazard
to the health, safety, and welfare of the public, and therefore enacts this
section to regulate the care, maintenance, security, and upkeep of the
exterior of vacant and abandoned residential properties on which a
summons and complaint in an action to foreclose has been filed.
B. Responsibility for maintenance. The creditor filing the summons and
complaint in an action to foreclose shall be responsible for the care,
maintenance, security, and upkeep of the exterior of vacant and
abandoned residential properties, and if located out of state, shall be
responsible for appointing an in-state representative or agent to act for
the foreclosing creditor.
C. Enforcement; notice of violation; penalty.
(1) This section shall be administered and enforced by the Code
Enforcement Official.
(2) Upon determination by the Code Enforcement Official that a
creditor has violated this section by failing to provide for the care,
maintenance, security, and upkeep of the exterior of the property,
he or she shall issue a notice of violation to the creditor. Such
notice shall require the person or entity to correct the violation
within 30 days of receipt of the notice, or within 10 days of receipt
of the notice if the violation presents an imminent threat to public
health and safety. The issuance of a notice pursuant to this
subsection shall constitute proof that a property is "vacant and
abandoned" for the purposes of P.L. 2012, c. 70 (N.J.S.A. 2A:50-73).
(3) A creditor found by the Township of Cedar Grove Municipal Court,
or by any other court of competent jurisdiction, to be in violation of
the requirement to correct a care, maintenance, security, or upkeep
violation cited in a notice issued pursuant to this section shall be
subject to a fine of $1,500 for each day of the violation. Any fines
imposed pursuant to this subsection shall commence 31 days
following receipt of the notice, except if the violation presents an
imminent risk to public health and safety, in which case any fines
shall commence 11 days following receipt of the notice.
D. Out-of-state creditors; penalty.
(1) An out-of-state creditor shall include the full name and contact
information of the in-state representative or agent in the notice
advising the Township Clerk that a summons and complaint in an
action to foreclose on a mortgage has been served, as required by
Paragraph (1) of Subsection a of Section 17 of P.L. 2008, c. 127
(N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51).
§ 198-7 PARADES § 198-7
184:493
Chapter 201
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT SPECIFICATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 119.
Individual sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
213.
Sewers — See Ch. 217.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 230.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 234.
Trees — See Ch. 246.
Water — See Ch. 259.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Adoption of technical specifications — See
N.J.S.A. 40:69A-181.
§ 201-1. Definitions. [Amended 4-1-1963]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT SPECIFICATIONS CODE — That certain written
code entitled "Township of Cedar Grove Code Governing Specifications for
Certain Public Improvements," heretofore filed in the respective offices
of the Township Clerk and the Township Engineer on August 20, 1962,
and as supplemented by ordinance adopted on April 1, 1963, prescribing
standard technical specifications and regulations governing certain public
improvements, as follows:
(2) An out-of-state creditor found by the Township of Cedar Grove
Municipal Court, or by any other court of competent jurisdiction, to
be in violation of the requirement to appoint an in-state
representative or agent shall be subject to a fine of $2,500 for each
day of the violation. Any fines imposed on a creditor for the failure
to appoint an in-state representative or agent shall commence on
the day after the ten-day period set forth in Paragraph (1) of
Subsection a of Section 17 of P.L. 2008, c. 127 (N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51).
A. Construction of concrete and granite block curbs.
B. Construction of concrete sidewalks.
C. Construction of bituminous concrete pavements.
D. Construction and installation of water mains.
E. Construction and installation of sanitary sewer mains.
F. Construction and installation of storm sewer mains.
§ 198-7 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 201-1
201:494
§ 201-2. Adoption of specifications by reference; copies on file;
enforcement official. [Amended 4-1-1963]
There is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference the whole of
the Public Improvement Specifications Code defined in § 201-1, as though
its text had been set forth herein at length. Ten copies of said code have
been placed on file with the office of the Township Clerk and in the office
of the Township Engineer, who is hereby charged with the enforcement
thereof, and shall remain in said respective offices for the use and
examination of the public so long as this chapter shall remain in effect.
§ 201-3. Conformance with specifications required.
All sidewalks and curbs, bituminous concrete pavements, water mains,
sewer mains, storm drains and shade tree plantings shall be constructed,
installed or planted, as the case may be, in accordance with the provisions
of the Public Improvement Specifications Code defined in § 201-1.
§ 201-4. Amendments. [Added 3-21-1966 by Ord. No, 66-6]
The provisions of the code referred to in §§ 201-1, 201-2 and 201-3 are
amended in the following respects:
Par. 7. Granite block curb to be constructed as follows:
Concrete to be Class C. Bottom of concrete bed to be a minimum of 16
inches below grade. Width of bed at bottom to be 12 inches. Each granite
block to be backed by at least four inches of concrete. Block to be set with a
one-half-inch batter. Blocks to have six inches of exposed face at pavement.
Granite blocks to be between 10 inches and 12 inches long. Transverse
joints between granite blocks shall be 3/4 inch and shall be filled with
cement mortar, one part portland cement to three parts mason's sand. The
joint shall be struck flush and pointed.
§ 201-5. Violations and penalties. [Added 12-17-1962; amended
7-30-1984 by Ord. No. 84-222; 10-23-2006 by Ord. No. 06-656]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000 or by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
G. Planting of shade trees.
§ 201-1 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT SPECIFICATIONS § 201-5
201:495
Chapter 205
RECREATION AREAS, USE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Advisory Recreation Board — See Ch. 59.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 83.
Animals — See Ch. 91.
Outdoor burning — See Ch. 107.
Littering — See Ch. 168.
Parades — See Ch. 184.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 188.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Regulation of parks and playgrounds — See
N.J.S.A. 40:61-1 et seq.
§ 205-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PUBLIC RECREATION AREAS — Municipal parks, municipal swimming
pools, municipal playground areas and other municipal recreational
facilities in the Township.
§ 205-2. Entry prohibited during certain hours. [Amended 4-1-1985
by Ord. No. 85-234]
No person shall be allowed in any public recreation area between the hours
of 9:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., except when events or programs authorized by
the Township Council are scheduled during those hours.
§ 205-3. Restrictions on dressing and undressing.
Dressing or undressing is prohibited any place in any public recreation
area, except in any bathhouse provided for such purpose.
§ 205-4. Consumption of alcoholic beverages restricted.
No person shall consume any alcoholic beverage, including beer, in any
public recreation area of the Township unless such consumption is approved
by the Council in connection with any event or program which has received
approval by the Township.
§ 201-5 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 205-5
201:496
§ 205-5. Use of glass containers for food or beverages.
No beverage or food shall be consumed in any public recreation area
directly from glass containers, except by permission of the Department of
Recreation.
§ 205-6. Games of chance prohibited without approval.
No games of chance shall be conducted nor shall participation in any such
games of chance be solicited in any public recreation area in the Township
without the prior approval of the Council.
§ 205-7. Restricted activities. [Amended 5-7-2018 by Ord. No.
18-824]
No archery, golf, horseback riding or operation of power-driven models shall
be permitted in any public recreation area in the Township without the
permission of the Department of Recreation. Except in the municipal pools,
no person in any public recreation area shall swim, bathe or wade in any
waters or waterways.
§ 205-7.1. Restrictions on pollution and littering. [Added 5-7-2018
by Ord. No. 18-824]
§ 205-8. Promulgation of rules and regulations; establishment of
fees for use of areas.
The Council shall have the authority to enact by resolution such reasonable
rules and regulations and shall have the authority to adopt reasonable fees,
all in connection with the use and operation of any public recreation area in
the Township.
A. No person in any public recreation area shall throw, discharge or
otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any pond, lake,
stream or other body of water in or adjacent to any public recreation
area, or any tributary, stream, storm sewer or drain flowing into such
waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will result
in the pollution of such waters.
B. No person in any public recreation area shall dump, deposit or leave
any material or debris, whether organic or inorganic. No refuse or trash
shall be placed in any waters contiguous to any public recreation area,
or left anywhere, but may be placed in the proper receptacles provided
therefor. If receptacles are not so provided, all such rubbish or waste
shall be carried away from the public recreation area by the person
responsible for its presence and disposed of legally elsewhere.
§ 205-5 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT SPECIFICATIONS § 205-9
201:497
§ 205-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-30-1984 by Ord. No.
84-222; 10-23-2006 by Ord. No. 06-656]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000 or by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days, or both.
Chapter 206
REDEVELOPMENT PLANS
Chapter 208
RENTAL PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing standards — See Ch. 158.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 179.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 197.
Residential property maintenance — See Ch.
198.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
General police powers — See N.J.S.A.
40:69A-29.
§ 205-9 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 205-9
206:498
ARTICLE I
Rent Control
[Adopted 2-19-1973 by Ord. No. 73-1, Ch. 11A, Art. I, of the former
Revised Ordinances, as amended 12-16-1974 by Ord. No. 73-1(a);
1-20-1975 by Ord. No. 73-1(b); 12-1-1975 by Ord. No. 73-1(c);
amended in its entirety 12-6-1976 by Ord. No 76-27]
§ 208-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AVAILABLE FOR RENT TO TENANTS — Fit for habitation as defined by
the statutes, codes and ordinances in full force and effect in the State of
New Jersey, County of Essex and Township of Cedar Grove, and occupied or
unoccupied and offered for rent.
DWELLING — Includes any building or structure rented or offered for rent
to one or more tenants or family units. Housing units newly constructed
and rented for the first time are exempted, and the initial rent may be
determined by the landlord. All subsequent rents will be subject to the
provisions of this chapter. Single-family homes and owner-occupied twofamily
dwellings are exempted from this chapter.
HOUSING SPACE — Includes that portion of a dwelling rented or offered
for rent for living and dwelling purposes to one individual or family unit,
together with all privileges, services, furnishings, furniture, equipment,
facilities and improvements connected with the use or occupancy of such
portion of the property.
§ 208-2. Limitations on rent increases. [Amended 3-3-1980 by Ord.
No. 80-126; 12-15-1986 by Ord No. 86-285; 4-19-1999 by Ord. No.
99-513]
A. Establishment of rents between a landlord and a tenant to whom this
chapter is applicable shall hereafter be determined by the provisions of
this chapter. No landlord shall be entitled to request or receive an
increase in rental payments from a tenant, with or without a lease,
more often than once in 12 calendar months.
B. At the expiration of a lease or a periodic tenancy, such as a month-tomonth
tenancy, no landlord shall request or receive a percentage
increase in rent which is greater than the consumer price index plus
.5%, United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics for
all urban consumers, all items, in New York-Newark-Jersey, NY-NJ-PA,
Series ID CUURS12ASAO, published for the three month period ending
on September 30 of the year preceding the calendar year in which such
increase shall be effective. [Amended 12-3-2018 by Ord. No.
18-833]
C. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, if a housing space is
voluntarily vacated by a tenant, the landlord may increase the rent
§ 208-1 REDEVELOPMENT PLANS § 208-2
206:499
§ 208-2.1. (Reserved)
§ 208-3. Unauthorized increase deemed void. 78 [Amended 3-3-1980
by Ord. No. 80-126; 12-15-1986 by Ord. No. 86-285]
Any rental increase at a time other than at the expiration of a lease or
termination of a periodic lease shall be void. Any rental increase in excess
of that authorized by the provisions of this chapter shall be void.
§ 208-4. Notification of tenant of intended increase. [Amended
3-3-1980 by Ord. No. 80-126; 12-15-1986 by Ord. No. 86-285]
Any landlord seeking an increase in rent shall notify the tenant by certified
mail at least 60 days prior to the effective date thereof (30 days' prior notice
for a month-to-month tenant) of the intended increase, the effective date
thereof and the manner of computation of said increase.
§ 208-5. Tax surcharge. [Amended 12-6-1976 by Ord. No. 76-27(a);
12-15-1986 by Ord. No. 86-285]
Any tax surcharge properly charged to a tenant prior to November 1,
1986, in accordance with municipal ordinances in effect at that time shall
henceforth be deemed to be rent for all purposes, including computation of
future increases in accordance with the terms of this chapter.
§ 208-6. Increases granted for hardship or capital improvements. 79
[Amended 11-5-1984 by Ord. No. 84-231; 4-19-1999 by Ord. No.
99-513]
The landlord may seek additional rental for major capital improvements.
The landlord seeking a capital improvement surcharge shall appeal for said
surcharge to the Board, who shall determine if said improvement is a major
capital improvement as provided by this chapter and, if so, shall allow and
direct the manner in which the increase shall take place. At least 10 days
before the hearing by the Board, the landlord must notify each tenant by
certified mail of the nature and total actual cost of each of the completed
thereon without restriction in amount. Upon re-renting the unit, the
restriction set forth in this section shall apply to all future rent
increases to the tenant, and no additional rental increase shall be
imposed upon such tenant until at least 12 months have passed.
D. In no event shall any increase exceed 5.5% of the previous base rent in
any 12 month period.
78.Editor's Note: Former § 208-2.1, Fuel surcharge, added 3-3-1980 by Ord. No. 80-126, was
repealed 12-15-1986 by Ord. No. 86-285.
79.Editor's Note: Former § 208-6, Notification of tenant of intent to impose tax surcharge, as
amended; § 208-7, Method of payment of tax surcharge, as amended; § 208-8, Surcharge
not considered increase in rent; and § 208-9, Rebate to tenant of portion of tax surcharge
upon successful tax appeal, were repealed 12-15-1986 by Ord. No. 86-285, which also
renumbered former §§ 208-10 through 208-18 as §§ 208-6 through 208.14, respectively.
§ 208-2 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 208-6
206:500
capital improvements for which a surcharge is sought, the number of years
of useful life of the improvements as claimed by the landlord to represent
the actual useful life of the improvement, the total number of rooms of
the dwelling or garden apartment complex, the total number of rooms
occupied by the tenant, the capital improvement surcharge sought from
the tenant, the manner in which the tenant's surcharge was computed and
the date such matter is to be heard by the Board. Such notice shall be
effective upon mailing. In order to qualify as a major capital improvement,
the improvement must provide a new and additional benefit to the tenants
which improves their housing accommodations in a substantial way and
be one that is not already required by law or lease. Normal upkeep,
maintenance, repair and replacements shall not be deemed major capital
improvements for the purposes of this chapter. Replacement of a heating
system with another type of heating system shall not be considered a major
capital improvement for the purposes of this chapter. In the event that the
Board grants the surcharge, the actual cost of a major capital improvement
may be recovered by a landlord over the actual useful life, as opposed
to the depreciable life, of the improvement in equal monthly installments
proportioned fairly among the tenants in a manner approved by the Board.
If said increase is granted, it shall not be considered rental and calculated in
cost of living increases. In any event, no increase authorized by this section
shall exceed 15% of the tenant's rent.
§ 208-7. Creation of Rent Leveling Board. [Amended 5-16-1977 by
Ord. No. 77-46; 10-5-1992 by Ord No. 92-404]
§ 208-8. Powers of Board.
A. There is hereby created a Rent Leveling Board within the Township of
Cedar Grove. Said Board shall consist of five members.
B. The Township Council may, upon the adoption of a resolution, appoint
itself as the Rent Leveling Board.
C. In the alternative, the Township Council may appoint a separate Rent
Leveling Board. Such a Board shall be established upon the adoption of
a resolution appointing the initial members to that Board. The initial
term of members shall be staggered so that the terms of three members
of the Board end on December 31 following the establishment of such
Board and two members' terms shall end one year later. Thereafter, as
the term of each member expires, a successor shall be appointed for a
term of two calendar years. In the event of a resignation of any member
of such Rent Leveling Board or upon death, inability to serve or absence
from 50% or more of the regularly scheduled meetings of the Board in
any twelve-month period, in which latter event removal shall be
automatic, the Township Council shall fill said vacancy for the
remainder of the unexpired term.
D. The Rent Leveling Board existing pursuant to ordinances established
prior to the adoption of this section is hereby dissolved.
§ 208-6 REDEVELOPMENT PLANS § 208-8
206:501
§ 208-8.1. Procedures; filing fee. [Added 10-5-1992 by Ord. No.
92-404]
The following procedures shall apply to hearings for relief before the Rent
Leveling Board:
A. The Rent Leveling Board is hereby granted and shall have and exercise,
in addition to other powers herein granted, all the powers necessary
and appropriate to carry out and execute the purposes of this chapter,
including but not limited to the following:
(1) To issue and promulgate such rules and regulations as it deems
necessary to implement the purposes of this chapter, which rules
and regulations shall have the force of law until revised, repealed
or amended from time to time by the Board in the exercise of its
discretion, provided that such rules are filed with the Township
Clerk.
(2) To supply information and assistance to landlords and tenants to
help them comply with the provisions of this chapter.
(3) To hold hearings and adjudicate applications from landlords for
additional rental as hereinafter provided.
(4) To hold hearings and adjudicate complaints or petitions from
tenants seeking rent reductions where landlords have collected or
sought to collect rents in violation of this chapter. Said Board shall
give both landlord and tenant reasonable opportunity to be heard
before making any determination.
(5) To perform such other functions in an advisory capacity as the
Township Council may direct by resolution, which may include,
without limitation, holding of hearings and making
recommendations concerning the modifications, supplementation
or repeal of any provisions of this chapter. [Added 3-3-1980 by
Ord. No. 80-126]
B. All decisions of the Rent Board shall be rendered within 35 days or at
the next public meeting of the Rent Board, whichever may first occur
after the final presentation of all evidence or other submissions by the
parties and shall be in writing and signed by the Secretary of the Rent
Board. The favorable vote of a majority of the members of the Board is
required for a final determination.
A. A landlord or tenant seeking relief from the Rent Leveling Board shall
petition the Board on forms approved by the Board. The petition shall
contain the name and address of the petitioner, the address of the
property in question, the type of relief being requested and any other
information deemed pertinent by the Rent Leveling Board.
B. In order to invoke the jurisdiction of the Board, eight copies of the
petition, together with eight copies of a written statement of reasons
§ 208-8 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 208-8.1
206:502
and facts supporting the application, shall be filed with the Township
Clerk. Along with the petition and statement of reasons, the petitioner
shall pay a filing fee of $10.
C. Within 10 days after the date of the filing of the petition, the petitioner
shall cause to be served upon the party or parties against which relief is
sought a copy of the petition and the statement of reasons by personal
service or by certified mail, return receipt requested, which latter
service shall be effective upon mailing.
D. At least 10 days before any scheduled hearing, the Township Clerk shall
cause to be served upon the parties written notice of the hearing which
shall be sent by regular mail. In addition, at least 10 days before the
hearing, the Township Clerk shall cause notice of the hearing to be
published in an official newspaper of the municipality.
E. In the event that a petition seeks relief against tenants in a complex
generally, such as in applications where landlords seek additional
rental, notwithstanding the provisions for personal service of the
petition and notice upon the parties named in the petition, the
requirements of personal service shall not apply, and substituted
service may be made in place of such personal service. Such substituted
service shall be made by posting a copy of the petition and statement of
reasons in a prominent place in each building in the complex within 10
days after the filing of the petition. In a petition where no particular
respondent is named, the notice of hearing mailed to the petitioner by
the Township Clerk shall likewise be posted in a prominent place in
each building by the petitioner at least seven days prior to the date of
the hearing. An affidavit attesting to the posting of the petition and
statement of reasons as well as the notice of hearing shall be submitted
by the petitioner to the Board prior to hearing.
F. Upon receipt of the appropriate number of petitions and payment of the
filing fee, the Township Clerk shall circulate five copies of the petition
and statement of reasons to the members of the Rent Leveling Board.
G. The Rent Leveling Board shall hold a hearing on each petition it
receives. The Board shall make the rules governing such hearings.
H. The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as he or she may
designate shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
evidence, including witnesses and documents presented by the parties
pursuant to the County and Municipal Investigations Law (N.J.S.A.
2A:67A-1 et seq.).
I. The testimony of all witnesses relating to a petition shall be taken under
oath or affirmation, and the right of cross-examination shall be
permitted to all interested parties through their attorneys, if
represented, or directly, if not represented, subject to the discretion of
the presiding officer and to reasonable limitations as to time and
number of witnesses.
§ 208-8.1 REDEVELOPMENT PLANS § 208-8.1
206:503
§ 208-9. Appeals of decisions of Board.
§ 208-10. Standards of service to be maintained.
J. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the hearing, but
the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious
evidence.
K. The Board shall provide for a verbatim record of the proceedings. If
recorded, the Board shall provide a duplicate recording of the
proceedings to any interested party on request at the expense of the
party requesting the recording.
L. Each decision of the Board shall include findings of fact and conclusions
based thereon. The decision shall be reduced to writing and be voted
upon by the Board.
M. A copy of each decision shall be mailed by the Board, within 10 days of
the date of the adoption of the written decision, to the petitioner or, if
represented, then to his or her attorney. A copy of the decision shall also
be filed by the Board with the Township Clerk. Notice of the decision
shall be published by the Township Clerk.
A. Both landlord and tenant may appeal the findings and determination of
the Board to the Municipal Council within 20 days from the date of said
determination and request a hearing thereon before the Township
Council. In the event that no appeal is taken from the Board's
determination as provided, the decision of the Rent Board shall be final,
and any violation thereof or failure to comply with said decision may be
presented by the Rent Leveling Board or the aggrieved party to the
Cedar Grove Municipal Court for enforcement or imposition of
sanctions.
B. This section shall only be applicable when the Township Council
appoints a separate Rent Leveling Board. In the event that an appeal is
taken to the Township Council from a determination of the Board, the
appeal shall be decided by the Township Council only upon the record
established before the Board. On such appeal, the Township Council
may affirm, reverse, remand or modify the decision of the Board.
[Added 10-5-1993 by Ord. No. 92-404]
A. During the term of this chapter, the landlord shall maintain the same
standards of service, maintenance, furniture, furnishings and
equipment in the housing space and dwelling as he or she provided or
was required to do by law or lease at the date the lease was entered
into.
B. In the event that a claimed violation of this section can be argued by a
tenant to constitute an effective rent increase, the matter may be
brought before the Rent Leveling Board pursuant to § 208-8A(4).
Otherwise, a violation of this section which is brought to the attention
§ 208-8.1 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 208-10
206:504
§ 208-11. Unauthorized increases in rent prohibited.
No landlord shall, after the effective date of this chapter, charge any rents
in excess of what he or she was receiving from the effective date of this
chapter, except for increases as authorized by this chapter.
§ 208-12. Initial rents.
The owner of housing space or a dwelling being rented for the first time
shall not be restricted in the initial rent he or she charges. Any subsequent
rental increases, however, shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 208-13. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
§ 208-14. Interpretation of provisions.
This chapter, being necessary for the welfare of the Township and its
inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes thereof.
of the Board may be referred to the appropriate municipal enforcement
official under the Property Maintenance Code, Health Code or other
state or municipal regulation which may be applicable under the
circumstances. Additionally, any person aggrieved by the action or
inaction of the landlord subject to the provisions of this section may
bring an alleged violation of this section before the Municipal Court.
[Added 10-5-1992 by Ord. No. 92-404]
A. Willful violation of any provision of this chapter, including but not
limited to the willful misrepresentation of fact to the Rent Leveling
Board and any refusal or failure to comply with a final order or
determination of the Rent Leveling Board or other appellate forum,
shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $2,000 or imprisonment
of not more than 90 days, or both. A violation affecting more than one
leasehold shall be considered a separate violation as to each leasehold.
[Amended 10-23-2006 by Ord. No. 06-656]
B. This chapter shall be enforceable by any aggrieved party before the
Municipal Court of the Township of Cedar Grove. [Added 10-5-1992
by Ord. No. 92-404]
§ 208-10 REDEVELOPMENT PLANS § 208-14
206:505

ARTICLE II
Registration and Licensing; Quality-of-Life Violations
[Adopted 3-21-2011 by Ord. No. 11-723]
§ 208-15. Findings.
It is hereby found by the Township Council of the Township of Cedar
Grove that there exist landlords who lease residential units to unrelated
persons who engage in conduct which constitutes breaches of the peace,
and violations of property maintenance standards. Such conduct has a
negative effect on occupants of other rental units and nearby structures,
impacts the quality of life of the neighborhood and may devalue the
surrounding property. As landlords control both the selection of tenants and
their eviction for cause, the Township Council of the Township of Cedar
Grove hereby finds that landlords can best remedy these conditions.
§ 208-16. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to create a uniform system for the
registration of single-family rental properties and multifamily rental
properties. While registration and licensing of rental units is authorized
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12c and 40:52-1d, revocation of licenses and
the penalties provided for herein are necessary. It is a further purpose of
the article to exercise the municipal police power implicit in the New Jersey
Constitution and granted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2 and, inter alia, to
promote the welfare of the municipality and its inhabitants.
§ 208-17. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DWELLING(S) (also referred to as UNITS, RENTAL UNITS OR
RESIDENTIAL UNITS) — Includes any building or structure rented or
offered to one or more tenants or family units.
LICENSE — Collectively, the licenses issued to the owner of either a singlefamily
rental property or multifamily rental property pursuant to this
article. Each dwelling unit and multifamily rental property shall be
separately licensed pursuant to the provisions of this article.
MULTIFAMILY RENTAL PROPERTY — Any structure containing two or
more units available for rent, whether occupied or not.
OWNER — The fee owner of any single-family rental property or multifamily
rental property whether individual, corporation, partnership, trust, limited
liability company or other business entity. For the purpose of this article,
owner shall also include all corporate officers, partners, trustees, trust
beneficiaries, members of LLCs or others with a control interest in an owner
no matter the form.
§ 208-15 REDEVELOPMENT PLANS § 208-17
206:507
POST/POSTING — The requirement to permanently affix information
required to be made known to tenants at rental properties regulated by this
article.
QUALITY-OF-LIFE VIOLATION — A violation of any Township ordinance
or any other federal, state or local law arising from or incidental to the
condition of the rental unit or the land upon which the rental unit is
situated, including, without limitation, violations of Chapters 179, 197, and
198 of the Code of the Township of Cedar Grove, and convictions related
to disorderly, indecent, tumultuous or riotous conduct occurring during any
one twelve-month period, by the fee owner, licensee's guest(s), tenant(s), or
other occupant(s) of a rental unit.
SINGLE-FAMILY RENTAL PROPERTY — Any single-family structure held
out for rental, whether occupied or not.
§ 208-18. Registration of multifamily rental properties.
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:52-1d, commencing September 1, 2011, and
annually on September 1 of each succeeding year, owners of all
multifamily rental properties shall register same with the Township
Clerk. Annually at the time of registration, a registration fee of $100
shall be paid to the Township Clerk. Such registration shall be on forms
provided by the Township Clerk, or by electronic means at such time as
a computerized system becomes available. Required information shall
generally include the following information which will be required in
greater detail on forms issued by the Clerk:
(1) Premises address, and tax block and lot number.
(2) Owner contact information.
(3) If the owner is a corporation, officer contact information.
(4) If the owner is a limited liability company, member contact
information.
(5) If the owner is a partnership, partner contact information.
(6) Resident management agent contact information.
(7) Rental agent and other agent contact information.
(8) Number of persons permitted to occupy each unit pursuant to
Chapter 208 Article I, of the General Code of the Township of Cedar
Grove.
(9) Unit descriptions, including room sizes, number of bathrooms and
the like.
(10) Summary description regarding leases and tenants, including lease
terms, names of tenants and the like.
(11) Names and address of all mortgages of record.
§ 208-17 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 208-18
206:508
§ 208-19. Registration of single-family rental properties.
(12) Contact information of any on-site superintendent.
(13) Emergency contact information.
(14) If heated by fuel oil, contact information for the oil supplier.
B. Owners shall amend the filing required by this section within seven
days of an occurrence affecting the required information and shall
annually, on July 1 of each year, update the information required by this
section. Compliance with this section shall also constitute compliance
with the requirements of N.J.S.A. 46:8 to 27 and registration for the
purposes of Chapter 208, Article I, Rent Control, of the Code of the
Township of Cedar Grove.
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:52-1d, commencing September 1, 2011, and
annually on September 1 of each succeeding year, owners of singlefamily
rental properties shall register same with the Township Clerk.
Annually, at the time of registration, a registration fee of $50 shall be
paid to the Township Clerk. Such registration shall be on forms
provided by the Township Clerk, or by electronic means at such time as
a computerized system becomes available. Required information shall
include:
(1) Premises address, and tax block and lot number.
(2) Owner contact information.
(3) If the owner is a corporation, officer contact information.
(4) If the owner is a limited liability company, member contact
information.
(5) If the owner is a partnership, partner contact information.
(6) Unit descriptions, including room sizes, number of bedrooms and
bathrooms and the like.
(7) Summary information regarding leases and tenants, including
lease terms and names of tenants and permanent addresses.
(8) Emergency contact information.
(9) If heated by fuel oil, contact information for the oil supplier.
B. Owners shall amend the filing required by this section within seven
days of an occurrence affecting the required information and shall
annually, on July 1 of each year, update the information required by this
section.
§ 208-18 REDEVELOPMENT PLANS § 208-20
206:509
§ 208-20. Licensure.
Upon filing of a completed registration form and the payment of the
registration fee, the Township Clerk shall issue a license or renewal to the
owner. In the case of a multifamily rental property, the Township Clerk
shall issue a single license certificate whereon shall be listed all dwelling
units contained in that property. Each dwelling so listed shall be deemed
separately licensed.
§ 208-21. Violations and penalties.
Failure to register, to amend a registration when so required, or the
permitting of repeated violations pursuant to § 208-23 shall be a violation
of this article. Each such violation shall constitute a separate offense, each
punishable by a fine of not less than $50. Continued rental of a dwelling,
after revocation or suspension of a license, shall constitute a separate
offense punishable upon conviction in the municipal court of a fine of not
less than $500 for each day such unit was rented without a license.
§ 208-22. Obligation of owner.
No owner shall knowingly permit a tenant to remain in occupancy of a
dwelling unit who, or whose guests, commit repeated quality-of-life
violations.
§ 208-23. Repeated quality-of-life violations.
On each occasion that a tenant in a multifamily rental property or a singlefamily
rental property, or such tenant's guest, commits a quality-of-life
violation, the Chief of Police shall cause notice of such violation to be sent to
the owner or registered agent via certified mail. Upon the occurrence and
notice of two quality-of-life violations by one or more tenants or his/her/their
guests, with respect to any dwelling unit within any twelve-month period,
the appropriate law enforcement official may cause a complaint to be filed
in the Municipal Court and/or to conduct a public hearing, on notice to the
owner, why the license to operate a rental property should not be revoked
or suspended. In a multifamily rental property, license revocation may only
be imposed upon the dwelling unit associated with the subject quality-of-life
violation.
§ 208-24. Designation of enforcement official.
The Chief of Police shall be charged with the duty of enforcing the
provisions of this article.
§ 208-25. Resident agent; posting of license.
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12c, every owner of a multifamily rental
property who does not reside in the Township of Cedar Grove shall
designate an agent with authority to act in the absence of the owner
§ 208-20 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 208-25
206:510
with respect to such property, and which agent shall be a resident of
the Township of Cedar Grove.
B. Owners shall post both a copy of the most current license and the
names, addresses, telephone numbers and e-mail addresses of all
persons available in the event of an emergency. Owners of multifamily
rental properties shall also include such information for resident
agents.
§ 208-25 REDEVELOPMENT PLANS § 208-25
206:511
Chapter 213
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, INDIVIDUAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Advisory Health Council — See Ch. 31.
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 105.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 119.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 179.
Public improvement specifications — See Ch.
201.
Sewers — See Ch. 217.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 234.
Water — See Ch. 259.
Wells, cisterns and holes — See Ch. 265.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Adoption of health codes by reference -See
N.J.S.A. 26:69-1 et seq.
§ 213-1. Definitions. [Amended 1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 77-64]
§ 213-2. Adoption of standards by reference. [Amended 1-9-1978 by
Ord. No. 77-64]
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM CODE OF NEW JERSEY
(1963) — (hereinafter referred to as the "state code" or "code") That
certain code approved by the State Department of Health on August 8,
1963, for adoption by reference by local Boards of Health in accordance
with law, being a code regulating:
The location, construction, use, maintenance and method of
emptying or cleaning individual sewage disposal systems.
(1)
The issuance of licenses or permits to locate, construct, empty or
clean said systems.
(2)
B. As used in the Individual Sewage Disposal System Code of New Jersey
(1963), "Board of Health" shall mean and refer to the Department of
Health of the Township of Cedar Grove.
A. Pursuant to and in accordance with the Public Health and Sanitation
Codes Adoption by Reference Act (N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 to 26:3-69.6),
there is hereby established and adopted as the Individual Sewage
Disposal System Code of the Township the whole of the Individual
Sewage Disposal System Code of New Jersey (1963). A printed copy of
said code is annexed to and incorporated by reference in this chapter.
§ 208-25 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 213-2
213:512
§ 213-3. Permit required to locate, construct or alter systems;
conditions for issuance.
§ 213-4. Certificate of compliance required for operation.
§ 213-5. License to empty or clean systems required.
B. The Individual Sewage Disposal System Code of New Jersey (1963) is
hereby incorporated in this chapter by reference and made a part
hereof as fully as though it had been set forth at length herein.
C. In accordance with law, 10 printed copies of the Individual Sewage
Disposal System Code of New Jersey (1963) have been placed on file in
the office of the Township Clerk and in the office of the Health Officer of
the Township and shall remain on file in said offices for the use and
examination of the public so long as this chapter shall remain in effect.
A. No person shall locate, construct or alter any individual sewage
disposal system, as defined in Section 1.1 of the code, unless and until a
permit for the location, construction or alteration of said individual
sewage disposal system shall have been issued by the Township
Department of Health.
B. The Department of Health is authorized to issue the permit described in
Subsection A of this section if, as and when the application is
accompanied by a certificate made by an engineer licensed to practice
professional engineering in New Jersey, stating that the design of the
individual sewage disposal system is in compliance with the said code.
A. Individual sewage disposal systems located and constructed after May
19, 1958, shall not be placed in operation, nor shall dwellings or
buildings or additions thereto be sold or occupied, which must rely on
such a system for sewage disposal unless and until the Department of
Health shall have issued a certificate indicating that said disposal
system has been located and constructed in compliance with the terms
of the permit issued pursuant to § 213-3A. The issuance of such
certificate shall not be required for alteration to an individual sewage
disposal system existing prior to May 19, 1958.
B. The Department of Health is authorized to issue the certificate
described in Subsection A of this section if, as and when the
Department has inspected the installation and found it to have been
installed on the basis of plans submitted and the state code.
A. No person shall engage in the business of emptying or cleaning septic
tanks, cesspools, privies or any place used for the reception or storage
of human excrement without first obtaining a license therefor from the
Department of Health.
B. The license to engage in the businesses described in Subsection A of
this section and any renewals thereof shall be issued for a term of one
§ 213-2 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, INDIVIDUAL § 213-5
213:513
§ 213-6. Hearings on denial or revocation of permit; license or
certificate of compliance.
In case the Township Health Officer, as head of the Department of Health,
denies or revokes any license or permit or denies any certificate of
compliance required by this chapter, the applicant for the license, permit or
certificate, or the licensee or permittee in the case of a revocation, may take
an appeal as provided in § 31-7 of the Code of the Township of Cedar Grove.
§ 213-7. Actions to be taken in case of noncompliance.
§ 213-8. Fees. [Amended 2-7-1977 by Ord. No. 77-37]
The fees and charges under this chapter shall be as follows:
year, commencing on January 1 and expiring on December 31 of the
year in which issued.
C. Licenses issued under this section may be revoked for failure of the
licensee to comply with the provisions of the code or ordinance
applicable to the operation of the licensed business.
A. If the Department of Health finds that any individual sewage disposal
system is being erected or installed in violation, of the code, it may
order that:
(1) All further work be stopped forthwith, except such work as shall be
necessary to remedy such violation.
(2) After the violation has been remedied, the work may be continued
not in violation of any of the provisions of the code.
B. After issuance of any such order and the service of a copy thereof upon
any person connected with or working in or about the erection or
installation of any such individual sewage disposal system, or any part
thereof, no further work shall be done thereon except in compliance
with and as authorized by said order.
A. Licenses. For the issuance or renewal of a license to engage in the
business of cleaning or emptying receptacles for the reception and
storage of human excrement or other putrescible matter: $10 for each
vehicle.
B. Permits. For the issuance of a permit to locate and construct or alter an
individual sewage disposal system: $10.
C. Reinspection. For each reinspection of an individual sewage disposal
system, or part thereof, caused by the failure of the permittee to locate
and construct or alter the same in accordance with the terms of the
permit issued or the terms of the aforesaid code: $10.
§ 213-5 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 213-9
213:514
§ 213-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-9-1978 by Ord. No.
77-64; 7-30-1984 by Ord. No. 84-222; 10-23-2006 by Ord. No.
06-656]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter, including the
Individual Sewage Disposal System Code of New Jersey (1963),
incorporated herein by reference, or any order issued pursuant thereto,
shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000
or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 217
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 119.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 179.
Public improvement specifications — See Ch.
201.
Individual sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
213.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 230.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 234.
Water — See Ch. 259.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Municipal and County Sewerage Act — See
N.J.S.A. 40A:26A-1 et seq.
§ 217-1. Definitions and word usage. [Amended 12-21-1970 by Ord.
No. 70-25; 2-5-2007 by Ord. No. 07-666]
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number,
and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The
word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The definitions
below are the same as or based on corresponding definitions in the New
Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C.
7:14A-1.2.
BOD (denoting "biochemical oxygen demand") — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20º C.), expressed in milligrams per
liter.
§ 213-9 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, INDIVIDUAL § 217-1
213:515
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal.
CHLORINE DEMAND — The quantity of chlorine which must be added per
unit volume to produce a residual chlorine concentration of 2.0 milligrams
per liter after 15 minutes under standard laboratory conditions, expressed
in milligrams per liter.
COD (denoting "chemical oxygen demand") — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the chemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedures, expressed in milligrams per liter.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or household
operations.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and disposing of
foods and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or nonphysical connection that
discharges domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Township of Cedar
Grove, unless that discharge is authorized under an NJPDES permit other
than the Tier A municipal stormwater general permit (NJPDES Permit No.
NJ0141852). Nonphysical connections may include, but are not limited to,
leaks, flows, or overflows into the municipal separate storm sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Nondomestic waste, including, but not limited to,
those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the Federal
Clean Water Act [33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b), or (c)].
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance
or system of conveyance (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Township of Cedar Grove or
other public body and is designated and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or
other body of surface or ground water.
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperature
for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact
with any raw material, intermediate product (other than heat) or finished
product. Noncontact cooling water may, however, contain algaecides, or
biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat exchangers, and/or
corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
§ 217-1 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 217-1
213:516
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ions concentration in
moles per liter.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production
or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct,
or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is not limited
to, leachate and cooling water other than noncontact cooling water.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer which is controlled by public authority.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage as defined in this
section.
SEWAGE — A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — Any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating sewage.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN — A sewer which carries storm- and
surface waters and drainage.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land’s surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in, water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
WATERCOURSE — A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continually or intermittently.
§ 217-2. Discharge of polluted material without treatment
prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to discharge into any natural outlet within the Township
or in or upon any area under the jurisdiction of said Township any sanitary
sewage, industrial wastes or other polluted waters, except where suitable
treatment has been provided in accordance with this chapter.
§ 217-3. Connections with public sewer required; exceptions.
A. The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment or recreation or other purposes, situated
within the Township and abutting on or having a permanent right of
access to any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is located a
public sanitary sewer of the Township, shall at his expense:
(1) Install suitable toilet facilities therein.
§ 217-1 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, INDIVIDUAL § 217-3
213:517
§ 217-4. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful to make any connection to the sewer without first
obtaining a written permit from the Department of Public Works as provided
in § 217-15, and such connections shall be made by a licensed plumber
under the direction and supervision of the Township Engineer or his
representative and in the manner hereinafter set forth.
§ 217-5. Costs. [Amended 5-16-1977 by Ord. No. 77-45]
(2) Connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within 90 days after
the date of official notice from the Township Manager to so do,
provided that said public sewer is within 100 feet of any property
line.
B. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by an individual sewage disposal system, as provided in Chapter 213,
Sewage Disposal Systems, Individual, a direct connection shall be made
to the public sewer in compliance with this chapter, and any septic
tanks, cesspools and similar individual sewage disposal facilities shall
be abandoned or removed or filled with suitable material as directed by
the Health Officer.
C. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of Subsection B, the Council
may, for a period of one year and at its discretion from year to year
thereafter, waive the requirements thereof relating to immediate sewer
connections of dwellings with the comprehensive sanitary sewer
system. Such waiver by the Council shall be based upon the following
conditions:
(1) The owner has submitted evidence of substantial hardship.
(2) The Health Officer finds that the existing septic tank system is
working properly.
(3) The Health Officer and the Township Manager recommend the
requested waiver.
A. All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify
the Township from any loss or damage that may indirectly or directly be
occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. The maintenance of
the building sewer shall be the responsibility of the owner of the
property served.
B. The Township shall, however, repair structural damage to that portion
of any building sewer which lies under the public roadway, provided
that such structural damage is not caused or contributed to by any act
or omission of the owner of the property served.
§ 217-3 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 217-5
213:518
§ 217-6. Separate sewer required for each building; exceptions.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building; except that, where one building stands at the rear of another on
an interior lot and no building sewer is available or can be constructed to
the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building
and the whole considered as one building sewer. In the case of multiple
housing units, it is not necessary to have a separate and independent
building sewer for every building, but instead the sewage from the various
principal buildings shall be gathered together into one or more building
sewers of a size satisfactory to the Township Engineer and carried out to
the nearest public sewer adjacent to the property.
§ 217-7. Use of old building sewers.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the Township Engineer or
his representative, to meet all the requirements of this chapter.
§ 217-8. Specifications for sewer materials.
C. The Township assumes no responsibility for any other damages or
consequential damages which may be related to the structural defect or
repair.
D. The Township Engineer shall preliminarily determine, from all facts and
information made available to him, whether the building sewer
malfunction is of a maintenance nature or the result of structural
damage before any work is undertaken by the Township. The property
owner shall bear the responsibility to demonstrate to the Township that
the malfunction of the sanitary sewer lateral is not of a maintenance
nature but rather a structural failure. The substantiation shall be by a
licensed plumber or by a firm recognized in the sewer maintenance
business, and at the cost of the homeowner.
E. In the event that the Township undertakes excavation and it is later
determined that the malfunction is not such structural failure for which
the Township is responsible, the owner shall bear the cost of the work
done or materials provided by the Township.
F. The Township shall have the right to proceed against third parties for
any structural repair made at its expense.
A. Pipes. The building sewer shall be either cast-iron soil pipe
(Commercial Standard CS-188-59 of the Department of Commerce) or
asbestos-cement pipe conforming to the following specifications: That
portion of the building sewer from the main to the curb shall be sixinch-
diameter, Class 2400, and that portion of the building sewer from
the curb to the house shall be either four-inch-diameter standard pipe
Class 1500 or, if six-inch diameter, extra heavy pipe Class 2400 with a
§ 217-5 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, INDIVIDUAL § 217-8
213:519
maximum length per section of 6 1/2 feet. Joints shall be tight and
waterproof. Cast-iron pipe with leaded joints may be required by the
Township Engineer where the building sewer is exposed to damage
by tree roots. If installed in filled or unstable ground or at a depth
providing less than three feet of cover under driveways or roadways,
the sewer shall be of cast-iron soil pipe, except that nonmetallic
material may be accepted if installed on a suitable concrete bed or
cradle as approved by the Township Engineer.
B. Size and slope. The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject
to the approval of the Township Engineer, but in no event shall the
diameter be less than four inches for cast-iron soil pipe and asbestoscement
house connection pipe. The slope of such four-inch pipe shall
not be less than 1/4 inch per foot, and of such six-inch pipe shall not be
less than 1/8 inch per foot.
C. Location. Whenever possible, the building sewer for new construction
shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement
floor. In existing buildings where no plumbing facilities are provided in
the basement, the building sewer may be above the cellar floor.
Building sewers shall not be laid parallel to or within three feet of any
bearing wall, which might thereby be weakened. The depth shall be
sufficient to afford protection from frost. The building sewer shall be
laid at uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as possible.
Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curved pipe and
fittings. Where required, a standpipe with a brass plug shall be
furnished at the curb.
D. Sewage pump. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to
permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such
drain shall be lifted by a sewage pump of a type acceptable to the
Township Engineer and discharged to the building sewer.
E. Trench work. All excavations required for the installation of a building
sewer shall be open trench work or another method which would permit
proper inspection. Pipelaying and backfill shall be performed according
to the manufacturer's recommendations; however, no blocking of pipes
will be allowed except under fittings. Backfill shall be placed by hand
and tamped to a height one foot above the pipe. No backfill shall be
placed until the piping has been inspected.
F. Joints and connections.
(1) All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight.
(2) Caulked joints for cast-iron bell and spigot soil pipe shall be firmly
packed with oakum or hemp and secured with molten lead. At least
12 ounces of soft lead shall be used for each inch in diameter of the
pipe used. Lead shall be run in one pouring and caulked tight.
(3) Sulfur-base compound joints used with a cast-iron bell and spigot
building sewer line shall be caulked with jute or hemp leaving a
§ 217-8 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 217-8
213:520
§ 217-9. Inspection of sewer before connection; time limit.
The holder of the building sewer permit shall notify the Department of
Public Works when the building sewer is ready for inspection. The
installation shall be made under the supervision of the Township Engineer,
or his representative, within 24 hours of the receipt of notice by the
Township engineering office.
§ 217-10. Guarding and restoring excavations.
All excavations for building sewer installations shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course
of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Township
Engineer.
§ 217-11. Compliance with other requirements.
In addition to the requirements of this chapter, where the applicant for
the building sewer permit must connect to a public sewer discharging into
the sewerage system of an adjacent municipality or governing body, the
provisions of any ordinance or ordinances, rules and regulations of such
municipality or governing body concerning the connection to a public sewer
shall govern and apply, as well as the applicable terms of any agreement in
connection herewith entered into between the Township and such adjoining
municipality.
§ 217-12. Regulations of use. [Amended 12-21-1970 by Ord. No.
70-25]
two-and-one-half-inch uniform depth for securing the joint with
the compound. Care shall be taken to prevent overheating the
compound, which should not be poured until the surface is free
from bubbles and shows a mirrorlike appearance. Manufacturer's
instructions shall be followed in the preparation and pouring of the
compound jointing material.
(4) Asbestos-cement sewer pipe joints shall be made with sleeve
couplings of the same composition as the pipe and sealed with
rubber rings in accordance with the specifications of the
manufacturer.
(5) Joints between asbestos-cement pipe and metal pipe shall be made
by means of an adapter coupling approved by the Township
Engineer, or his representative, and caulked as specified above.
(6) Other jointing materials and methods equal to the standards
approved above may be used only by approval of the Township
Engineer.
§ 217-8 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, INDIVIDUAL § 217-12
213:521
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling
water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
B. Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to
be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any
public sanitary sewer:
(1) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150º F.
(2) Any waters or wastes which may contain more than 100 milligrams
per liter of fat, oil or grease.
(3) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid, gas or vapor.
(4) Any garbage.
(5) Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, manure or any other solid or viscous
substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or
interference with the proper operation of the sewage works.
(6) Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.0
or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage
or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage
works.
(7) Any waters or wastes containing chemicals or chemical compounds
of a strength which would impair metal, concrete, wood or painted
structures or of a poisonous or toxic nature in sufficient quantity to
injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals or create any hazard in the receiving
waters of the sewage treatment plant. These include arsenic and
arsenicals, copper and copper salts, mercury and mercurials, silver
and silver compounds, zinc, toxic dyes (organic and minerals),
sulfonamides, phenols and their derivatives, creosols, alcohols,
formaldehydes, chlorine in excess of 25 parts per million, iodine,
fluorine, bromine, all strong oxidizing agents, such as peroxides,
chromates, dichromates, permanganates, etc., compounds
producing hydrogen sulphide or any other toxic, inflammable or
explosive gases, either upon acidification, alkalization, reduction or
oxidation and strong reducing agents, such as nitrates, sulfites,
sulphides, etc.
(8) Any waters or wastes containing more than 350 milligrams per liter
by weight of suspended solids or containing suspended solids of
such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is
required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant.
§ 217-12 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 217-12
213:522
§ 217-13. Interceptors. [Amended 8-27-1979 by Ord. No. 79-105]
(9) Any waters or wastes containing inert (nonvolatile) solids in either
suspended, dissolved or colloidal state, of such character and/or
quantity as to adversely affect treatment processes.
(10) Any waters or wastes from industrial, hospital or laboratory
procedures which contains viable pathogenic organisms.
(11) Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration
as will adversely affect treatment processes or, after treatment of
the composite sewage, fail to meet requirements of state, federal or
other public agencies having jurisdiction over the receiving waters.
(12) Any waters or wastes which contain materials which exert or cause
discoloration within the sewage treatment plant or in the receiving
waters or exhibit a true color of more than 100 units on the
platinum-cobalt scale.
(13) Any unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes resulting in
the application of shock or slug loads at the sewage treatment
plant.
(14) Any waters or wastes having an average daily flow greater than
10,000 gallons; provided, however, that the Council may waive
such requirements by contract with any user if the best interests of
the Township so require.
(15) Any waters or wastes having a five-day biochemical oxygen
demand greater than 300 milligrams per liter by weight.
(16) Any waters or wastes having a chemical oxygen demand greater
than 250 milligrams per liter by weight.
(17) Any waters or wastes having a chlorine demand greater than 20
milligrams per liter by weight.
(18) Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a
public nuisance.
A. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when necessary, in
the opinion of the Health Officer, for the proper handling of liquid
wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable
wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units.
B. When the need for such an interceptor is determined, a plumbing
permit shall be obtained prior to the installation. All interceptors shall
be of a type and capacity approved by the Plumbing Inspector for
adequate removal of grease, oil, sand or other ingredients which may
be harmful to the public sewer system, with proper installation certified
by the Plumbing Inspector. Interceptors shall be located for ready
§ 217-12 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, INDIVIDUAL § 217-13
213:523
§ 217-14. Facilities to be provided and maintained by owner.
§ 217-15. Permit; fee. [Amended 3-21-1966 by Ord. No. 66-4;
1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 77-64; 4-20-1987 by Ord. No. 87-293;
11-7-1988 by Ord. No. 88-326; 9-20-1993 by Ord. No. 93-428;
3-4-2019 by Ord. No. 19-838]
The owner or his agent shall make application on a form furnished by
the Township. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications or other information considered pertinent by the Township
Engineer. A connection fee shall be paid to the Township at the time the
application is filed in the amount of $2,500 per equivalent connection for
any new or increased capacity connection to the sanitary sewer system.
An equivalent connection for the purposes of this section shall be a use
with a design flow of 100,000 gallons per year. Each and every dwelling
unit, whether it be attached or detached housing, shall be considered as
one equivalent connection regardless of design flow. In all the other cases
accessibility and ease of cleaning in inspection. The owner shall furnish
design data indicating required interceptor capacity and installation
detail with the permit application. An interceptor shall be of substantial
construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable covers,
which, when bolted in place, shall be gastight and watertight.
C. Interceptors shall be maintained and regularly cleaned by the owner.
D. If the owner fails to provide a required interceptor or fails to regularly
clean an installed interceptor, the general penalty provisions in the
Township Code shall apply.
A. Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or
wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and
effective operation by the owner at his expense.
B. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by
the township of Cedar Grove any domestic sewage, noncontact cooling
water, process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than
stormwater). [Added 2-5-2007 by Ord. No. 07-66680]
C. Where necessary, the owner of any property served by a building sewer
carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of
the wastes. Such manholes, when required, shall be accessibly and
safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans
approved by the Township Engineer. The manholes shall be installed by
the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe
and accessible at all times.
80.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection B
as Subsection C.
§ 217-13 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 217-15
213:524
the amount of gallons shall be calculated using the design flow criteria
established by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and
Energy in N.J.A.C. 7:9-1 et seq. In determining the number of equivalent
connections for purposes of computing the connection fee, the equivalent
connection shall be computed by dividing the sewer use flow per year for
the building, structure or premises by 100,000 gallons and the quotient
shall be the number of equivalent connections assigned to the particular
building, structure or premises. The number of computed equivalent
connections shall be rounded to the next highest 1/4. In no event shall the
equivalent connection assigned to a building, structure or premises be less
than one equivalent connection. The permit shall expire 12 months after the
date of issue.
§ 217-16. Service charges.
A. There is hereby established a sewerage service charge for the use,
operation, maintenance and construction of the sewerage system of the
Township, to be imposed upon the owners of properties served thereby
at the rates hereinafter set forth.
B. The sewerage service charge hereby imposed shall be a quarterly
charge based upon the water consumption of the properties served as
measured by the quantity of water supplied for the current quarter year
as hereinafter set forth.
C. Properties served by the sewerage system of the Township shall pay a
quarterly charge in accordance with the following schedule: [Last
amended 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 17-81781]
(1) For the first 20,000 gallons or less: $90.
(2) Over 20,000 gallons: $7.35 per 1,000 gallons.
D. Properties using other than Township water and served by the
Township sewerage system shall pay a sewerage service charge based
on the consumption of other than Township water. This sewerage
service charge should be measured by the quantity of water used by
such properties. The Township Engineer can require the owner of each
such property to install without cost to the Township a meter or meters
to measure the quantity of water received from such source or sources
and discharged into the Township sewers. No meters shall be installed
or shall be used for such purposes without the approval of the Township
Engineer. The sewerage service charge based on such quantity of water
shall be the same in amount as is required to be paid by the owners of
property receiving the same amount of water from the Township. If the
owner of said property is not required to install an approved meter or
meters, the Township Engineer may make an estimate of the quantity of
81.Editor's Note: This ordinance also stated that its provisions would be reflected in the
water billing date of 11-1-2017.
§ 217-15 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, INDIVIDUAL § 217-16
213:525
§ 217-17. Meters and measuring devices.
All meters or other measuring devices installed or required to be used under
the provisions of this chapter shall be under the control of the Township
Engineer. The owner of the property upon which any such measuring device
is installed, which shall be at said owner's expense, shall be responsible
for its maintenance and safekeeping; and all repairs thereto shall be made
at the owner's cost, whether such repairs are made necessary by ordinary
wear and tear or other causes. Charges for such repairs, if made by the
Township, shall be due and payable at the same time, collected in the same
manner and be subject to the same penalties as the sewer service charge.
such water used by said property and discharged into the Township's
sewers from said property.
E. Whenever a property upon which a sewerage service charge is hereby
imposed uses water for an industrial or commercial purpose or for
irrigation of lawns and gardens or filling swimming pools, such that the
water so used is not discharged into the sewerage system of the
Township, the quantity of water so used and not discharged into the
Township's sewers shall be excluded in determining the sewerage
service charge of said property, provided that the quantity of water so
used and not discharged into the Township's sewers is measured by a
device or devices, meter or meters approved by the Township Engineer
and installed without cost to the Township and provided, further, that
the water supply is metered. The sewerage service charge to be paid by
the owner, occupant or applicant for service of said property shall be
computed at the rates hereinabove provided, based upon the
consumption of Township water less the quantity not discharged into
the Townships sewers. [Amended 5-18-1992 by Ord. No. 92-401]
F. All sewerage service charges shall be due and payable at the same time
that water bills are now due and payable and shall be subject to the
same penalties as the charges for water. Said payments shall apply to
all properties subject to the payment of sewerage service charges
without regard to the source of water used by them. The aforesaid
charges for the use of said public sewers shall draw the same interest
from the time they become due as taxes upon real estate and shall be a
lien upon the premises connected until paid, and the Township shall
have the same remedies for the collection thereof with interest, costs
and penalties as it has by law for the collection of taxes upon real estate
and water rents.
G. The Tax Collector is hereby charged with the duty of collecting all
sewerage service charges.
H. Whenever the sewer service to any property begins after the first day or
terminates before the last day of any calendar quarter, the sewer rental
for such property for such quarter shall be for that portion of the
quarter during which the said property is served.
§ 217-16 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 217-18
213:526
§ 217-18. Right of entry by inspectors.
Duly authorized employees of the Township bearing proper credentials
and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the
purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing, in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 217-19. Enforcement. [Added 2-5-2007 by Ord. No. 07-66682]
This chapter shall be enforced by the Township of Cedar Grove by the Police
Department and/or other authorized municipal officials of the Township of
Cedar Grove.
§ 217-20. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-30-1984 by Ord. No.
84-222; 10-23-2006 by Ord. No. 06-656]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000 or by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 221
SHOPPING CARTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 168.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 179.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 197.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
General police powers — See N.J.S.A.
40:69A-29.
Maintaining streets clear of debris — See
N.J.S.A. 40:67-1(g).
§ 221-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OWNER — The person who owns or has possession, custody or control
of shopping carts which are made available for the use of patrons in
connection with the operation of a retail business.
PERSON — Includes a natural person, corporation, partnership or
association.
82.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former § 217-19,
Violations and penalties, as § 217-20.
§ 217-18 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, INDIVIDUAL § 221-1
213:527
SHOPPING CART or CART — A cart of the type commonly provided by retail
stores and/or supermarkets and used for the convenience of patrons.
STREET — Any street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway and parking
lot, and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavements, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks,
parking areas and other places within the street lines and places used by
the general public.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Cedar Grove.
§ 221-2. Name of owner to appear on cart.
The owner or owners of shopping carts used in connection with any retail
business and intended for use by patrons shall clearly designate, on each
cart, the name of such owner or owners.
§ 221-3. Restrictions on removal of carts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove a shopping cart from the
premises of a retail establishment or bring into the Township any shopping
carts.
§ 221-4. Owner responsible for abandoned carts and carts found off
premises.
It shall be unlawful for any owner or owners to leave any such cart or permit
any such cart to be left unattended or abandoned on any street or public
place within the Township of Cedar Grove. Any owner who shall directly or
indirectly permit or suffer his customers to take said carts off the business
premises of said owner shall be responsible if such carts are abandoned or
left unattended on a public street or public place.
§ 221-5. Signs prohibiting removal of carts required.
The owner shall conspicuously display signs in and outside of store premises
prohibiting removal of shopping carts from property.
§ 221-6. Impoundment of carts.
The Township shall remove or cause to be moved any cart found abandoned
or left unattended on any street and shall take the same to Township
property, where it shall be held until redeemed, sold or otherwise disposed
of as hereinafter provided.
§ 221-7. Notice to owner of impoundment; redemption fee.
Whenever the Township shall take any cart containing the owner's
identification, a notice shall be sent by ordinary mail to such owner advising
that the cart is held by the Township and may be redeemed upon payment
of $5 to the Township at any time prior to a sale, dismantling or destruction
thereof as hereinafter provided. No cart shall be delivered to a person
§ 221-1 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 221-7
213:528
seeking to redeem the same unless such person shall furnish satisfactory
evidence of ownership or right to possession.
§ 221-8. Notice of sale of unredeemed carts.
When any cart remains in the custody of the Township for a period of 15
days after removal, and with respect to which no person has presented to
the Township proof establishing to its satisfaction such person's ownership
or right to possession, the Township shall give public notice in its official
newspaper that, at a specified place and time, not less than five days after
such notice is published, such cart will be sold at public auction for not less
than $5 plus the costs of advertising the sale. If, after such notice of sale is
given, any person desires to redeem any cart prior to the sale, such person
shall pay to the Township for redemption the sum of $7.50 plus the costs
of advertising the sale. A general description of the cart to be sold shall be
sufficient. Said sale shall be conducted by the Township Manager or by such
person as the Council shall designate.
§ 221-9. Other disposition of carts.
If said cart is not sold at public auction, the Township may offer it again
for sale or may dismantle, destroy or otherwise dispose of such cart. Any
disposition of such cart made pursuant to this chapter shall be without any
liability of the Township to the owner of such cart or other person lawfully
entitled thereto or having an interest therein.
§ 221-10. Disposition of moneys.
Upon a redemption or sale of a cart, the proceeds shall be deposited in the
general funds of the Township.
§ 221-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-9-1978 by Ord. No.
77-64; 7-30-1984 by Ord. No. 84-222; 10-23-2006 by Ord. No.
06-656]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000 or by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 224
SMOKING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cigarettes and e-cigarettes — See Ch. 117.
§ 221-7 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, INDIVIDUAL § 221-11
213:529

ARTICLE I
Smoking in School Buildings
[Adopted 4-25-2005 by Ord. No. 05-629]
§ 224-1. Findings.
The Township Council of the Township of Cedar Grove does hereby find and
determine that:
§ 224-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall be defined as set
forth below. All other terms, words and phrases not defined herein shall be
given their customary meaning.
A. Numerous studies have found tobacco smoke is a major contributor to
air pollution.
B. The United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) has
designated secondhand smoke as a "Class A" carcinogen as well as a
significant cause of respiratory problems in children.
C. Reliable studies have shown that environmental tobacco smoke is a
cause of cardiovascular disease in nonsmokers and that breathing
environmental tobacco smoke is a significant health hazard for
children, the elderly and individuals with cardiovascular disease,
impaired respiratory function and asthma.
D. The United States Surgeon General has found that separating smoke
from nonsmokers within the same air space does not eliminate the
exposure of nonsmokers to environmental tobacco smoke.
E. The Cedar Grove Township Board of Education is publicly committed to
have a tobacco-free school environment to protect the health of its
students and staff members.
F. The use of any tobacco product presents a significant health hazard to
the students and staff members of the Cedar Grove Township Board of
Education.
G. The sale of all tobacco products to minors is an illegal act in the State of
New Jersey.
H. The Cedar Grove Township Board of Education needs the support of the
entire Cedar Grove community to effect meaningful change in this
important health matter.
I. The Municipal Council of the Township of Cedar Grove finds that it is
within its inherent governmental powers conferred upon it by N.J.S.A.
40:48-1 and N.J.S.A. 40:48-2 to implement and enforce the provisions of
this article regulating smoking in school buildings under the control of
the Board of Education of the Township of Cedar Grove.
§ 224-1 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, INDIVIDUAL § 224-2
213:531
COMMON AREA — The walkways, parking areas, driveways, lawns, yards,
gardens of any school building, athletic fields, vehicles in parking areas
and all accessory structures, improvements or appurtenances used for the
management, operation or maintenance of the school building.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, cooperative association, private
corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee or any
other legal entity.
SCHOOL BUILDINGS — Any building, structure, facility or complex used
by students and/or the general public, or to which students and/or the
general public are invited, which is constructed and/or operated or leased
by the Board of Education of the Township of Cedar Grove, including school
district offices or work areas.
SMOKING — The inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying of any lighted
cigar, cigarette, pipe or other combustible tobacco product in any manner
or in any form.
§ 224-3. Smoking prohibited.
Smoking shall be prohibited in the following places:
§ 224-4. Signs.
"No Smoking" signs or the international "No Smoking" symbol shall be
clearly and conspicuously posted by the person in control of every school
building where smoking is controlled by this article. The color of such
signs, when not of the international type, shall have letters that are distinct,
contrasting to the background, and easily read. Letters shall have a
minimum height of three-quarters of an inch. The "No Smoking" signs shall
be posted, at a minimum, on every doorway which provides an entry to the
school building.
§ 224-5. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be primarily enforceable by the Board
of Education of the Township of Cedar Grove and its administration and
employees with the assistance of the Township Police Department by the
filing of a complaint in the Municipal Court of the Township of Cedar Grove.
§ 224-6. Violation and penalties.
A. Every room, chamber, lobby, hallway and the common areas of any
school buildings which are under the control of the Board of Education
of the Township of Cedar Grove as well as school vehicles.
A. Any person who smokes in an area in which smoking is prohibited by
the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine
of up to $50 and 15 hours of community service for the first offense, up
to $100 and 30 hours of community service for the second offense, and
§ 224-2 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 224-6
213:532
$250 and 50 hours of community service for the third and each
subsequent offense.
B. Any person found guilty of defacing or removing "No Smoking" signs,
which are required by this article, shall be subject to a fine of not less
than $100 nor more than $200 plus the cost of replacing the sign.
§ 224-6 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, INDIVIDUAL § 224-6
213:533

ARTICLE II
Smoking on Public Property
[Adopted 2-6-2017 by Ord. No. 17-804]
§ 224-7. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
ENCLOSED AREA — All areas between a floor and a ceiling, extending to
the outer perimeter walls of a structure.
MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS — Includes all structures owned, leased, rented
and/or operated by the Township of Cedar Grove, and/or occupied by
Township employees and used for official business of the Township of Cedar
Grove.
PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES — Includes all public parks,
playgrounds, ball fields, publicly owned or leased by the Township of Cedar
Grove and all property owned or leased by the Township of Cedar Grove
upon which the public is invited or upon which the public is permitted
and where individuals gather for recreational activities, including all areas
adjacent to such facilities, including, but not limited to, any parking area,
driveway or drive aisle.
SMOKING — The burning of, inhaling from, exhaling the smoke from, or
the possession of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or any other matter or
substance which contains tobacco or any other matter that can be smoked,
or the inhaling or exhaling of smoke or vapor from an electronic smoking
device.
§ 224-8. Prohibition of smoking in public places; signs.
A. Smoking shall be prohibited in all municipal buildings as defined
herein. No-smoking signs or the international no-smoking symbol
(consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed
in a red circle with a diagonal red line through its cross section) shall be
clearly, sufficiently and conspicuously posted at each municipal building
entrance and within each closed area where smoking is prohibited by
this article. The signs shall be clearly visible to the public and shall
contain letters or a symbol which contrast in color with the sign,
indicating that smoking is prohibited therein. The sign shall also
indicate that violators are subject to a fine.
B. Smoking shall be prohibited within a thirty-five-foot radius of the front
entrance of all municipal buildings. No-smoking signs or the
international no-smoking symbol (consisting of a pictorial
representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a
diagonal red line through its cross section) shall be clearly, sufficiently
and conspicuously posted both on the building and at the thirty-five-foot
perimeter of the front entrance of all municipal buildings where
smoking is prohibited by this article. The signs shall be clearly visible to
§ 224-7 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, INDIVIDUAL § 224-8
213:535
§ 224-9. Enforcement.
The enforcement authority of this article shall be the Police Department,
Fire Department, Recreation Department, Public Works Department and
Health Department of the Township of Cedar Grove.
§ 224-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to a
fine of not less than $250 for the first offense, $500 for the second offense
and $1,000 for each subsequent offense. Any municipal employee found in
violation of this article may also be subject to discipline in accordance with
the provisions of the Township of Cedar Grove's policies and procedures.
the public and shall contain letters or a symbol which contrast in color
with the sign, indicating that smoking is prohibited therein. The sign
shall also indicate that violators are subject to a fine.
C. Smoking shall be prohibited in all public parks and recreation facilities
owned or leased by the Township of Cedar Grove and all property
owned or leased by the Township of Cedar Grove upon which the public
is invited or upon which the public is permitted and where individuals
gather for recreational activities, including all areas adjacent to such
facilities, including, but not limited to, any parking area, driveway or
drive aisle, which have been designated with no-smoking signs. Nosmoking
signs or the international no-smoking symbol (consisting of a
pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle
with a diagonal red line through its cross section) shall be clearly,
sufficiently and conspicuously posted in all areas regulated by this
article. The signs shall be clearly visible to the public and shall contain
letters or a symbol which contrasts in color with the sign, indicating
that smoking is prohibited at the designated area. The sign shall also
indicate that violators are subject to a fine.
D. Smoking shall be prohibited in any vehicle registered to the Township
of Cedar Grove.
§ 224-8 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 224-10
213:536
Chapter 226
SOIL REMOVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 119.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 140.
Public improvement specifications — See Ch.
201.
Streets and curb construction — See Ch. 230,
Art. IV.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 234.
Trees — See Ch. 246.
Zoning — See Ch. 268.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
General police powers — See N.J.S.A.
40:69A-29.
Soil conservation as part of Master
Plan — See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28b(8).
§ 226-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DEVELOPER — An excavator.[Amended 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 87-288]
EXCAVATOR — Any person who, within any period of 12 months, shall move
more than 300 cubic yards of soil on any lot.[Amended 4-6-1987 by Ord.
No. 87-288; 11-21-1988 by Ord. No. 88-330]
LOT — Any parcel of land or portion thereof, the boundary lines of which
can be ascertained by reference to the maps or records in the office of the
Township Tax Assessor or in the office of the Essex County Register.
MAJOR SOIL PERMIT — Any permit for the moving of soil which does not
meet the definition of a minor soil permit.[Amended 11-21-1988 by Ord.
No. 88-330]
MINOR SOIL PERMIT — A permit for the moving of less than 800 cubic
yards of soil, proposing no retaining wall in excess of two feet in height
at any point, and requiring no exception from the requirements of this
chapter.[Amended 11-21-1988 by Ord. No. 88-330]
MOVE [Amended 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 87-288] — To dig, excavate,
remove, deposit, place, fill, grade, regrade, level or otherwise alter or
change the location or contour, transport or supply; provided, however, that
nothing in this definition shall be construed to apply to:
Digging, excavating and removing of soil from a lot which is to be
displaced by a building foundation, swimming pool or other structure
pursuant to a validly issued building permit.
A.
B. Backfilling of foundations and other structures.
§ 224-10 SOIL REMOVAL § 226-1
226:537
OWNER — Any person having title to any lot or having such other interest
or estate therein as will permit exercise of effective possession thereof or
dominion thereover.
SOIL — Any earth, sand, clay, loam, gravel, humus, rock or dirt without
regard to the presence or absence therein of organic matter.
TOPSOIL — Any soil that, in its natural state, constitutes the top layer of
earth and is composed of 2% or more, by weight, of organic matter and has
the ability to support vegetation.
§ 226-2. Legislative findings.
The Township Council does hereby find and declare that:
§ 226-3. Permit required.
Plowing, spading, cultivation, harrowing or disking of soil or any other
operation usually and ordinarily associated with the tilling of soil for
agricultural or horticultural purposes.
C.
A. Unregulated and uncontrolled relocation, filling, excavation and
removal of soil on a large scale by developers and excavators in and
upon lands in the Township has resulted in conditions detrimental to
the public health, safety and general welfare, substantially hampering
and deterring the efforts of the Township to effectuate the general
purpose of municipal planning.
B. Continuation of the unregulated and uncontrolled relocation, filling,
excavation and removal of soil will result in serious and irreparable
damage to the public welfare by reason of consequent soil erosion by
water and wind; inadequate and improper surface water drainage; a
decrease in or destruction of the fertility of the soil; removal of lateral
support of abutting streets, lands and premises; creation of dust storms
and places for mosquito breeding; creation of dangerous depressions or
pits; deterioration of property values; rendering of lands unfit or
unsuitable for their most appropriate use; and creation of other factors
and elements hampering and deterring the coordinated, adjusted and
harmonious development of the Township.
A. No owner of any lot in the Township shall cause, allow, permit or suffer
any soil, in and upon any lot in the Township, to be moved by any
developer or excavator until such developer or excavator has first
obtained a soil permit therefor as required by Subsection B of this
section.
B. No developer and no excavator shall move or cause, allow, permit or
suffer to be removed any soil in and upon any lot in the Township unless
and until such developer or excavator has obtained a soil permit
therefor issued by the Township Clerk in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 226-1 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 226-3
226:538
§ 226-4. Application procedure. [Amended 9-11-2000 by Ord. No.
00-536]
An application for a soil moving permit shall be filed with the Township
Planning and Zoning Coordinator and shall be accompanied by the fee
prescribed in § 226-7. Application shall be made in duplicate, on forms
prescribed by the Township and supplied by the Township Planning and
Zoning Coordinator. The application shall set forth the following:
C. No soil moving permit shall be required for any soil moving approved
pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law83 as a part of a site plan
application or for grading within a roadway right-of-way or for
installation of other improvements to be dedicated to the public and
approved as a part of a subdivision application. [Added 4-6-1987 by
Ord. No. 87-288]
A. The identity and location of the applicant.
B. The description and location of the lands in question, including metes
and bounds.
C. The identity and location of the owner of the lands.
D. The purpose or reason for moving the soil.
E. The kind and quantity, in cubic yards, of soil to be moved.
F. In case of removal, the place to which the soil is to be removed and the
kind and quantity of soil to be removed.
G. The proposed date of completion of the work.
H. The anticipated cost of the proposed soil moving and any method of
retention. [Added 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 87-28884]
I. A declaration as to whether the applicant seeks a major soil permit or
minor soil permit [Added 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 87288; amended
11-21-1988 by Ord. No. 88-330]
J. In the event that the applicant seeks exceptions pursuant to § 226-12.1,
the applicant shall set forth the exceptions so sought. In addition, the
applicant shall attach to the application a written statement setting
forth the reason for the seeking of each such exception. [Added
11-21-1988 by Ord. No. 88-33085]
K. Such other pertinent data as the Township may require.
83.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
84.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection H as Subsection I.
85.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection J as Subsection K.
§ 226-3 SOIL REMOVAL § 226-5
226:539
§ 226-5. Topographical map required for major soil permit.
[Amended 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 87-288; 11-21-1988 by Ord. No.
88-330]
The application for a soil permit shall be accompanied by the following:
A. In the case of a minor soil permit, three copies of a topographical map
of the lot in question. In the case of a major soil permit, nine copies of a
topographical map of the lot in question. Said map shall be prepared
and certified and sealed by a licensed professional engineer. The map
shall be prepared at a scale not to exceed 30 feet to the inch if the
property in question consists of more than one acre and shall not
exceed 20 feet to the inch if the property consists of one acre or fewer.
The topographical map shall include the following:
(1) The present grades at two-foot intervals and the present elevations
at the corners of the lot.
(2) The proposed grades at two-foot intervals and proposed elevations
at the corners of the lot and corners of proposed buildings, using a
designation different than those used for the present grades.
(3) The grades and elevation of all streets, curbs, manholes, inverts
and other appurtenances not underground within 50 feet of the lot.
(4) All easements and utility lines on the lot, including the elevations of
manholes, inverts and other appurtenances not underground.
(5) The present grades at two-foot intervals of all adjacent properties
to a distance of at least 15 feet from the lot in question, including
the location of any structures within such 15 feet.
(6) The location and size of proposed structures, with first floor and
basement elevations of all proposed buildings.
(7) The quantity of fill for which the soil moving permit is sought,
together with the calculations used to arrive at such determination
of quantity. The quantity shall be calculated by accepted
earthmoving computations, such as the end area method. The
quantity of soil to be moved shall be certified as accurate by a
licensed professional engineer or licensed land surveyor.
(8) Details of retaining walls and other structures proposed for support
of soil, together with elevations of proposed grade above and below
any retaining wall and at the top of the wall. Such retaining walls
shall be of a design approved by the Township Engineer.
(9) The elevations of proposed driveways and walkways.
(10) The location, elevation and detail of swales and other means for the
disposition of surface water.
§ 226-5 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 226-5
226:540
(11) A notation as to the method of restoration of disturbed areas and
the method and ground cover to be used for stabilization of slopes
created by the soil moving.
(12) All elevation shall be computed based on United States Coast and
Geodetic Survey datum.
B. In the case of a minor soil permit three copies of a topographical map of
the lot in question. In the case of a major soil permit, nine copies of a
topographical map of the lot in question. Such profile shall be prepared
and certified and sealed by a licensed professional engineer. The
drawing shall be prepared at a scale of not more than 20 feet to the
inch. At least three sections shall be provided, one each at the property
side line and one through the middle of the property. Additional sections
shall be provided in the event that the required sections are more than
50 feet apart. The Township may require yet additional sections if, in its
determination or that of its agents, the drawings are inadequate to
show the effect of the soil moving. The cross sections shall contain the
following information.
(1) The location and size of existing and proposed structures, including
elevations. With reference to buildings, the basement elevation and
first-floor elevation shall be shown, but otherwise it shall not be
necessary to show any portion of the building five feet above the
higher of the proposed or existing grade.
(2) The existing grade from the front property line to the rear.
(3) The proposed grade from the front property line to the rear.
(4) Any proposed cut shall be shown as a shaded area, and the area of
proposed fill shall be shaded by diagonal lines.
C. A set of colored photographs of the property in question. The following
photographs shall be required: one taken from the center line of the
street toward the center of the frontage of the property in question; one
from each corner or jog in the boundary line of the perimeter of the
property taken toward the center of the property. Each such
photograph shall be eight inches by 10 inches and shall be numbered
and dated. Along with the photographs, the applicant shall submit a
map of the property, drawn to scale, showing the number of the
photograph taken at each location, each such location and providing a
directional arrow for the direction in which the photograph was taken.
D. On any application in which there is a retaining wall proposed of any
height, the applicant shall submit an unqualified certification from a
licensed professional engineer that the retaining wall proposed, and its
design, is adequate and appropriate to retain the soil proposed to be
retained and for the purposes intended as shown on the plan.
E. (Reserved)
§ 226-5 SOIL REMOVAL § 226-5
226:541
§ 226-6. Notice of hearing for major soil permit; proof of service
and publication.
§ 226-7. Fees. [Amended 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 87-288; 9-12-1988 by
Ord. No. 88-322]
F. In the case of a minor soil permit, three copies of a tree inventory map,
and tree removal plan as required by Chapter 246, Trees. In the case of
a major soil permit, nine copies of a tree inventory map, and tree
removal plan as required by Chapter 246, Trees. Said map shall be
prepared by and certified and sealed by a licensed professional
engineer. The tree inventory map shall show each tree on the property
in question which is four inches in caliper or greater, measured at a
height of three feet above the ground, and shall depict the species and
size of each such tree. The tree removal plan shall be submitted and
reviewed in accordance with Chapter 246.
A. Every applicant for a major soil permit shall give all property owners
within 200 feet of the extreme limits of the property, as their names
appear on the Township tax records, at least 10 days' written notice of
the hearing on the application. The notice shall be given in person or by
registered or certified mail and shall state the time and place of the
hearing, as fixed by the Township Planning and Zoning Coordinator; a
brief description of the property; and that a copy of the application and
map has been filed with the Township Planning and Zoning Coordinator
for public inspection. [Amended 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 87-288;
9-11-2000 by Ord. No. 00-536]
B. In addition to the requirements of Subsection A of this section, the
applicant shall also cause notice of the hearing to be published in the
official newspaper, designated as such by the governing body, at least
10 days prior to the hearing.
C. Prior to the hearing, the applicant shall submit the following:
[Amended 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 87-288]
(1) A certification or an affidavit, signed and sworn to by the applicant,
affirming that the applicant has notified all the property owners, as
required by Subsection A of this section, in person or by registered
or certified mail.
(2) Proof of publication of the newspaper notice required by
Subsection B of this section.
A. The application fee for a minor soil permit shall be $500. A fee of $75
shall be paid in connection with each revision.
B. The application fee for a major soil permit shall be $1,500. A fee of $150
shall be paid in connection with each revision. For the purpose of
computing such fee, the statement set forth in the application of the
number of cubic yards to be moved shall be deemed prima facie correct.
§ 226-5 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 226-8
226:542
§ 226-8. Processing of application. [Amended 4-6-1987 by Ord. No.
87-288; 9-11-2000 by Ord. No. 00-536]
The Township Clerk shall forward all applications for minor soil moving
permits and major soil moving permits to the Township Engineer. The
Township Engineer shall inspect the property prior to any soil moving and
submit a written report to the Township Planning and Zoning Coordinator
regarding his review of the application within 30 days after the filing of
the application, together with his recommendation for the amount of the
performance guarantee required by Chapter 226, § 226-13. Upon receipt
of the Township Engineer's report, the Township Planning and Zoning
Coordinator shall schedule a hearing date before the Planning Board and
forward a copy of the application for the major soil moving permit, together
with all submissions made at the time of application and required by the
Township Engineer, to the members of the Township Planning Board.
§ 226-9. Cumulative amount of soil removed to be considered in
determining eligibility for minor soil permit. [Added 1-9-1978 by
Ord. No. 77-64; amended 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 87-288; 11-21-1988
by Ord. No. 88-330; 9-11-2000 by Ord. No. 00-536]
Notwithstanding anything contained in this chapter to the contrary, in
determining whether an applicant is eligible for a minor soil permit or must
apply for a major soil permit, the total amount of soil that an applicant
has applied to remove within a three-year period will be used; and, when
an applicant requests that he be permitted to remove any amount of soil
that will result in his having applied to remove a cumulative total in excess
of 800 cubic yards within said three-year period, he shall be required to
acquire a major soil permit, irrespective of the fact that such applicant shall
not have requested permission to remove in excess of 800 cubic yards in
any one permit application. In addition, any time such an applicant shall
have applied for and received a major soil permit, he shall be required to
apply for and secure either a major or minor soil permit, as applicable,
for any work done subsequently, not specifically covered by the major soil
permit, and shall be subject to having to secure an additional major soil
permit should said applicant once again apply for a series of minor permits
which result in requests totaling in excess of 800 cubic yards since the last
major soil permit, within a three-year period. Additionally, notwithstanding
anything contained in this chapter to the contrary, in the event that the
Township Engineer determines that an application for a minor soil permit,
as defined in this chapter, deserved further review based upon its impact on
the lot in question or surrounding properties, he may reject the application
for a minor soil permit and direct the applicant to apply for a major soil
permit.
§ 226-8 SOIL REMOVAL § 226-10
226:543
§ 226-10. Review of applications for minor soil permit; issuance.
[Amended 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 87-288; 11-21-1988 by Ord. No.
88-330; 9-11-2000 by Ord. No. 00-536]
The Township Engineer is hereby authorized to approve applications for
minor soil moving permits, and upon such approval, the Township Planning
and Zoning Coordinator shall issue such a permit and forward a duplicate
copy to the Township Manager. The Township Engineer's written decision
with reference to any minor soil moving permits shall be rendered within 30
days after receipt of a complete application by the Township Planning and
Zoning Coordinator.
§ 226-11. Review of applications for major soil permit; issuance.
[Amended 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 87-288; 11-21-1988 by Ord. No.
88-330; 9-11-2000 by Ord. No. 00-536]
Within 90 days after the Township Planning and Zoning Coordinator has
received a complete application for a major soil moving permit, the
Township Planning Board shall conduct a hearing and grant or deny the
permit, with or without conditions. The Township Planning and Zoning
Coordinator shall then issue the permit in accordance with the decision of
the Township Planning Board. A copy of the permit shall be forwarded to
the Township Manager, Township Engineer and Construction Official.
§ 226-12. Factors in considering applications. [Amended 4-6-1987
by Ord. No. 87-288; 11-21-1988 by Ord. No. 88-330; 9-11-2000 by
Ord. No. 00-536]
In considering and reviewing applications for minor and major soil permits,
the Township Planning Board and Township Engineer shall be guided by the
general purposes of municipal planning and the following standards:
A. In development of land, natural grades should be preserved wherever
possible, and soil moving shall only be permitted when good and
sufficient reason appears for such soil moving.
B. No soil moving shall be permitted to result in any increase of velocity or
change in direction of surface water runoff without such water being
appropriately managed on site so as to not adversely affect other
properties.
C. No soil moving shall be permitted which shall result in the removal or
destruction of trees in violation of the standards established under the
Tree Removal Ordinance of the municipality, Chapter 246, Trees. In all
respects, the applicant shall provide a method for protection of trees
acceptable to the Township, provide welling or mounding where
appropriate and provide for mitigation in the event of tree removal.
D. No soil moving shall be permitted if an applicant merely proposes to
raise or lower the general level of a lot in relation to adjacent
properties.
§ 226-10 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 226-12
226:544
§ 226-12.1. Exceptions. [Added 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 87-288]
The following exceptions to the standards established in § 226-12 of the
Code of the Township of Cedar Grove shall be permitted:
E. No soil moving permit shall be issued if the proposed soil moving would
have any reasonable conceivable detrimental impact upon any person,
surrounding property or the municipality.
F. All proposed structures shall be situate on a lot so as to require the
least amount of soil moving as is practical.
G. In connection with the construction of any building requiring soil
moving, the following additional standards shall apply:
(1) The basement floor elevation shall be set no higher than the
average elevation of the natural grade within the area of the
proposed building.
(2) Construction disturbance of the land shall be limited to a perimeter
of 15 feet from the sides and rear of the foundation, except for
driveway access to the building.
(3) In the event that a level area for construction of the building must
be created by soil moving, the area shall be created by a cut on the
uphill side and fill on the downhill side. Such cut and fill must be
adequately retained, and a certification by the applicant's engineer
that the proposed method of soil retention is adequate must be
submitted without qualification or exception. No construction shall
begin on the lot until the land where the building is to be located
shall be prepared for construction and all necessary cut and fill,
together with the approved method of retaining the soil, has been
completed on the lot. In this regard, no foundation footing shall be
constructed until the building site has been properly prepared.
Additionally, all buildings and structures shall be designed with
footings extending to stable soil with proper lateral supports.
H. No slope created by soil moving shall be permitted to exceed a grade
which rises or falls one foot vertically for every two feet horizontally.
A. In the event that the elevation of any building established by § 226-12
shall create a situation where driveway access would exceed a slope of
18%, configured in the most gradual manner possible, an applicant may
obtain relief to raise the floor elevation of the building to achieve such
grade.
B. In the event that the grading of the disturbed area on a one-on-two
slope at a point 15 feet from any building as required by § 226-12
cannot practically be accomplished and meet acceptable engineering
design standards for retaining the soil, an applicant may obtain relief to
extend the fifteen-foot disturbance area to an extent beyond 15 feet as
may be minimally required to meet acceptable engineering design
§ 226-12 SOIL REMOVAL § 226-12.1
226:545
§ 226-13. Performance bond required for major soil permit.
No major soil permit shall be issued unless and until the applicant therefor
shall have posted with the Planning Board a performance bond, in form and
with surety approved by the Township Attorney, and in such amount as the
Township Engineer shall determine. The bond shall be conditioned upon
full and faithful performance by the applicant, as principal, within the time
specified in the application, of all the proposed work in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and of the soil permit issued pursuant thereto.
Said bond shall not be deemed canceled or released except as provided in
§ 226-16.
§ 226-14. Topographical maps to be furnished as work progresses.
[Amended 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 87-288]
At the request of the Township Engineer, every developer or excavator to
whom a major soil permit has been issued shall file with the Township
Engineer a topographical map, in duplicate, prepared and certified by a
licensed professional engineer or a licensed land surveyor, showing the
contours of the area at a point when approximately 1/3 of the soil has been
moved and again at the point when approximately 2/3 of the soil has been
moved.
§ 226-15. Topographical map to be furnished upon completion of
work. [Amended 11-21-1988 by Ord. No. 88-330; 9-11-2000 by Ord.
No. 00-536]
standards for a retaining wall or other structure designed to retain the
soil.
C. In any other case, the applicant may seek exception to the provisions of
this chapter based upon a showing of hardship.
D. In granting any such exception, the applicant shall only be permitted to
move as much soil and disturb as little land area as is reasonably
possible beyond the standards. No relief granted under this section
shall be granted if the applicant has created his own hardship by the
particular design of a structure or in any other manner.
E. An exception to the standards contained in this chapter may only be
granted by the Township Council after a hearing which shall be
conducted with notice to adjacent property owners.
A. Every developer or excavator, upon completion of the work for which a
major soil permit has been issued, shall forthwith file with the Township
Engineer:
(1) A written notice of the fact of such completion and the date thereof.
(2) A topographical map in duplicate, prepared and certified by a
licensed professional engineer or a licensed land surveyor, which
shall contain and show the following:
§ 226-12.1 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 226-15
226:546
§ 226-16. Cancellation and release of bond. [Amended 9-11-2000 by
Ord. No. 00-536]
The Township Engineer shall not recommend to the Planning Board that
the applicant's performance bond posted pursuant to § 226-13 be canceled
or released until after all conditions set forth in the original permit have
been met. The Township Engineer shall notify the Planning Board within 31
days of the filing of said topographical map of his approval or disapproval
thereof and of any objections he may have to the cancellation or release of
the applicant's performance bond.
§ 226-17. Restrictions on removal of soil.
(a) The identity and location of the applicant.
(b) The description of the land in question, including metes and
bounds.
(c) The identity and location of the owner of the land.
(d) The final grades of the lot following the completion of the
moving of all soil and replacing of topsoil.
B. The map shall be drawn to the same scale as the topographical map
submitted with the application and shall show the final grades on a onehundred-
foot grid layout.
C. In the event that any retaining walls were constructed on site, the
applicant shall submit an unqualified certification from a licensed
professional engineer that the retaining wall or walls was constructed
under his supervision and that the walls were properly constructed and
are adequate to support and retain the soil proposed to be retained.
A. No developer or excavator shall move topsoil in or upon any lot unless
provisions are made for the storage of the topsoil within the boundary
lines of said lot.
B. Except as hereinafter otherwise provided in this section, all topsoil so
stored shall be uniformly replaced over the entire area or surface of the
lot on or before the completion date set forth in the soil permit, so that
the final grade or grades of the replaced topsoil shall be in accordance
with the proposed final grades shown on the topographical map.
C. No developer or excavator shall remove any topsoil to any point beyond
the boundary lines of the lot, unless and until topsoil, not inferior in
quality to that to be removed, shall first have been replaced uniformly
to a depth of not less than six inches, measured from the proposed final
grades as shown on the topographical map, over the entire surface or
area of the lot. The requirement of this subsection shall not apply to
those areas of the lot that shall have been, since the date of filing of said
topographical map, permanently covered by a building or structure,
§ 226-15 SOIL REMOVAL § 226-17
226:547
§ 226-18. Restrictions on excavation depth.
No developer or excavator shall, at any time in the course of the work, dig
or excavate more than six inches below the proposed final grades as shown
on the topographical map unless:
§ 226-19. Restrictions on storage and replacement of soil.
street, pavement, curb, sidewalk, driveway or other paved area or by
any body of water or waterway.
D. In no event shall the developer or excavator remove from the lot more
topsoil than that comprising the surplus or excess remaining after the
replacement of the topsoil as aforesaid.
A. The major soil permit specifies otherwise and the performance bond,
referred to in § 226-13 hereof, makes specific provision for
replacement, on or before the completion date set forth in the soil
removal permit, of soil of sufficient quantity and kind to restore the final
grades to those shown on the topographical map; or
B. After issuance of the major soil permit, the developer or excavator,
before digging or excavating below the maximum level, shall apply to
the Township Planning Board for an amendment of the application and
topographical map then in effect. Such amendment may be granted
upon such terms as the Planning Board may deem necessary to assure
adherence to the purposes and objectives of this chapter. [Amended
9-11-2000 by Ord. No. 00-536]
A. No developer or excavator shall deposit soil upon, fill in or raise the
grade of any lot without first making provisions for:
(1) The use in said work of soil or other materials as will not result in
deviation from the proposed final grades or the uniformity thereof
by reason of abnormal shrinkage or settlement.
(2) The collection and storage upon the lot of the original topsoil, so
that said topsoil shall not be buried beneath soil or other material
of inferior quality.
(3) The uniform replacement of the topsoil stored over the entire area
or surface of the fill soil or other material, so that the final grades of
the replaced topsoil shall be in accordance with the proposed final
grades shown on the topographical map.
B. In the event that such storage and replacement as provided in
Subsections A(2) and (3) of this section is not practicable, then
provision shall be made for the uniform placement, over the entire area
or surface of the fill soil or other material, of a layer of topsoil not
inferior in quality to that of the original topsoil, to a depth of not less
than six inches, measured from the proposed final grades as shown on
the topographical map; excepting only those portions thereof as shall
§ 226-17 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 226-19
226:548
§ 226-20. Use of streets for transportation of soil.
In the removal of soil, only such streets of the Township shall be used
for transportation as may be designated for that purpose by the Township
Engineer. The permittee shall keep such streets free from dirt resulting
from such soil removal work.
§ 226-21. Inspection of operations.
For the purpose of administering and enforcing this chapter, any duly
authorized officer, agent or employee of the Township shall have the right
to enter into and upon any lands, in or upon which soil moving or removal
operations are being conducted, to examine and inspect such lands.
§ 226-22. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-30-1984 by Ord. No.
84-222; 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 87-288; 9-11-2000 by Ord. No. 00-536;
10-23-2006 by Ord. No. 06-656]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000 or by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
In addition, no certificate of occupancy shall be issued to any person for
any property where there exists a violation of this chapter. The Township
Engineer shall be authorized to issue said penalties in the event a violation
occurs.
Chapter 228
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Regional Flood Control Board — See Ch. 29.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 38.
Environmental Commission — See Ch. 47.
Uniform Construction Codes — See Ch. 119.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 140.
Sewers — See Ch. 217.
Soil removal — See Ch. 226.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 234.
Zoning — See Ch. 268.
§ 228-1. Purpose; applicability; compatibility with other
regulations.
be or shall have become permanently covered by a building or
structure, street, pavement, curb, sidewalk, driveway or other paved
area or by any body of water or waterway.
§ 226-19 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 228-1
228:549
A. Policy statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and pollutant
reduction through nonstructural or low-impact techniques shall be
explored before relying on structural best management practices
(BMPs). Structural BMPs should be integrated with nonstructural
stormwater management measures and proper maintenance plans.
Nonstructural measures include both environmentally sensitive site
design and source controls that prevent pollutants from being placed on
the site. Source control plans should be developed based upon physical
site conditions and the origin, nature, and the anticipated loading of
potential pollutants. Multiple stormwater management BMPs may be
necessary to achieve the established performance standards for water
quality, quantity, and groundwater recharge.
B. Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for development.
C. Applicability. The following activities shall be required to provide for
control of peak stormwater runoffs and stormwater quality, in
accordance with this chapter by use of detention and/or retention
basins or other appropriate techniques, which may be reviewed and
approved by the municipality with the advice of the Township Engineer:
(1) Subdivisions not meeting the definition of a minor subdivision
described in § 234-3 of the Township Code.
(2) Major site plans.
(3) Any area of documented existing flooding conditions, which would
be exacerbated by any increase in peak flows of stormwater runoff
for the one-, two-, ten-, and one-hundred-year return frequency
storm events. The existence of this condition requires the full force
and effect of this chapter.
(4) Single-family lot development and subdivisions of not more than
four total lots shall comply with the intent of the chapter to the
degree possible and appropriate and specifically to those sections
identified as single-family lot development or subdivisions of not
more than four lots.
D. Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements.
Development approvals issued pursuant to this chapter are to be
considered an integral part of development approvals under the
subdivision and site plan review process and do not relieve the
applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals
for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act, or
ordinance. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. This
chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other
ordinances, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law except
that, where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different
from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other
§ 228-1 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 228-1
228:550
§ 228-2. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses serving
the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and access to
public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the Essex County
Board of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater management
plans and implementing ordinance(s). The county review agency may either
be a county planning agency or a county water resource association created
under N.J.S.A 58:16A-55.5, if the enabling ordinance or resolution delegates
authority to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove municipal
stormwater management plans and implementing ordinances.
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
(NJDEP).
DESIGNATED CENTER — A state development and redevelopment plan
center as designated by the State Planning Commission. A "center" is
defined in the State Development and Redevelopment Plan (SDRP) as a
compact form of development with one or more cores and residential
neighborhoods. Centers range in scale from an urban center to a regional
center, town center, village, and hamlet.
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly licensed
in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, development of project requirements, creation
and development of project design and preparation of drawings and
specifications.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or
more lots, tracts or parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion,
structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or structure,
any mining excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any
building or other structure, or land or extension of use of land, for which
permission is required pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater,
sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving water body
or to a particular point along a receiving water body.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CONSTRAINED AREA — The following areas where
the physical alteration of the land is in some way restricted, either through
regulation, easement, deed restriction or ownership such as wetlands,
provision of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher standards
shall control.
§ 228-1 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 228-2
228:551
floodplains, threatened and endangered species sites or designated
habitats, and parks and preserves. Habitats of endangered or threatened
species are identified using the Department's Landscape Project as
approved by the Department's Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood designated by the
Urban Coordinating Council in consultation and conjunction with the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A 55:19-69.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREA — An area or feature which is of
significant environmental value, including but not limited to: stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or
threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland forest;
steep slopes; and wellhead protection and groundwater recharge areas.
Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using the
Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer of
material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — The process by which water seeps into the soil from
precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development that provides for ultimately
disturbing one or more acres of land or increasing impervious surface
by one-quarter acre or more. Disturbance for the purpose of this chapter
includes the placement of impervious surface, the exposure and/or
movement of soil or bedrock, and the clearing, cutting, or removal of
vegetation. Projects undertaken by any government agency which
otherwise meet the definition of "major development" but which do not
require approval under the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq., are also considered "major development."
MAJOR SITE PLAN — Any site plan not exempted under § 268-40 of the
Township Code, or not meeting the criteria established in § 268-41B(1)
through (6) of the Township Code.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Cedar Grove.
NODE — A concentration of facilities and activities which are not organized
in a compact form, as defined by the SDRP.
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state and any state, interstate or
federal agency.
§ 228-2 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 228-2
228:552
POLLUTANT —
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into
the ground.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is
being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or
gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or has
occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin
including any earth, sand, clay, loam, gravel, humus, rock or dirt without
regard to the presence or absence therein of organic matter.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN
PLANNING AREA (PA1) — An area delineated on the State Plan Policy Map
and adopted by the State Planning Commission that is intended to be the
focus for much of the state's future redevelopment and revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — The geographic application of the State
Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and state-wide policies, and
the official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, or is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or embankment
and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A stormwater
management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a detention basin or
infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool (a retention basin), or
be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (as in the case of a constructed
stormwater wetland).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater recharge
of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal nonstormwater discharges into
stormwater conveyances.
Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash,
sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive
substance [except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of
1954, as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.)], thermal waste, wrecked
or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal,
agricultural, and construction waste or runoff, or other residue
discharged directly or indirectly to the land, groundwaters or surface
waters of the state, or to a domestic treatment works.
A.
B. Pollutant includes both hazardous and nonhazardous pollutants.
§ 228-2 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 228-2
228:553
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or in
storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or
more lots, tract, parcels or other divisions of land for sale or development.
The following shall not be considered subdivisions within the meaning of
this chapter, if no new streets are created: divisions of land found by
the Planning Board or Subdivision Committee thereof appointed by the
Chairman to be for agricultural purposes where all resulting parcels are five
acres or larger in size; divisions of property by testamentary or intestate
provisions; divisions of property upon court order, including but not limited
to judgments or foreclosure; consolidation of existing lots by deed or other
recorded instrument; and the conveyance of one or more adjoining lots,
tracts or parcels of land, owned by the same person or persons and all
of which are found and certified by the administrative officer to conform
to the requirements of the municipal development regulations and are
shown and designated as separate lots, tracts or parcels on the tax map
or atlas of the municipality. The term "subdivision" shall also include the
term "resubdivision." In the case of development of agricultural lands,
"development" means any activity that requires a state permit; any activity
reviewed by the County Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State Agricultural
Development Committee (SADC), and municipal review of any activity not
exempted by the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A 4:1C-1 et seq.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD
— A neighborhood given priority access to state resources through the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONES — A zone designated by the New Jersey
Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban Enterprise
Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et. seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Previously developed portions of areas
delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the Metropolitan
Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or Nodes; designated as
Urban Enterprise Zones; and designated as Urban Coordinating Council
Empowerment Neighborhoods.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams,
wetlands, and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
WETLANDS or WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surfacewater or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
§ 228-3. Design and performance standards for stormwater
management measures.
§ 228-2 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 228-3
228:554
§ 228-4. Stormwater management requirements for development.
A. Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality standards in
this chapter. To the maximum extent feasible, these standards shall be
met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater management strategies
into the design. If these strategies alone are not sufficient to meet these
standards, structural stormwater management measures necessary to
meet these standards shall be incorporated into the design.
B. The standards in this chapter apply to all new major development and
redevelopment and are intended to minimize the impact of stormwater
runoff on water quality and water quantity in receiving water bodies
and maintain groundwater recharge. The standards do not apply to new
major development to the extent that alternative design and
performance standards are applicable under a regional stormwater
management plan or water quality management plan adopted in
accordance with Department rules. Such alternative standards shall
provide at least as much protection from stormwater-related loss of
groundwater recharge, stormwater quantity and water quality impacts
of major development projects as would be provided under the
standards in this chapter.
C. For site improvements regulated under the Residential Site
Improvement Standards (RSIS) at N.J.A.C. 5:21, the RSIS shall apply in
addition to this chapter except to the extent the RSIS are superseded by
this chapter or alternative standards are applicable under a regional
stormwater management plan or water quality management plan
adopted in accordance with Department rules.
A. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures into the design of a major
development.
B. The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater
runoff quality requirements at Subsections E and F:
(1) The construction of an underground utility line, provided that the
disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
(2) The construction of an aboveground utility line, provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
(3) The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk
or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access
is made of permeable material.
C. A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
§ 228-3 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 228-4
228:555
requirements at Subsections E and F may be obtained for the
enlargement of an existing public roadway or railroad; or the
construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access, provided
that the following conditions are met:
(1) The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
(2) The applicant demonstrates through an alternatives analysis, that
through the use of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management strategies and measures, the option selected
complies with the requirements of Subsections E and F to the
maximum extent practicable;
(3) The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements
at Subsections E and F, existing structures currently in use, such as
homes and buildings, would need to be condemned; and
(4) The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under Subsection C(3) above within
the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream, that would
provide additional opportunities to mitigate for requirements of
Subsections E and F that were not achievable on site.
D. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
(1) To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in Subsections E
and F shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies at Subsection D into the design. The
applicant shall identify the nonstructural measures incorporated
into the design of the project. If the applicant contends that it is not
feasible for engineering, environmental, or safety reasons to
incorporate any nonstructural stormwater management measures
identified in Subsection D(2) below into the design of a particular
project, the applicant shall identify the strategy considered and
provide a basis for the contention.
(2) Nonstructural stormwater management measures incorporated
into site design shall:
(a) Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the
flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
(c) Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
(d) Minimize the decrease in the time of concentration from
preconstruction to postconstruction. "Time of concentration" is
defined as the time it takes for runoff to travel from the
§ 228-4 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 228-4
228:556
hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point
of interest within a watershed;
(e) Minimize land disturbance including clearing and grading;
(f) Minimize soil compaction;
(g) Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides;
(h) Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas; and
(i) Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site in order to prevent or
minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. These source controls include, but are not limited to:
[1] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems;
[2] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
[3] Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
[4] When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
(3) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in Subsections E and
F shall be dedicated to a government agency or homeowners'
association, subjected to a conservation restriction filed with the
appropriate County Clerk's office, or subject to an approved
equivalent restriction that ensures that measure or an equivalent
stormwater management measure approved by the reviewing
agency is maintained in perpetuity.
(4) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management measures is
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The manual is available on the Department of
Environmental Protection's stormwater web page at
http://www.njstormwater.org.
E. Erosion control, groundwater recharge and runoff quantity standards.
(1) This section contains minimum design and performance standards
to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and
§ 228-4 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 228-4
228:557
groundwater recharge, and control stormwater runoff quantity
impacts of major development.
(a) The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and
implementing rules.
(b) The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
[1] The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations in this section, either:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater management
measures maintain 100% of the average annual
preconstruction groundwater recharge volume for the
site; or
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff volume
from preconstruction to postconstruction for the twoyear
storm is infiltrated.
[2] This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to
projects within the urban redevelopment area or projects
subject to Subsection E(1)(b)[3] below.
[3] The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged
but shall be managed in accordance with applicable
federal and/or state regulations:
[a] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. High
pollutant loading areas are areas in industrial and
commercial developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored, or
applied, areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded
or stored; areas where hazardous materials are
expected to be present in greater than reportable
quantities as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR
302.4; areas where recharge would be inconsistent
with Department-approved remedial action work plan
and areas with high risks for spills of toxic materials,
such as gas stations and vehicle maintenance
facilities; and
[b] Industrial stormwater exposed to source material.
"Source material" means any material(s) or machinery
located at an industrial facility that is directly or
§ 228-4 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 228-4
228:558
indirectly related to process, manufacturing or other
industrial activities, which could be a source of
pollutants in any industrial stormwater discharge to
groundwater. Source materials include, but are not
limited to, raw materials; intermediate products; final
products; waste materials; byproducts; industrial
machinery and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and
detergents that are related to process, manufacturing,
or other industrial activities that are exposed to
stormwater.
[4] The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on
the groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid
adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a
naturally or seasonally high water table so as to cause
surficial ponding, flooding of basements, or interference
with the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal
systems and other subsurface structures in the vicinity or
downgradient of the groundwater recharge area. In order
to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the design
engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for
stormwater runoff calculations at § 228-5, complete one of
the following:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that for stormwater leaving the site,
postconstruction runoff hydrographs for the two-, ten-,
and one-hundred-year storm events do not exceed, at
any point in time, the preconstruction runoff
hydrographs for the same storm events;
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that there is no increase, as compared to the
preconstruction condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the two-, ten-, and onehundred-
year storm events and that the increased
volume or change in timing of stormwater runoff will
not increase flood damage at or downstream of the
site. This analysis shall include the analysis of impacts
of existing land uses and projected land uses assuming
full development under existing zoning and land use
ordinances in the drainage area;
[c] Design stormwater management measures so that the
postconstruction peak runoff rates for the two-, tenand
one-hundred-year storm events are 50, 75 and
80%, respectively, of the preconstruction peak runoff
rates. The percentages apply only to the
postconstruction stormwater runoff that is
§ 228-4 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 228-4
228:559
attributable to the portion of the site on which the
proposed development or project is to be constructed.
(2) Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the
definition of "major development" shall be submitted to the
Hudson-Essex-Passaic Soil Conservation District for review and
approval in accordance with the requirements of this section and
any Hudson-Essex-Passaic Soil Conservation District guidelines for
stormwater runoff quantity and erosion control. For the purposes of
this section, "agricultural development" means land uses normally
associated with the production of food, fiber and livestock for sale.
Such uses do not include the development of land for the
processing or sale of food and the manufacturing of agriculturally
related products.
F. Stormwater runoff quality standards.
(1) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
postconstruction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in stormwater
runoff by 80% of the anticipated load from the developed site,
expressed as an annual average. Stormwater management
measures shall only be required for water quality control if an
additional 1/4 acre of impervious surface is being proposed on a
development site. The requirement to reduce TSS does not apply to
any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated under a numeric
effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the New Jersey Pollution
Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in
a discharge specifically exempt under a NJPDES permit from this
requirement. The water quality design storm is 1.25 inches of
rainfall in two hours. Water quality calculations shall take into
account the distribution of rain from the water quality design
storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation of the volume of
runoff may take into account the implementation of nonstructural
and structural stormwater management measures.
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
§ 228-4 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 228-4
228:560
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
(2) For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in
accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 228-6, or found on the Department's website
at www.njstormwater.org. The BMP Manual and other sources of
technical guidance are listed in § 228-6. TSS reduction shall be
calculated based on the removal rates for the BMPs in Table 2
below. Alternative removal rates and methods of calculating
removal rates may be used if the design engineer provides
documentation demonstrating the capability of these alternative
rates and methods to the review agency. A copy of any approved
alternative rate or method of calculating the removal rate shall be
provided to the Department at the following address:
Division of Watershed Management
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
PO Box 418 Trenton, New Jersey, 08625-0418.
(3) If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required
80% TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize the
following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B — (A x B)/100
Where
R = Total TSS percent load removal from application of both
BMPs, and
A = The TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first BMP
B = The TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second BMP
§ 228-4 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 228-4
228:561
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS % Removal Rate
Bioretention systems 90
Constructed stormwater wetland 90
Extended detention basin 40-60
Infiltration structure 80
Manufactured treatment device See § 228-5C
Sand filter 80
Vegetative filter strip 60-80
Wet pond 50-90
(4) If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the 80% TSS
removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the runoff
from the subareas converge on site in which case the removal rate
can be demonstrated through a calculation using a weighted
average.
(5) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the postconstruction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm.
In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible,
the design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the performance standards in Subsections E and F.
(6) Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which may
be obtained from the address identified in § 228-7.
(7) In accordance with the definition of an "FW1 stream," at N.J.A.C.
7:9B-1.4, stormwater management measures shall be designed to
prevent any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as
FW1.
(8) Special water resource protection areas shall be established along
all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B and perennial
or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the
County Soil Surveys, within the associated HUC14 drainage. These
areas shall be established for the protection of water quality,
aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance, exceptional
recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance,
and exceptional fisheries significance of those established Category
One waters. These areas shall be designated and protected as
follows:
§ 228-4 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 228-4
228:562
(a) The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
[1] A three-hundred-foot special water resource protection
area shall be provided on each side of the waterway,
measured perpendicular to the waterway from the top of
the bank outwards or from the centerline of the waterway
where the bank is not defined, consisting of existing
vegetation or where vegetation allowed to follow natural
succession is provided.
[2] Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under Subsection F(1) above
shall only be allowed where previous development or
disturbance has occurred (for example, active agricultural
use, parking area or maintained lawn area). The
encroachment shall only be allowed where applicant
demonstrates that the functional value and overall
condition of the special water resource protection area will
be maintained to the maximum extent practicable. In no
case shall the remaining special water resource protection
area be reduced to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the top of bank of the waterway or
centerline of the waterway where the bank is undefined.
All encroachments proposed under this subsection shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(b) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through
the special water resource protection area and shall comply
with the Standard For Off-Site Stability in the "Standards for
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq.
(c) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
Standard For Off-Site Stability in the "Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq., then the stabilization measures in accordance
with the requirements of the above standards may be placed
within the special water resource protection area, provided
that:
[1] Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet
of the Category One waterway;
[2] Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this
section shall achieve a 95% TSS postconstruction removal
rate;
§ 228-4 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 228-4
228:563
[3] Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on
receiving waterway;
[4] The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent feasible;
[5] A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and Soil Conservation
District staff to identify necessary stabilization measures;
and
[6] All encroachments proposed under this section shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(d) A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as an
element of a regional stormwater management plan, or by a
municipality through an adopted municipal stormwater
management plan. If a stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to Subsection F(8) has been approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection, then the provisions
of the plan shall be the applicable special water resource
protection area requirements for that waterway. A stream
corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to Subsection
F(8) shall maintain or enhance the current functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection area
as defined in Subsection F(8)(a)[1] above. In no case shall a
stream corridor protection plan allow the reduction of the
Special Water Resource Protection Area to less than 150 feet
as measured perpendicular to the waterway subject to this
subsection.
G. Standards applicable to single-family lot development and minor
subdivisions.
(1) Where development of a single lot or of a subdivision of up to four
lots is proposed, no adverse drainage impact should occur to the
neighboring properties. This result shall be ensured by inclusion of
appropriate measures, which include direct connection of sump
pump and/or footing drainage to existing piped drainage.
Additionally, roof water (and driveway drainage if possible) shall be
managed by direct connection to existing piped drainage. If soils
are adequate, dry wells shall also be employed as a method to
manage increased runoff. The design and applicable use of dry
wells shall be in strict conformance with Chapter 9.3 of the NJDEP
BMP manual. Dry wells shall be accompanied by direct piping
installation designed to accept and manage overflow. Soils data and
volume calculations shall be provided with drywell design
§ 228-4 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 228-4
228:564
§ 228-5. Calculation of stormwater runoff and groundwater
recharge.
proposals to demonstrate both soil suitability and adequacy of the
design to manage anticipated flow.
(2) The Township Engineer shall have the authority to waive the
requirements for an individual lot, whereas the appropriate Board
with the advice of the Township Engineer shall have the right to
waive the requirements for subdivisions creating no more than four
lots.
A. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
(1) The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
(a) The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS
National Engineering Handbook Section 4 — Hydrology and
Technical Release 55 — Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds; or
(b) The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational
Method for hydrograph computations.
(2) For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater
recharge, there is a presumption that the preconstruction condition
of a site or portion thereof is a wooded land use with good
hydrologic condition. The term "runoff coefficient" applies to both
the NRCS methodology at Subsection A(1)(a) and the Rational and
Modified Rational Methods at Subsection A(1)(b). A runoff
coefficient or a groundwater recharge land cover for an existing
condition may be used on all or a portion of the site if the design
engineer verifies that the hydrologic condition has existed on the
site or portion of the site for at least five years without interruption
prior to the time of application. If more than one land cover has
existed on the site during the five years immediately prior to the
time of application, the land cover with the lowest runoff potential
shall be used for the computations. In addition, there is the
presumption that the site is in good hydrologic condition (if the
land use type is pasture, lawn, or park), with good cover (if the land
use type is woods), or with good hydrologic condition and
conservation treatment (if the land use type is cultivation).
(3) In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows, or
culverts, that may reduce preconstruction stormwater runoff rates
and volumes.
§ 228-4 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 228-5
228:565
§ 228-6. Standards for structural stormwater management
measures.
(4) In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design
engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or
volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces separately to
accurately compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff
from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected impervious
cover, urban impervious area modifications as described in the
NRCS Technical Release-55, Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds and other methods may be employed.
(5) If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management
measure is below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined
at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall take into account the
effects of tailwater in the design of structural stormwater
management measures.
B. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following: The New Jersey Geological Survey Geological Survey Report
GSR-32 A Method for Evaluating Ground- Water Recharge Areas in New
Jersey, incorporated herein by reference as amended and
supplemented. Information regarding the methodology is available
from the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual;
at http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at New Jersey Geological Survey,
29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427 Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0427; (609)
984-6587.
A. Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
(1) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
take into account the existing site conditions, including, for
example, environmentally critical areas, wetlands; flood-prone
areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high water table; soil type,
permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns; and
the presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
(2) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and
ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the
intake to the outlet structure as appropriate, and shall have parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars to the elevation of the
water quality design storm. For elevations higher than the water
quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure shall
be spaced no greater than 1/3 the width of the diameter of the
orifice or 1/3 the width of the weir, with a minimum spacing
between bars of one inch and a maximum spacing between bars of
six inches. In addition, the design of trash racks must comply with
the requirements of § 228-8D.
§ 228-5 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 228-6
228:566
(3) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and corrosion
resistant. Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions
of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3,
7.4, and 7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement.
(4) Stormwater management basins.
(a) At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management
basin, the orifice size shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in
diameter.
(b) Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins
at § 228-8.
(c) The depth of stormwater basins shall be designed to the
minimum depth practicable. Moreover to avoid public safety
concerns and to ensure that no inspection obligation will be
imposed on the Township, the depth and configuration of any
stormwater basin shall be designed to avoid classification as a
dam, as defined and regulated under NJDEP Dam Safety
standards.
(d) Except for single-family lot developments, the use of
underground basins, drywells and perforated pipes for the
purpose of detention or infiltration is discouraged because of
restricted access, which discourages proper maintenance.
However, if the applicant supplies sufficient justification to the
Township that there are no other reasonable alternatives, the
Township will allow their use provided that the applicant can
demonstrate compliance with the design standards contained
in applicable chapters of the NJDEP BMP manual.
(e) All stormwater management basins shall be designed and
constructed so as to minimize liability exposure and
maintenance requirements to the owner.
(f) Retention basins shall not be permitted on single-family lot
subdivision applications.
(5) Pipes and conduits.
(a) The design of pipes and conduits shall be by Manning's
equation for the twenty-five-year storm to determine capacity.
Runoff for pipe flow shall be calculated using the Rational
Method.
(b) Design velocities in pipes must be a minimum of three feet per
second to allow self-cleaning and a maximum of 15 feet per
second to prevent scouring of pipes, manholes, and inlets, and
to prevent erosion at points of discharge. When deviations
§ 228-6 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 228-6
228:567
from these standards are required because of physical terrain
or other features, the applicant's engineer shall bring the
specifics to the attention of the Township Engineer for special
consideration.
(c) Reinforced Concrete Pipe (RCP), Class 3 Wall B Tongue and
Groove shall be used, except where high velocities can be
slowed through the use of corrugated galvanized metal pipes
or corrugated aluminum pipes, only in areas without traffic
loads. Consideration will be given to High Density Polyethylene
Pipe (HDPE) in non-public right-of-way areas. Higher-class
pipe will be required where insufficient cover warrants. Pipes
shall be installed in accordance with manufacturer's
specifications.
(d) All storm drainage pipes shall be a minimum of 15 inches in
diameter unless specifically waived by the Township Engineer.
(6) Each road or project driveway shall have inlets spaced to efficiently
intercept stormwater so as to allow no gutter ponding greater than
three feet into the street or driveway during peak runoff periods in
the twenty-five-year storm. In no case shall inlets (or manholes) be
constructed more than 350 feet apart. Each low point along streets
or site plan driveways shall have double inlets on each side. Inlets
shall be placed and provisions shall be made so as to receive pipes
from each dwelling or building for sump-pump water discharge.
(7) Drainage structures shall be placed wherever storm drain pipes
intercept branch lines, change alignment, change grade, change in
pipe materials and wherever pipe sizes are increased. These
drainage structures shall have sufficient depth to prevent overflow
due to energy losses or change in flow directions. At locations of
questionable depth, the applicant's engineer may be required to
perform and submit detailed engineering analysis proving no
overflow.
(8) All new manholes and inlets shall be precast concrete or cast-inplace
concrete construction. Brick or block construction of new
manholes and inlets is prohibited unless specifically waived, by the
Township Engineer due to unusual and extraordinary
circumstances. Where new drainage is to be installed in proximity
to existing utilities, concrete inlet block may be used to permit
flexibility in setting invert elevations in the field. These structures
shall be coated with two coats of Portland cement mortar adhered
to the outside of the structure via bitumen mastic. Masonry brick
may only be used for vertical adjustment to rims and castings and
only for vertical adjustments of less than 12 inches.
(9) Bicycle-type grates shall be used in all areas where vehicular or
pedestrian traffic may be expected. The maximum capacity of a
curb inlet shall be six cubic feet per second (cfs). Area inlets in
§ 228-6 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 228-6
228:568
§ 228-7. Sources for technical guidance.
parking lots should be limited to three cubic feet per second. New
curb pieces shall prevent the introduction of floatable debris into
the stormwater management system. Where pipe connections of
more than 12 inches are to be attached to existing inlets, those
structures shall be retrofitted with new curb pieces matching those
utilized on site.
(10) Where existing ditches or streams are intercepted by a drainage
system, concrete headwalls shall be constructed with flared wing
walls and a splash pad. On the downstream or discharge end of a
drainage system, a concrete headwall or concrete flared end
section shall be constructed with corresponding erosion control
measures installed.
B. Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized provided the design
engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its design will
accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater recharge and
water quality design and performance standards established by this
subchapter.
C. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements
of this subchapter, provided the pollutant removal rates are verified by
the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced Technology and certified by
the Department.
A. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed at Subsection A(1) and (2) below, which
are available from Maps and Publications, Department of
Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton,
New Jersey, 08625; telephone (609) 777-1038.
(1) Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
as amended. Information is provided on stormwater management
measures such as: bioretention systems, constructed stormwater
wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand
filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
(2) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
B. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures
can be obtained from the following:
(1) The "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey" promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and
§ 228-6 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 228-7
228:569
§ 228-8. Safety standards for stormwater management basins.
incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be
obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee or
any of the Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4.
The location, address, and telephone number of each Soil
Conservation District may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625;
(609) 292-5540.
(2) The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, 732-932-9306.
A. This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety through
the proper design and operation of stormwater management basins.
This section applies to any new stormwater management basin..
B. The provisions of this section are not intended to preempt more
stringent municipal or county safety requirements for new or existing
stormwater management basins.
C. Requirements for trash racks, overflow grates and escape provisions.
(1) A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
(a) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than
six-inch spacing between the bars.
(b) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect
the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
(c) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of stage and
discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of the net
area of opening through the rack.
(d) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square feet.
(2) An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
(a) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
(b) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
§ 228-7 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 228-8
228:570
§ 228-9. Requirements for site development stormwater plan.
(c) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square feet.
(3) For purposes of this section, "escape provisions" means the
permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or other features
that provide easily accessible means of egress from stormwater
management basins. Stormwater management basins shall include
escape provisions as follows:
(a) If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure.
With the prior approval of the reviewing agency identified in
Subsection D a freestanding outlet structure may be exempted
from this requirement.
(b) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of
water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety ledges shall be
comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four to six feet in
width. One step shall be located approximately 2 1/2 feet below
the permanent water surface, and the second step shall be
located one to 1 1/2 feet above the permanent water surface.
(c) In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior
slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm shall not be
steeper than 3 horizontal to 1 vertical.
D. Variance or exemption from safety standards. A variance or exemption
from the safety standards for stormwater management basins may be
granted only upon a written finding by the appropriate reviewing
agency (municipality, county or Department) that the variance or
exemption will not constitute a threat to public safety.
A. Submission of site development stormwater plan.
(1) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to this chapter, the applicant shall submit all of the required
components of the Checklist for the Site Development Stormwater
Plan at Subsection C below as part of the submission of the
applicant's application for subdivision or site plan approval.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this chapter.
(3) The applicant shall submit 18 copies of the materials listed in the
checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance with
Subsection C of this chapter.
§ 228-8 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 228-9
228:571
B. Site development stormwater plan approval. The applicant's site
development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision or
site plan review process by the municipal board or official from which
municipal approval is sought. That municipal board or official shall
consult the engineer retained by the Planning and/or Zoning Board (as
appropriate) to determine if all the checklist requirements have been
satisfied for purposes of a completeness determination and to
determine if the project meets the standards set forth in this chapter.
C. Checklist requirements. The following information shall be required:
(1) Topographic base map. The reviewing engineer may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary. The
topographic base map of the site shall extend a minimum of 200
feet beyond the limits of the proposed development, at a scale of
one inch equals 200 feet or greater, showing two-foot contour
intervals. The map shall indicate the following: existing surface
water drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible soils,
perennial or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the
Category 1 waters, wetlands and floodplains along with their
appropriate buffer strips, marshlands and other wetlands, pervious
or vegetative surfaces, existing man-made structures, roads,
bearing and distances of property lines, and significant natural and
man-made features not otherwise shown.
(2) Environmental site analysis. A written and graphic description of
the natural and man-made features of the site and its environs. This
description shall include a discussion of soil conditions, slopes,
wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular
attention shall be given to unique, unusual, or environmentally
sensitive features and to those that provide particular
opportunities or constraints for development.
(3) Project description and site plan(s). A map (or maps) at the scale of
the topographical base map indicating the location of existing and
proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural
facilities for stormwater management and sediment control, and
other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show
areas where alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover,
including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high ground
water elevations. A written description of the site plan and
justification for proposed changes in natural conditions may also be
provided.
(4) Land use planning and source control plan. This plan shall provide
a demonstration of how the goals and standards of §§ 228-3
through 228-6 of this chapter are being met. The focus of this plan
shall be to describe how the site is being developed to meet the
objective of controlling groundwater recharge, stormwater quality
and stormwater quantity problems at the source by land
management and source controls whenever possible.
§ 228-9 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 228-9
228:572
§ 228-10. Maintenance and repair; violations and penalties.
(5) Stormwater management facilities map. The following information,
illustrated on a map of the same scale as the topographic base map,
shall be included:
(a) Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon, and
details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
(b) Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during
and after construction, including discharge provisions,
discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of
detention, and emergency spillway provisions with maximum
discharge capacity of each spillway.
(6) Calculations.
(a) Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations
for the predevelopment and postdevelopment conditions for
the design storms specified in § 228-4 of this chapter.
(b) When the proposed stormwater management control measures
(e.g., infiltration basins) depend on the hydrologic properties
of soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report
shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The
number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall
be determined based on what is needed to determine the
suitability and distribution of soil types present at the location
of the control measure.
(7) Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of § 228-10.
(8) Waiver from submission requirements. The municipal official or
board reviewing an application under this chapter may, in
consultation with the municipal engineer, waive submission of any
of the requirements in Subsection C(1) through (6) of this chapter
when it can be demonstrated that the information requested is
impossible to obtain or it would create a hardship on the applicant
to obtain and its absence will not materially affect the review
process.
A. Applicability. Projects subject to review as described in § 228-1C of this
chapter shall comply with the requirements of Subsection B, C and D.
B. General maintenance for proposed facilities.
§ 228-9 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 228-10
228:573
(1) This subsection shall be enforced by the governing body with the
assistance of the Township Engineer and the Township Health
Officer.
(2) The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development.
(3) The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris, or trash removal; and the name,
address, and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance (including
replacement). Maintenance guidelines for stormwater
management measures are available in the New Jersey Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan
identifies a person other than the developer (for example, a public
agency or homeowners' association) as having the responsibility for
maintenance, the plan shall include documentation of such
person's agreement to assume this responsibility, or of the
developer's obligation to dedicate a stormwater management
facility to such person under an applicable ordinance or regulation.
(4) Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred
to the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential
development or project, unless such owner or tenant owns or
leases the entire residential development or project.
(5) If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above is not a public agency, the maintenance plan
and any future revisions based on Subsection B(7) below shall be
recorded upon the deed of record for each property on which the
maintenance described in the maintenance plan must be
undertaken.
(6) Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of all stormwater management measures,
including repairs or replacement to the structures; removal of
sediment, debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and
ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
and repair or replacement of non-vegetated linings.
(7) The person responsible for maintenance required under Subsection
B(2) above shall maintain a detailed log of all preventative and
corrective maintenance for the structural stormwater management
measures incorporated into the design of the development,
including a record of all inspections and copies of all maintenancerelated
work orders.
(8) The person responsible for maintenance required under Subsection
B(2) above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the maintenance plan
at least once per year and adjust the plan and the deed as needed.
§ 228-10 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 228-10
228:574
(9) The person responsible for maintenance required under Subsection
B(2) above shall retain and make available, upon request by any
public entity with administrative, health, environmental, or safety
authority over the site, the maintenance plan and the
documentation required by Subsections B(6) and (7) above.
(10) The requirements of Subsection B(3) and (4) do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality or any other governmental agency.
(11) In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance, the responsible party shall take corrective action at
once to ensure that public access to the facility is barred, and
undertake the repairs and/or maintenance necessary to restore the
facility to safe, working condition. In the event the unsafe condition
and/or need for maintenance is noted by an inspector or officer of
the Township, the municipality shall so notify the person
responsible for facility repair and maintenance by telephone and in
writing. Upon receipt of such notice, the responsible person shall
have 24 hours to block public access to the facility and 14 days to
effect maintenance and repair of the facility in a manner that is
approved by the municipal engineer or his designee. If the
responsible person fails or refuses to perform such maintenance or
repair, the municipality or county may immediately proceed to do
so and shall bill the cost thereof to the responsible person.
C. General maintenance for existing facilities.
(1) Any detention/retention or infiltration basin hereinafter
constructed shall be regularly maintained in order to preserve its
function, capacity and appearance. Minimum standards for
maintenance shall be as follows:
(a) If intended to be a maintained bottom basin, then all grass or
other ground cover in the basin shall be kept mowed or
otherwise cut so as not to exceed a height of eight inches at
any time. The basin shall be kept clean and free of debris, litter
and leaves.
(b) All inlet and outlet structures, spillways and other
appurtenances shall at all times be kept free of any debris or
foreign material in order to prevent clogging or reduction in
performance.
(c) All embankments, dams and other lateral supports shall be
kept in a sound condition at all times.
(d) Any fence installed around the perimeter of the basin shall be
maintained in sound condition and shall be repaired or
replaced whenever needed.
§ 228-10 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 228-10
228:575
(2) Each detention/retention or infiltration basin shall be inspected
periodically, but not less than once in each calendar year, in order
to determine that adequate maintenance is being performed.
(3) It is the intent of this chapter to treat the existence of swales in a
similar fashion to that of storm piping, in that they shall not be
altered, relocated, filled, or damaged by any individual. Swales,
within easements either private or public, shall enjoy the same
protection in order to ensure that they function for their intended
purpose. Private stormwater easements on lots shall be maintained
by the individual property owner or designated homeowners'
association. Said maintenance includes normal mowing, cleaning of
debris, lawn clippings and leaves, etc., as appropriate and
necessary to allow the drainage component to function as
designed. Stormwater easements shall be filed with the County
Clerk and run with the land as an ongoing obligation to successors
in title. The Township of Cedar Grove shall be named as a party
with rights to enter upon and provide such maintenance only
should the property owner fail to do so and cause a public nuisance
or safety concern. In such event, the costs incurred by the
Township of Cedar Grove shall be assessed against the property.
(4) Once every five years, the property owner and /or responsible party
of any detention/retention or infiltration basin shall cause to be
performed an inspection of the basin and the preparation of a
written report by a professional engineer licensed in the State of
New Jersey and qualified in the field of hydrology and hydraulic
engineering and such other qualified persons as may be
appropriate. The time of inspection and the deadline for submission
of the written report shall be determined by the Township
Engineer. The written report shall be submitted to the Township
Engineer and shall address the following:
(a) The original storage volume or infiltration capacity and an
estimate of any change in storage volume or capacity, if any.
(b) A statement as to the structural integrity of embankments and
a description of any settlement or erosion on embankments or
in the basin and any siltation in the basin.
(c) The condition of all appurtenant structures and supports.
(d) Any changes in the tributary area upstream of the basin.
(e) Any changes in impervious coverage within the drainage area
upstream of the basin.
(f) Any changes in time of concentration of stormwater entering
the basin.
(g) An inspection of embankments for holes by burrowing animals.
§ 228-10 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 228-10
228:576
(h) An inspection of inlet and outlet structures for obstructions.
(i) The condition of fencing.
(j) Testing of movable structures and control devices, such as
gates, valves and mechanical and electrical equipment.
(k) Determination of any erosion downstream of the basin.
(l) Evidence of any significant health factors, including, but not
limited to, water pollution, excessive algae growth and insect
growth.
(m) Such other matters as the Township Engineer may direct.
(5) The five-year inspection report shall be reviewed by the Township
Engineer and the Township Health Officer, who may then make an
inspection of the detention/retention or infiltration basin. Any
deficiencies in the basin or any conditions found which are in
violation of this section shall be corrected within a reasonable
period of time, as specified by the Township Engineer, but not to
exceed 90 days. Any health violations or health problems shall be
corrected within a period not to exceed 30 days.
(6) If a property owner fails to take corrective action within the
specified period of time, the Township Engineer or Health Officer,
as the case may be, shall serve notice on the property owner and
shall notify the governing body, in which case the Council shall take
such action as it deems appropriate in the circumstances.
(7) Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which a
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
D. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
(1) Any responsible person who violates any portion or section of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to the following
penalties: a fine not to exceed $2,000 or by imprisonment in the
county jail for a period not to exceed 90 days or by both such fine
and imprisonment; and each violation of any of the provisions of
this section of the code and each day the same is violated shall be
deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct offense. [Amended
10-2-2006 by Ord. No. 06-653]
(2) Should any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or
phrase of this chapter of the code be adjudged by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect,
impair or invalidate the remainder thereof, but shall be confined in
its operation to the section, subsection, paragraph, sentence,
clause or phrase thereof directly involved in the controversy in
which said judgment shall have been rendered.
§ 228-10 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 228-10
228:577
Chapter 230
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Removal of brush and weeds from
sidewalks — See Ch. 100, Art. I.
Food-handling establishments — See Ch. 142.
Littering — See Ch. 168.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 179.
Parades — See Ch. 184.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 197.
Public improvement specifications — See Ch.
201.
Soil removal — See Ch. 226.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Removal of ice and snow — See N.J.S.A.
40:65-12.
Street openings and improvements — See
N.J.S.A. 40:67-1c.
Establishment of public streets — See N.J.S.A.
40:67-1a.
Construction of sidewalks and curbs — See
N.J.S.A. 40:65-1 et seq.
Street excavations — See N.J.S.A. 40:67-1c.
(3) Unless otherwise stated or required by the Board, all stormwater
management infrastructure shall be maintained by the property
owner or designated homeowners' association.
(4) Private stormwater easements on lots shall be maintained by the
individual property owner or designated homeowners association.
Said maintenance includes normal mowing, cleaning of debris,
lawn clippings and leaves, etc. as appropriate and necessary to
allow the drainage component to function as designed. Stormwater
easements shall be filed with the County Clerk and run with the
land as an ongoing obligation to successors in title. The Township
of Cedar Grove shall be named as a party with rights to enter upon
and provide such maintenance only should the property owner fail
to do so and cause a public nuisance or safety concern. In such
event, the costs incurred by the Township of Cedar Grove shall be
assessed against the property.
§ 228-10 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 228-10
230:578
ARTICLE I
Removal of Ice and Snow
[Adopted by 3-1-1954, Ch. 20, Art. I, of the former Revised
Ordinances]
§ 230-1. Responsibility for removal. [Amended 2-6-1995 by Ord. No.
95-455]
The owner, occupant or tenant of premises abutting or bordering upon any
street in the Township shall remove all snow and ice from the abutting
sidewalks of any such street within 24 hours after the same shall have
ceased to have fallen or have formed thereon or, in the case of ice which
may be so frozen to the sidewalks as to make removal impracticable,
shall cause the same to be thoroughly covered with sand or other suitable
material.
§ 230-2. Throwing snow or ice upon streets or sidewalks prohibited.
No person, including the owner, tenant or occupant of any premises
abutting upon any street, shall throw, place or deposit any snow or ice into
or upon any street or sidewalk in the Township without specific permission
of the Township. It is the intent and purpose of this section to prohibit all
persons from throwing, casting, placing or depositing snow or ice which
accumulated within the private property belonging to said persons upon the
sidewalks or streets of the Township without the specific permission of the
Township.
§ 230-3. Removal by Township in case of noncompliance;
assessment of cost.
In any case in which snow or ice shall not be removed from any sidewalk
as required in § 230-1 or shall be cast, deposited, thrown or placed upon
any sidewalk or street in violation of § 230-2, such snow or ice shall be
forthwith removed by or under the direction of the Township Engineer. The
cost thereof shall be certified by the Township Engineer to the Council,
which shall examine such certificate of cost and, if it finds said certificate
to be correct, shall cause such cost to be charged against the real estate so
abutting upon such sidewalk. In the event that such cost is excessive, the
Council shall cause the reasonable cost thereof to be charged against said
real estate. The amount so charged shall thereupon become a lien and tax
upon said real estate and be added to and be a part of the taxes next to be
assessed and levied thereon, and enforced and collected, with interest at
the same rate as other taxes, by the same officers and in the same manner
as other taxes.
§ 230-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-17-1962; 7-30-1984
by Ord. No. 84-222; 10-23-2006 by Ord. No. 06-656]
A. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000 or by
§ 230-1 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 230-4
230:579
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
B. The imposition and collection of any penalty imposed by the provisions
of Subsection A of this section shall not constitute any bar to the right of
the Township to collect the cost of removal as provided in § 230-3.
§ 230-4 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 230-4
230:580
ARTICLE II
Opening and Improvement of Streets
[Adopted by 2-15-1954, Ch. 20, Art. 6, of the former Revised
Ordinances]
§ 230-5. Permit required.
Whenever an individual owner or a developer or a group of owners desire
to open or improve a street which is heretofore or hereafter to be dedicated
to public use and which would not come under Chapter 234, Subdivision of
Land, they shall first obtain a permit from the Township Council.
§ 230-6. Application procedure; contents of application.
Before any such street opening or improvement is begun, the owner,
developer or person desiring to make such opening or improvement shall
make an application for a permit in writing to the Council. The application
shall contain or have attached thereto the following:
§ 230-7. Violations and penalties. [Added 12-17-1962; amended
7-30-1984 by Ord. No. 84-222; 10-23-2006 by Ord. No. 06-656]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000 or by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
A. A map or survey showing the exact location of the street to be opened
or improved and its relation to the nearest accepted existing and
proposed street.
B. Three copies of a profile map and specifications showing the grade of
the street and the location therein of all other public improvements
determined to be necessary by the Township Council in accordance
with Chapter 201, Public Improvement Specifications, and the official
Township specifications. The Township Council, in requiring the
installation of improvements, may utilize the requirements set forth
under Chapter 234, Subdivision of Land, where deemed appropriate.
Wherever required, proof shall be submitted of the legal right to
dispose of drainage in the manner and at the place or places proposed.
C. A performance guaranty equal to that called for under Chapter 234
Subdivision of Land, shall be posted with the Township in an amount
not less than the estimated cost of the improvements as determined by
the Township Engineer, and a contract shall be written with the owner
or owners setting forth their obligations and giving the Township the
right to call upon the cash deposit to complete any unfinished work
after a stipulated date of completion.
§ 230-5 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 230-7
230:581

ARTICLE III
Street Acceptances
[Adopted by 7-2-1956, Ch. 20, Art. 7, of the former Revised
Ordinances]
§ 230-8. Compliance required.
Before any street now or hereafter dedicated to public use is accepted
by the Council as a public street, the conditions and requirements of this
article, including those relating to street improvements, must be complied
with as hereinafter set forth.
§ 230-9. Approval of location and dimensions.
The location and dimension of the street and other public improvements
shall be approved by the Township Planning Board in conformity with
official Township specifications, Chapter 234, Subdivision of Land, and the
Master Plan adopted by the Planning Board.
§ 230-10. Approval of engineering details.
The Township Engineer shall furnish the Council with written approval or
certification as to all engineering details, including certification that the
road or street and all other improvements have been installed according
to all Township specifications and ordinances and in accordance with
requirements of the Planning Board.
§ 230-11. Execution of deed; accompanying map and maintenance
bond. [Added 2-1-1960]
After any street is completed and approved and certified as set forth in
§ 230-10, a deed shall be properly executed by the owner or owners of all
land lying within the bed of the street conveying said land lying within the
bed of the street to the Township in fee simple and free of all encumbrances,
including taxes and assessments. The said executed deed shall be
accompanied by:
A. Three maps accurately delineating the street and showing the location
of all utilities.
B. A maintenance bond issued by a surety company licensed to do
business in New Jersey and having an office in Essex County upon
whom service of process may be made. Said bond shall be in an amount
equal to 1/4 of the cost of the public improvements installed or made in
or on said street. Said bond shall contain a condition requiring the
principal named therein to maintain said street and other public
improvements and make all necessary repairs therein resulting from
defects in workmanship and materials and the construction thereof for
a period of five years from the date of acceptance of said street.
§ 230-8 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 230-12
230:583
§ 230-12. Waiver of certain requirements. [Added 2-1-1960]
The Council may waive requirements of this article relating to the
installation of sidewalks, curbs and the width of streets whenever it appears
that the strict application of said requirements would result in peculiar and
exceptional practical difficulties to or exceptional and undue hardship upon
the owner or owners of the property or properties involved, and a showing,
by proof, of exceptional topographic conditions or engineering difficulties.
§ 230-13. Powers of Planning Board unaffected. [Added 2-1-1960]
No provision of this article shall be deemed to affect the powers of the
Township Planning Board conferred pursuant to Chapter 234, Subdivision
of Land, and the amendments thereof and supplements thereto.
§ 230-12 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 230-13
230:584
ARTICLE IV
Sidewalk and Curb Construction; Right-of-Way Maintenance
[Adopted by 7-16-1962, Ch. 20, Art. 8, of the former Revised
Ordinances]
§ 230-14. Repair or replacement of sidewalks and driveway aprons
by owner required; maintenance of right-of-way. [Amended 4-2-1973
by Ord. No. 73-5]
§ 230-15. Determination that work on sidewalks and driveway
aprons needs to be done; notice to owner. [Amended 4-2-1973 by
Ord. No. 73-5; 4-15-1985 by Ord. No. 85-237]
Whenever the Council determines that the sidewalk or driveway apron
repair work described in § 230-14A is necessary, they shall cause notice
thereof, signed by the Township Engineer, to be served upon the owner
of the land, directing him to do the work within 30 days after service
of the notice. In addition, the notice shall specify in sufficient detail the
character of the improvement, reconstruction or repair to be made; set
forth a description of the property affected, sufficiently definite to identify
it; and give opportunity to the owner to be heard within said thirty-day
period and to offer satisfactory reason why such work should not be done.
The notice, service and proof of service thereof shall be made in accordance
with the requirements of N.J.S.A. 40:65-1 et seq., as amended.
§ 230-16. Work to be done by Township at expense of owner upon
failure to comply.
If the owner of the land has failed to make such improvement,
reconstruction or repair within 30 days after service of the notice to do so,
as described in § 230-15, and has failed to show good and sufficient reason
why such work should not be done, the Council may have the work done at
the cost and expense of the owner. The Township Engineer shall keep an
accurate account of the cost thereof. If the cost or any part thereof is to
be assessed upon the several properties fronting on the improvement, he
A. Subject to the provisions of § 230-15, any sidewalk or driveway apron,
on any public street, which is out of line or grade or broken or out of
repair or is otherwise in need of reconstruction or repair shall be relaid
to line or grade or the broken portions thereof shall be repaired or
reconstructed by the owner or owners of the land in front of which any
such improvement, reconstruction or repair is to be made (hereinafter
referred to in this article as the "owner of the land").
B. The owner of premises abutting a street right-of-way in the Township
shall not allow or cause the construction or placement of any
permanent structure, or planting of any plant life and allowing such
plant life to grow higher than 24 inches, in the street right-of-way in
front of such property without the approval of the Township Council.
[Added 4-15-1985 by Ord. No. 85-237]
§ 230-14 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 230-16
230:585
shall assess such costs on them in proportion to the respective frontages
thereon and shall file a report thereof, under oath, with the Township Clerk.
The Council, after notice to the owner or owners of the time and place
for examination of the report, shall examine such report and, if properly
made, confirm and file it with the Tax Collector. Such assessments shall
bear interest from the date set at the time of confirmation and at the rate
specified for delinquent real estate taxes, and shall be a lien on the real
estate assessed.
§ 230-17. Payment of assessments in installments.
An assessment made under this article may, in the discretion of the Council,
be paid in equal yearly installments, not exceeding five, with legal interest
thereon, reserving to the owner the right to prepay any balance, with
accrued interest thereon, at one time.
§ 230-18. Compliance with construction and repair specifications.
The regulations specified in §§ 230-19 to 230-25, both inclusive, shall apply
in connection with the construction or repair of sidewalks, driveway aprons
and curbs, and the persons affected thereby shall comply therewith.
§ 230-19. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or cause to be removed or to
repair or cause to be repaired or to construct or cause to be constructed any
sidewalk, driveway apron or curb or part thereof, unless a permit therefor
is first obtained from the office of the Township Engineer.
§ 230-19.1. Fees. [Added 2-1-1982 by Ord. No. 82-174]
The fee for said permit required by the provisions of § 230-19 shall be $10.
§ 230-20. Contents of application for permit.
The application for a permit under this article shall be signed by the owner
of the land or his agent. The application shall state specifically the work
to be performed, the place where the work is to be performed, the date of
beginning and completion of said work, the address of the owner of the land
or his agent and the name and address of the contractor who is to do the
work.
§ 230-21. Lights and barriers to guard construction.
The permittee, during the period of the removal or construction of any
sidewalk, driveway apron or curb or part thereof, shall safely guard the
space of such removal or construction during the time between sunset and
sunrise with appropriate barriers and a lighted lantern securely placed at
each end of the space of operation.
§ 230-16 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 230-22
230:586
§ 230-22. Grading; removal of obstructions; location and size of
driveway entrances.
§ 230-23. Excavation of trenches.
Trenches shall be excavated and shaped to the proper depth and grade as
directed by the Township Engineer. They shall conform with stakes set by
the Township Engineer for that purpose.
§ 230-24. Materials and workmanship to comply with specifications.
Materials and workmanship for curbs, sidewalks and driveway aprons shall
be in accordance with written specifications on file in the office of the
Township Engineer.
§ 230-25. Notice to Township Engineer to allow for inspection.
The permittee shall give the Township Engineer at least 24 hours' notice
of the time of pouring any sidewalk, driveway apron or curb, so that the
Township Engineer may adequately inspect the same and require laboratory
tests at the permittee's expense.
§ 230-26. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-17-1962;
7-30-1984 by Ord. No. 84-222; 10-23-2006 by Ord. No. 06-656]
A. The permittee or his contractor shall, without additional cost to the
Township, do all necessary grading for curbs or sidewalks and remove
all existing obstructions.
B. The location of driveway entrances to properties shall be as directed by
the Township Engineer. Any curb to be depressed for driveway
openings shall be completely removed and reconstructed. Sidewalk and
driveway grades shall be in accordance with construction details as
established by the Township Engineer. No driveway curb opening in a
residential area shall be in excess of 20 feet. No driveway curb opening
in a commercial or industrial area shall be any greater than 30 feet,
except that in commercial or industrial areas the Township Engineer
may approve rounding of aprons between the curb and the sidewalk of
up to three feet on each side, giving a maximum total cut at the curb of
36 feet and narrowing to a maximum of 30 feet at the sidewalk or five
feet from the curb, whichever is closer. In commercial or industrial
areas, when the opening is on a state or county highway, such approval
by the Township Engineer shall be subject to review and final approval
by either the New Jersey State Highway Department or the Essex
County Highway Department, whichever Department shall have
jurisdiction. [Amended 2-20-1967 by Ord. No. 67-5]
A. Any person who violates any provision of §§ 230-19 to 230-25, both
inclusive, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not
exceeding $2,000 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days,
§ 230-22 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 230-26
230:587
or both. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
B. Any person who violates any provisions of §§ 230-14 or 230-15 shall,
upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000 or
by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues. The penalty provided by this subsection
shall not be exclusive. The imposition and collection of a penalty
imposed for a violation of §§ 230-14 or 230-15 under this subsection
shall not constitute a bar to the right of the Township to proceed under
the terms of § 230-16, and the fact that the Township may proceed
under § 230-16 shall not bar the right of the Township to proceed to
attempt to impose a penalty under this subsection. [Added 4-15-1985
by Ord. No. 85-237]
§ 230-26 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 230-26
230:588
ARTICLE V
Street Excavations
[Adopted by 8-20-1962, Ch. 20, Art. 9, of the former Revised
Ordinances]
§ 230-27. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EMERGENCY CIRCUMSTANCE — Any unforeseen circumstance or
occurrence, the existence of which constitutes a clear and immediate
danger to persons or properties.
ENGINEER or TOWNSHIP ENGINEER — The person in charge of the Public
Works Department and street operations in the Township or his authorized
deputy, representative or inspector.
PERSON — Includes any natural person, partnership, firm, association,
utility, corporation or authority created pursuant to statute.
§ 230-28. Permit required; emergency conditions.
§ 230-29. Permits restricted to person to whom issued and to
location for which issued.
No permit issued under this article shall be transferable from one person to
another, nor shall the work to be performed under said permit be made in
any place other than the location specifically designated in the permit.
§ 230-30. Application procedure; accompanying documents; fees.
Application for a permit under this article shall be made, in writing, to the
Township Engineer on such form as he shall prescribe. The application shall
be accompanied by the following:
A. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection B of this section, applicable
to emergency circumstances, no person shall make any tunnel,
pavement cut, opening or excavation of any kind in or under the surface
of any street without first securing a permit for each separate
undertaking from the Township Engineer in accordance with the
provisions of this article.
B. Any person maintaining pipes, lines or other underground facilities in
or under the surface of any street may proceed with an opening in the
street without first obtaining a permit as required by Subsection A of
this section when emergency circumstances demand the work to be
done immediately and the permit could not reasonably and practically
have been obtained beforehand. In such case, application for a permit
shall be made to the Township Engineer on the first regular business
day on which the office of the Engineer is open for business and said
permit shall be retroactive to the date when the work was begun.
§ 230-27 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 230-30
230:589
§ 230-31. Conditions required for issuance of permit.
No permit, described in § 230-28A, shall be issued by the Township
Engineer and no work authorized by such permit shall be commenced,
unless and until:
§ 230-32. Notice to affected property owners.
If the work to be undertaken by the applicant is such that it will affect
the use of properties abutting or adjoining the project or subsurface
installations in the vicinity of the proposed work for which a permit is
sought, the Township Engineer shall require the permittee to submit
evidence in affidavit form that the permittee has served a notice of the
proposed opening upon the owners and tenants of such properties and
subsurface installations personally or by registered or certified mail, return
receipt requested.
§ 230-33. Deposit requirements and regulations.
A. A plan, in duplicate, showing the work to be performed under the said
permit, one copy of which shall be returned to the applicant if the
application and plan are approved and when the permit is issued.
B. An agreement, signed by the applicant, to save the Township, its
officers, employees and agents harmless of and from any and all costs,
charges and liabilities which may accrue or be claimed to accrue by
reason of any work performed under the said permit; provided,
however, that notwithstanding the absence of such accompanying
agreement, the acceptance of a permit issued under this article shall be
deemed to constitute and effect such an agreement by the applicant.
C. A permit fee of $5; provided, however, that public utilities or authorities
may elect to be billed monthly for such fees as they accrue.
A. The Township Engineer has approved the application and
accompanying plan.
B. The applicant has paid the prescribed permit fee.
C. The applicant has posted a deposit in accordance with the requirements
of § 230-33 hereof.
D. The applicant has furnished a performance bond in accordance with
§ 230-34 hereof.
E. The applicant has furnished a certificate of liability insurance in
accordance with the requirements of § 230-35 hereof.
A. Use and purpose of deposit. The purpose of requiring a deposit under
this article, and the use to be made thereof, is:
(1) To cover the Township's cost of inspecting the work authorized by
the permit.
§ 230-30 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 230-33
230:590
(2) To reimburse the Township for the cost of any labor and materials
furnished by it in connection with restoration or repairs of any
street damaged by the work authorized by the permit.
(3) To cover the Township's cost and expense of maintenance of the
work, authorized by the permit, for one year following completion
thereof.
B. Determination of amount above the minimum of $50; yearly deposit by
public utilities or authorities. Upon receipt of a properly completed
application, the Township Engineer shall determine the amount of the
deposit to be made by the applicant prior to the issuance of the permit,
but in no event shall the deposit be less than $50. Whenever any public
utility or authority shall anticipate more than one street opening or
excavation per calendar year, such utility or authority may post one
deposit for the calendar year or part thereof in an amount determined
by the Township Engineer.
C. No deposit required where certain performance bond furnished. In the
event that a public utility or authority furnishes the Township, prior to
the receipt of a permit, with a performance bond for the current year, in
the amount of $5,000, guaranteeing compliance with all the provisions
of this article, no deposit as required by the foregoing provisions of this
section shall be required of such public utility or authority; and, in such
case, said performance bond shall be deemed to be in lieu of all deposits
required by this section.
D. Payment or recovery of additional amount to meet deficiency. If any
deposit is less than sufficient to pay all costs, following the issuance of
the permit, the permittee shall, upon demand, pay to the Township an
amount equal to the deficiency. If the permittee fails or refuses to pay
such deficiency, the Township may institute an action to recover the
same in any court of competent jurisdiction. Until such deficiency is
paid in full, no additional permits shall be issued to such permittee.
E. Refund of deposit. One year following notification by the permittee that
all work authorized by the permit has been completed and after
restoration of the opening, the Engineer shall authorize the refund to
the permittee of his deposit, less all costs incurred by the Township in
connection with said permit. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed
to authorize a refund of the permit fee.
F. Conclusive effect of Engineer's decision on costs. The decision of the
Engineer as to the cost of any work done or repairs made by him or
under his direction, pursuant to the provisions of this article, shall be
final and conclusive.
G. Adoption of schedule of charges for inspection and other costs that
Township may incur. The Engineer is authorized to establish a schedule
of charges for inspections, labor, materials and such other expenses as
may be incurred by the Township in meeting the requirements of this
article. The schedule shall be open to public inspection in the office of
§ 230-33 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 230-33
230:591
§ 230-34. Performance bond requirements and regulations.
§ 230-35. Insurance requirements and regulations.
the Engineer, upon demand, and shall be adopted in the same fashion
as street opening regulations under § 230-43.
A. Form, amount, terms and conditions of bond. Each applicant, prior to
the receipt of a permit, shall provide the Township with an acceptable
corporate surety bond to guarantee faithful performance of the work to
be done by the permittee. The amount of the bond shall be 100% of the
estimated cost of the work to be done by the permittee. The term of the
bond shall begin upon the date of posting thereof and shall terminate
upon the receipt by the permittee of a certificate from the Engineer that
the work is satisfactorily completed. If the permittee anticipates
requesting more than one permit per year as required by this article, he
may furnish one continuing corporate surety bond to guarantee faithful
performance in such amount as the Engineer deems necessary. The
amount of such bond shall be in relation to the cost of restoring
pavement cuts to be made by the permittee throughout the year.
B. Default in performance; notice of default; contents of notice. Whenever
the Engineer shall find that a default has occurred in the performance
of any term or condition of the permit, written notice thereof shall be
given to the principal and to the surety on the bond. Such notice shall
state the work to be done, the estimated cost thereof and the period of
time deemed by the Engineer to be reasonably necessary for the
completion of such work.
C. Duty of surety to cure default or indemnify Township for its cost. After
receipt of such notice the surety must, within the time therein specified,
either cause the required work to be performed or, failing therein,
indemnify the Township for the cost of doing the work as set forth in the
notice.
D. Option of public utility or authority to furnish bond in alternative form
and amount in lieu of the provisions of this section. Notwithstanding the
requirements of Subsections A through C of this section, and in lieu
thereof, a public utility or authority may, prior to the receipt of a permit,
provide the Township with an acceptable corporate surety performance
bond for the current year, in the amount of $5,000, guaranteeing
compliance with all provisions of this article.
A. Each applicant, prior to receipt of a permit, shall provide the Township
with an acceptable certificate of insurance indicating that he is insured
against claims for damages for personal injury as well as against claims
for property damage which may arise from or out of the performance of
the work, whether such performance be by himself, his subcontractor
or anyone directly or indirectly employed by him.
§ 230-33 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 230-35
230:592
§ 230-36. Time within which work must be commenced.
§ 230-37. Work limited by permit; allowable extension.
No person to whom a permit has been granted shall perform any of the
work authorized by such permit in any amount of quantity greater than that
specified in the permit; except that, upon the approval by the Engineer,
additional work may be done under the provisions of the permit in any
amount not greater than 10% of the amount specified in the permit. Any
deposit and bond posted in connection with the original permit shall be
deemed to cover any such additional work as may be approved pursuant to
this section within the aforesaid ten-percent limitation.
§ 230-38. Display of permit at site.
Every permittee shall, at all times, keep or cause to be kept the permit
and an approved copy of the plan at the location for which said permit was
granted and while the work authorized by such permit is in progress. The
permittee shall produce and exhibit said permit and plan upon demand of a
representative of the Public Works Department or of the police authorities.
§ 230-39. Additional restrictions on work on recently paved or
improved streets.
B. Such insurance shall cover collapse, explosive hazards and
underground work by equipment on the street and shall include
protection against liability arising from completed operations.
C. The amount of the insurance shall be prescribed by the Engineer in
accordance with the nature of the risk involved; provided, however, that
the liability insurance in effect for bodily injury shall be in an amount
not less than $250,000 for each person and $500,000 for each accident
and, for property damages, shall be in an amount not less than
$100,000 for all accidents or a single limit liability coverage of not less
than $500,000. [Amended 1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 77-64]
D. Public utilities and authorities may be relieved of the obligation of
submitting such certificates of insurance if they are in fact insured in
accordance with the requirements of this section.
A. Except as otherwise provided in § 230-39A hereof, the work for which a
permit has been issued under this article shall commence within 45
days of the issuance of said permit, in default of which the permit shall
be automatically terminated, unless the said time for the
commencement of the work shall be extended by the Township
Engineer upon an application therefor in writing, made prior to the
expiration of the forty-five-day period, setting forth the reasons for the
requested extension.
B. Permits terminated pursuant to the provisions of Subsection A hereof
may be renewed upon the payment of an additional permit fee of $5.
§ 230-35 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 230-39
230:593
§ 230-40. Expiration of permit; extensions.
Every permit shall expire at the end of the period of time which shall be
set out in the permit. If the permittee shall be unable to complete the work
within the specified time, he shall, prior to expiration of the permit, present
in writing to the Engineer a request for an extension of time, setting forth
therein the reasons for the requested extension. If such an extension is
necessary and not contrary to the public interest, the permittee may be
granted additional time by the Engineer for the completion of the work.
§ 230-41. Revocation of permit; completion of work by Township.
A. If the Township determines to pave or improve any street after August
20, 1962, notice of its intention to undertake said work shall first be
given to all persons owning property abutting on said street and to all
public utilities and authorities operating in the Township. Within 30
days of the giving of such notice, unless extended by the Township
Engineer following written request therefor, such persons, including
public utilities and authorities, shall make all connections, installations
and repairs which would necessitate an excavation or opening of said
street and shall comply with all the provisions of this article including,
but not by way of limitation, the application and permit requirements
and procedures.
B. No permit which would authorize an excavation or opening in a paved
or improved street surface less than five years old shall be issued by the
Township Engineer to any person, including a public utility or authority,
given the notice described in Subsection A of this section, unless the
applicant therefor can demonstrate that public health or safety requires
that the proposed work be permitted or unless an emergency
circumstance or condition exists. In the event that such permit is
issued, an additional penalty charge shall be made for the opening,
except that the penalty shall be waived in the event that the work is of
an emergency nature. The penalty charge shall be on a sliding scale and
shall be equal to 2% of the cost of restoring the opening for each
unelapsed month or fraction thereof of the five-year restricted period.
A. Any permit issued under this article may be revoked by the Township
Engineer, after giving notice as provided in Subsection B hereof, upon
any of the following grounds:
(1) Violation of any condition of the permit or of any provision of this
article.
(2) Violation of any provision of any other applicable ordinance or law
relating to the work.
(3) Existence of any condition or the doing of any act constituting or
creating a nuisance or endangering the lives or property of others.
§ 230-39 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 230-41
230:594
§ 230-42. Information showing installation of underground utilities
to be filed.
§ 230-43. Promulgation and publication of rules and regulations.
B. No permit shall be revoked unless written notice to that effect shall first
be served upon the permittee or his agent engaged in the work for
which a permit has been granted. The notice shall contain a brief
statement of the grounds relied upon for revoking the permit. In the
discretion of the Township Engineer, the notice may contain a provision
granting the permittee three days, from the date of service, to correct
the violation or condition constituting the grounds for the revocation, in
default of which the revocation will become effective, and to proceed
with the diligent prosecution of the work authorized by the permit.
C. When the permit has been revoked and the work authorized by the
permit has not been completed, the Engineer shall do such work as may
be necessary to complete such work as was authorized by the permit
and to restore the street or part thereof to as good condition as before
the opening was made. All expenses incurred by the Township shall be
recovered from the deposit or bond the permittee has made or filed
with the Township.
A. On or before August 20, 1964, every person owning, using, controlling
or having an interest in pipes, conduits, ducts or other structures under
the surface of any street, used for the purpose of supplying or
conveying gas, electricity, communication impulses, water or steam to
or from the Township or to or from its inhabitants, or for any other
purposes, shall file with the Township Engineer accurate information
showing the location, size and description of all such installations.
B. Thereafter, and within 30 days after January 1 of each and every year,
commencing with the year 1965, such person shall file with the
Township Engineer additional information showing such installations,
including all those made or abandoned during the previous year;
provided, however, that if no additions have been made to its
installation during the previous year, a public utility or authority may
file with the Engineer a written statement to that effect, within the said
thirty-day period. A public utility or authority may elect to provide the
said additional information throughout the year as it is available rather
than proceed on the annual basis above provided.
A. The Township Engineer is hereby authorized and directed to adopt such
written rules and regulations as may be necessary for the
implementation and enforcement of the provisions of this article. Such
rules and regulations shall include but shall not be limited to:
(1) Limitations on the size of an opening.
(2) Restrictions for the protection of existing subsurface installations,
monuments and drainage systems.
§ 230-41 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 230-43
230:595
§ 230-44. Nonapplicability to state or county highways.
The provisions of this article shall not be applicable in those instances
where the highway is maintained by the State of New Jersey or by the
County of Essex.
§ 230-45. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-17-1962]
(3) Requirements for the storage and removal of excavated materials.
(4) Designation of safety precautions to be taken by the permittee.
(5) Restrictions as to the periods of day when the work may be
performed.
(6) Requirements for backfilling, inspecting and restoring of openings.
B. Any regulations adopted by the Township Engineer shall become
effective within 30 days after submission to and approval by resolution
of the Council.
C. The regulations adopted by the Engineer and approved by the Township
Council shall be published once in the official newspaper of the
Township. Copies of the published regulations shall be placed on file in
the offices of the Township Clerk and Township Engineer and shall
remain on file in each of said offices for the use and examination of the
public so long as they remain in effect.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000 or by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues. [Amended 7-30-1984 by Ord. No.
84-222; 10-23-2006 by Ord. No. 06-656]
B. The penalty provided for in this section shall be deemed to be in
addition to the provisions for revocation of permits set forth in § 230-41
and for the penalty charge set forth in § 230-39.
§ 230-43 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 230-45
230:596
ARTICLE VI
Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited
[Adopted by 2-20-1978 as Ord. No. 78-67]
§ 230-46. Prohibited acts.
§ 230-47. Presumptive evidence of violations.
§ 230-48. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-23-2006 by Ord.
No. 06-656]
The general penalty section of the Township Ordinances, § 1-3, shall apply
to any violation of the provisions of this article prohibiting drinking of
alcoholic beverages in public places.
A. No person shall drink or consume any alcoholic beverage upon any
public street, sidewalk or right-of-way in the Township of Cedar Grove.
B. No person shall aid, assist or encourage any person to drink or consume
any alcoholic beverage in violation of Subsection A above.
C. No parent, guardian or other person having legal or other custody or
control over any other persons shall permit or suffer such person to
drink or consume any alcoholic beverage in violation of Subsection A
above.
A. Any person who is in the physical possession of any alcoholic beverage
which is not in a sealed container shall be presumed to have drunk or
consumed the alcoholic beverage in violation of § 230-46, which
presumption shall, however, be rebuttable by competent evidence.
B. Occupants of a motor vehicle shall be presumed to be in physical
possession of any unsealed container containing an alcoholic beverage
in accordance with Subsection A of this section when such alcoholic
beverage is found in the passenger area of the vehicle accessible to said
occupants. The presumption shall, however, be rebuttable by
competent evidence.
§ 230-46 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 230-48
230:597

ARTICLE VII
Outdoor Sidewalk Cafes
[Adopted 3-20-2000 by Ord. No. 00-527]
§ 230-49. Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of this article is to allow portions of the public
sidewalks in front of eating establishments to be used for sidewalk dining
subject to issuance of a sidewalk dining license and strict compliance
with all conditions set forth herein. This limited authorization to use the
public sidewalks is intended to advance the public purposes of stimulating
economic activity and providing amenities in the business districts of the
Township of Cedar Grove, and such authorization shall be solely in the
nature of a revocable license which shall not be deemed to vest licensees
with any property interest or other rights in the public sidewalks.
§ 230-50. License required.
No person shall engage in or allow sidewalk dining on any public sidewalk
without having first obtained a sidewalk dining license.
§ 230-51. Application for license.
An application, sworn to by the applicant, for a sidewalk dining license
shall be filed annually with the Township Clerk on forms supplied by the
Clerk. The forms shall require the following information and such additional
information as deemed necessary:
§ 230-52. Application review.
A. The name of the applicant, and the address.
B. The name and address of the eating establishment where sidewalk
dining is to be maintained.
C. A detailed description, including diagram of the dimensions of the area
and the number of tables to be used for sidewalk dining.
D. Consent of the owner of the premises, if other than the applicant.
E. A certificate of insurance providing at least $500,000 of comprehensive
general liability extending premises coverage to all activities associated
with sidewalk dining and naming the Township of Cedar Grove as an
additional insured with respect to such activities.
F. A check payable to the Township of Cedar Grove in the amount of the
license fee required by § 230-53.
A. The Township Council shall review the application and investigation
report of each applicant. The Council shall approve or deny the
application, taking into consideration the factors set forth in § 230-55.
§ 230-49 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 230-52
230:599
§ 230-53. Fees.
The annual license fee for each and every premises on which sidewalk
dining is conducted shall be $100.
§ 230-54. License terms and conditions.
§ 230-55. Regulations.
The conduct of sidewalk dining pursuant to a license issued under this
article shall be subject to all of the following restrictions and requirements:
B. Any applicant who is denied a license may request in writing a hearing
on the denial decision before the Township Council.
A. A sidewalk dining license shall be valid only through October 31 of a
given year, and a new license must be obtained for each year.
B. A sidewalk dining license may not be transferred.
C. The license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the premises
prior to the use of the premises for sidewalk dining.
A. Public sidewalk dining may be conducted in the Retail Shopping
District (B), Restricted Commercial District (RC) and Limited
Commercial District (LC), designated on the Cedar Grove Zoning Map.
B. The sidewalk dining area must not inhibit pedestrian traffic on public
sidewalks, and an area must be open and unobstructed for pedestrian
traffic between the closest edge of the cafe-type tables and the curbline,
which area shall have a minimum width of the greater of 10 feet or 1/2
of the sidewalk width.
C. Restaurateurs shall not place anything in an alleyway or walkway or set
up tables in such a manner as to block any alleyways or walkways or
any building entrance/egress. It shall be unlawful to obstruct or reduce
in any manner the clear width of any exit discharge passageway, as
determined by the clear width opening of the entrance/egress door(s).
The passageway shall be as straight as possible leading directly to the
street.
D. The only items permitted are tables, chairs, umbrellas and containers
for the disposal of recyclable cans/bottles and garbage.
E. Restaurateurs shall not place any table, sign, umbrella or other item in
such a manner as to block any municipal signs, receptacles for garbage,
public benches or other public amenity, including fire hydrants.
F. Restaurateurs must provide for the disposal of recyclable cans/bottles
and garbage. Public receptacles for garbage shall not be used. Sidewalk
areas shall be kept clean during hours of operation. Litter shall not be
permitted on adjoining sidewalks or property.
§ 230-52 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 230-55
230:600
§ 230-56. Suspension and revocation of license.
Any license may be suspended or revoked for good cause by the Township
Council, including but not limited to, a misrepresentation of the information
supplied in the application, the conviction of a crime, a violation of any
ordinance, statute or government regulation or a violation of this article.
§ 230-57. Enforcement.
The Township Clerk shall be responsible for licensing and the collection of
fees. This chapter shall otherwise be enforced by the Director of Community
Development, Cedar Grove Police Department and the Board of Health, as
to the Sanitary Code.
G. Restaurateurs are prohibited from serving drivers or passengers of
vehicles. All customers must be seated throughout their meal.
H. Restaurateurs are prohibited from using public utility hookups.
I. All sound systems are prohibited.
J. All food preparation shall be in the regular kitchen area of the
restaurant, not outside.
K. All outdoor food service is subject to the regulations contained in
Chapter 12 of the New Jersey Sanitary Code.
L. The placement of outdoor tables shall be limited to the area
immediately in front of the existing and/or properly approved
restaurants, cafes or eating establishments. No portion of any sidewalk
dining equipment, including chairs, tables and opened umbrellas, shall
encroach upon the sidewalk area in a manner to block, impede or cover
adjacent storefronts, doors or windows in front of other business
establishments.
M. Sidewalk dining may commence April 1 and may continue through
October 31.
N. Permissible hours of operation shall be from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
O. No alcohol service or consumption is permitted.
P. Everything must be removed and sidewalks must be washed daily by
10:30 p.m.
Q. The Township retains the right to temporarily suspend a sidewalk
dining license to allow for construction activity, utility repairs, special
events or for other reasons as deemed appropriate by the Township
Council, with reasonable advance notice to be given to affected
licensees.
§ 230-55 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 230-57
230:601
Chapter 234
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use procedures — See Ch. 38.
Building construction — See Ch. 102.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 119.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 137.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 140.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 181.
Plumbing — See Ch. 194.
Property maintenance — See Chs. 197 and
198.
Public improvement specifications — See Ch.
201.
Redevelopment plans — See Ch. 206.
Individual sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
213.
Sewers — See Ch. 217.
Soil removal — See Ch. 226.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 230.
Trees — See Ch. 246.
Open Space Trust Fund — See Ch. 248.
Water — See Ch. 259.
Zoning — See Ch. 268.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Regulation of land use generally — See
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
Subdivision of land — See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37
et seq.
§ 230-57 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 230-57
234:602
ARTICLE I
Title; Purpose; Definitions; Enforcement
§ 234-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Land Subdivision
Ordinance of the Township of Cedar Grove (1963)."
§ 234-2. Purpose; inconsistencies with other legislation.
§ 234-3. Definitions.
The following words, terms or phrases when used in this chapter shall have
the meanings ascribed in this section:
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The Planning and Zoning Coordinator of the
Township of Cedar Grove.[Added 1-31-1977 by Ord. No. 77-35]
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The lands required or designated for the
installation of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches or delineated along
a natural stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing
for a flow of water therein to safeguard the public against flood damage in
accordance with Chapter 1 of Title 58 of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated,
as amended.
EASEMENT — A right or interest, less than a fee, held by one person or
corporation in land owned by another to be used only for a specific purpose
or purposes.
FINAL PLAT — A map of all or a portion of the subdivision which is
presented to the Township Planning Board for final approval in accordance
with regulations established by this chapter and which, if approved, shall be
filed with the proper county recording officer.
A. The purpose of this chapter shall be to provide rules, regulations and
standards to guide land subdivision in the Township in order to promote
the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the
municipality. It shall be administered to ensure orderly growth and
development, the conservation, protection and proper use of land and
adequate provision for circulation, utilities and services.
B. This chapter shall not be construed as superseding or repealing
Chapter 268, Zoning of the Code of the Township of Cedar Grove or any
part thereof. All other ordinances which are inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed superseded to the extent of
such inconsistency.
C. The amendatory provisions of this chapter are intended to comply with
the requirements of the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq. [Added 1-31-1977 by Ord. No. 77-35]
§ 234-1 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 234-3
234:603
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.[Amended 1-31-1977 by Ord. No. 77-35]
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — All subdivisions not classified as minor
subdivisions.
MASTER PLAN — A composite of one or more written or graphic proposals
for the development of the municipality as set forth in and adopted pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.[Amended 1-31-1977 by Ord. No. 77-35]
MINOR SUBDIVISION — A subdivision of land which conforms to each of
the following criteria: will result in not more than four lots fronting on an
existing improved street, provided that if the aggregate of frontage of said
four lots constitutes not less than 80% of all the continuous frontage that
is in the same ownership, the remainder of frontage may be included; does
not involve a planned development; does not involve any new street; and
does not involve an extension of any off-tract improvement or Township
facility.[Amended 1-31-1977 by Ord. No. 77-35; 8-29-1977 by Ord. No.
77-35(a)]
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted by ordinance pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-32 through 55D-36.[Amended 1-31-1977 by Ord. No. 77-35]
OWNER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership or
corporation having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be
subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same
under this chapter.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Any security which may be accepted by a
municipality, including cash, provided that a municipality shall not require
more than 10% of the total performance guaranty in cash.[Amended
1-31-1977 by Ord. No. 77-35]
PLAT — A map of a subdivision.
SKETCH PLAT — A map of a subdivision of sufficient accuracy to be used for
the purpose of discussion and classification and meeting the requirements
of § 234-7 of this chapter.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct,
alley or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway
or a street or way shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law
or approved by official action or a street or way on a map or plat duly
filed and recorded in the office of the county recording officer prior to the
appointment of a Planning Board and the grant to such Board of the power
to review plats. "Street" also includes the land between the street lines,
whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders,
gutters, sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within the street lines.
For the purpose of this chapter, "streets" shall be classified as follows:
ARTERIAL STREETS — Those which are used primarily for traffic not
local in destination.
A.
§ 234-3 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 234-3
234:604
SUBDIVIDER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership,
corporation, trust or any other legal entity commencing proceedings under
this chapter to effect a subdivision of land hereunder for himself or for
another.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or
more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale or development.
The following shall not be considered subdivisions within the meaning of
this act if no new streets are created: divisions of land found by the Planning
Board or Subdivision Committee thereof appointed by the Chairman to
be for agricultural purposes where all resulting parcels are five acres or
larger in size; divisions of property by testamentary or intestate provisions;
divisions of property upon court order; and conveyances so as to combine
existing lots by deed or other instrument. The term "subdivision" shall
also include the term "resubdivision."[Amended 1-31-1977 by Ord. No.
77-35]
SUBDIVISION COMMITTEE — A Committee appointed by the Chairman of
the Planning Board, with the approval of said Board, for the purpose of
classifying subdivisions in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
The Chairman of the Planning Board shall act as Chairman of said
Committee.
§ 234-4. Administration. [Amended 1-31-1977 by Ord. No. 77-35]
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the Cedar Grove
Planning Board; except that, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-76, the Zoning
Board of Adjustment may administer this chapter whenever the application
for subdivision approval involves the granting of an application for a
variance to allow a structure or use in a district restricted against such
structure or use and, in that event, all references in this chapter to Planning
Board shall be deemed to read the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
COLLECTOR STREETS — Those which carry traffic from minor streets
to the major system of arterial streets and highways, including the
principal entrance streets of a residential development and streets for
circulation within such a development.
B.
MINOR STREETS — Those which are used primarily for access to the
abutting properties.
C.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREETS — Those which are parallel to and
adjacent to arterial streets and highways and which provide access to
abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
D.
ALLEYS — Minor ways which are used primarily for vehicular service
access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a
street.
E.
§ 234-3 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 234-5
234:605
§ 234-5. Standards deemed minimum requirements; variations
permitted.
The rules, regulations and standards set forth in this chapter shall be
considered the minimum requirements for the protection of the public
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Cedar Grove. Any action taken
by the Planning Board under the terms of this chapter shall give primary
consideration to the above-mentioned matters and to the welfare of the
entire community. However, if the subdivider can clearly demonstrate that
because of peculiar or unique conditions pertaining to his land the literal
enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter relating to the design
and layout of subdivisions is impracticable or would result in undue
hardship, the Planning Board may permit such variation in the application
thereof as may be reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of
the rules, regulations and standards established by this chapter.
§ 234-5 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 234-5
234:606
ARTICLE II
Sketch Plat Procedure
§ 234-6. Submission of sketch plat; fee. [Amended 1-31-1977 by
Ord. No. 77-35]
An owner of land within the Township prior to subdividing or resubdividing
land, as defined in this chapter, shall submit through the Planning and
Zoning Coordinator to the Planning Board, at least one week prior to the
regular meeting of the Board, nine copies of the sketch plat of the proposed
subdivision prepared in accordance with the requirements of § 234-7 hereof
for purposes of classification and preliminary discussion. At the time of
filing, a fee of $10 shall be paid to the Planning and Zoning Coordinator for
processing said application for classification of sketch plat. The landowner
shall have the option to omit compliance with the sketch plat procedure
for this chapter and submit the document required commencing with the
discussion plat procedures, § 234-10, in the first instance.
§ 234-7. Preparation of sketch plat; information to be included.
[Amended 3-17-1969 by Ord. No. 69-5]
The sketch plat shall be prepared by a land surveyor, engineer or architect
licensed in the State of New Jersey and shall be based on deed or deed map
information or some other similar accurate base at a scale not less than
200 feet to the inch, to enable the entire tract to be shown on one sheet. If
one sheet is not of sufficient size to contain the entire land area involved,
the map may be divided into sections to be shown on separate sheets with
references on each sheet to the adjoining sheet. The sketch plat will contain
a certification by the preparer that the measurements shown are accurate.
The size requirements for sketch plats shall be the same as those for final
plats called for by state statutes. The sketch plat shall show or include the
following information:
A. The location of that portion which is to be subdivided in relation to the
entire tract.
B. All existing structures, uses and wooded areas within 200 feet of the
portion to be subdivided.
C. The name and address of the owner and all property owners within 200
feet of the extreme limits of the proposed subdivision as disclosed by
the most recent municipal tax records.
D. The Tax Map sheet, block and lot numbers.
E. All streets or roads and streams within 500 feet of the subdivision.
F. Building setback line.
G. Street numbers for each lot.
§ 234-6 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 234-8
234:607
§ 234-8. Action with respect to a minor subdivision. [Amended
11-4-1974 by Ord. No. 74-24; 1-31-1977 by Ord. No. 77-35]
A. If an application for a subdivision is deemed to be incomplete, the
developer shall be notified thereof within 45 days of the submission of
such application, or it shall be deemed to be properly submitted. If the
proposed subdivision is tentatively classified as a minor subdivision by
majority action of the Planning Board, the Planning Board shall hold a
public hearing on the approval of the subdivision. The date of said
hearing shall be set by the Secretary of the Planning Board. At least 10
days prior to the hearing, the subdivider shall cause notice of the
hearing to be published in the official newspaper of the Township or a
newspaper of general circulation in the Township. At least 10 days prior
to the hearing, the subdivider shall notify all of the property owners
within 200 feet of the extreme limits of the property involved in the
subdivision, as their names appear on the Township tax records, by
mailing notice to them by certified mail. Said notices shall state the
time and place of the hearing, a brief description of the property
involved, a statement as to its location, a list of the maps and other
documents to be considered, a summary statement of the matters to be
heard and that a copy of said subdivision is on file in the office of the
Secretary of the Planning Board for public inspection. At least one day
prior to the hearing, the subdivider shall file, with the Planning Board,
an affidavit affirming that he has notified all of the above-described
property owners by certified mail and shall also file proof of publication
of said newspaper notice. If, after the hearing, the proposed subdivision
receives final approval, a notation to that effect will be made on all
copies of the sketch plat by the Chairman of the Planning Board. All
copies of the plat shall then be forwarded to the Township Clerk for his
signature, and one copy shall be returned to the subdivider.
B. In the event that any owner or subdivider requests approval of a
subdivision which meets all the requirements of a minor subdivision,
except for minimum lot dimensions or lot area requirements as
specified by Chapter 268, Zoning, the owner shall submit a sketch plat
and the required number of copies, and the procedure set forth in
Subsection A of this section shall be followed; except that, after the
sketch plat has been reviewed by the Planning Board, the Planning
Board shall then consider the granting of the variance in the same
manner, to the same extent and subject to the same restrictions as the
Zoning Board of Adjustment.
C. Before the Township Clerk returns the approved sketch plat to the
subdivider, the Clerk shall retain one copy for filing and furnish one
copy to each of the following:
(1) Township Engineer.
(2) Building Inspector.
(3) Tax Assessor.
§ 234-8 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 234-8
234:608
§ 234-9. Action with respect to a major subdivision. [Amended
1-31-1977 by Ord. No. 77-35]
If the proposed subdivision is classified as a major subdivision, a notation
to that effect shall be made on the sketch plat which will be returned to the
subdivider. In addition, the Township Engineer shall furnish the subdivider
with a copy of the Township specifications, covering the installation of
public improvements. If an application for a subdivision is deemed to be
incomplete, the developer shall be notified thereof within 45 days of the
submission of such application, or it shall be deemed to be properly
submitted.
(4) Planning and Zoning Coordinator.
D. Minor subdivision approval shall be deemed to be final approval of the
subdivision by the Board, provided that the Board may condition such
approval on terms ensuring the provision of improvements pursuant to
Article V of this chapter.
E. Minor subdivision approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days of
the date of submission of a complete application to the administrative
officer or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant. Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period
prescribed shall constitute minor subdivision approval, and a certificate
of the administrative officer as to the failure of the Planning Board to
act shall be issued on request of the applicant, and it shall be sufficient
in lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence of approval herein
required and shall be so accepted by the county recording officer for
purposes of filing subdivision plats.
F. Whenever review or approval of the application by the County Planning
Board is required by Section 5 of P.L. 1968, c. 285 (N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3),
the Municipal Planning Board shall condition any approval that it
grants upon timely receipt of a favorable report on the application by
the County Planning Board or approval by the County Planning Board
by its failure to report thereon within the required time period.
G. Approval of a minor subdivision shall expire 190 days from the date of
municipal approval, unless within such period a plat in conformity with
such approval and the provisions of the Map Filing Law, P.L. 1960, c.
141 (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.), or a deed clearly describing the
approved minor subdivision is filed by the developer with the county
recording officer, the Municipal Engineer and the Municipal Tax
Assessor. Any such plat or deed accepted for such filing shall have been
signed by the Chairman and Secretary of the Planning Board.
H. The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions, whether
conditional or otherwise, upon which minor subdivision approval was
granted shall not be changed for a period of two years after the date of
minor subdivision approval, provided that the approved minor
subdivision shall have been duly recorded as provided in this section.
§ 234-8 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 234-9
234:609

ARTICLE III
Discussion Plat Procedure
§ 234-10. Submission of discussion plat; fees. [Amended 1-31-1977
by Ord. No. 77-35]
§ 234-11. Preparation of discussion plat; information to be
included.
The discussion plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn or reproduced at a
scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet. Discussion plats shall be
designed and drawn by a New Jersey licensed land surveyor. The plat shall
be designed in compliance with the provisions of Article VI of this chapter,
and the size of the plat shall be the same as that called for in the final plat
by state statutes. The plat shall give or show the following information:
A. An applicant for an approval of a major subdivision, as defined in this
chapter and as classified by the Subdivision Committee of the Planning
Board, may request review and discussion in advance of filing an
application for Planning Board approval of a major subdivision by
submitting at least 15 black-on-white prints of a plat for discussion
prepared in accordance with the requirements of § 234-11 hereof,
together with three completed forms entitled "Application for
Discussion Leading to Application for Final Approval" with the Planning
and Zoning Coordinator, at least two weeks prior to the next regular
public meeting of the Planning Board. At the time of filing, a fee of $50
shall be paid to the Planning and Zoning Coordinator. The Planning and
Zoning Coordinator shall immediately notify the Planning Board upon
receipt of such an application and transmit the application to the Board,
except for the fee and one copy of the form and maps, which the
Planning and Zoning Coordinator shall keep with the records of the
office.
B. Copies of the preliminary plat shall be forwarded by the Secretary of
the Planning Board to such Township, county and state officials as
directed by the Planning Board.
C. The plat and any other engineering documents to be submitted shall be
required in tentative form for discussion purposes for preliminary
approval. If the application for development is found to be incomplete,
the developer shall be notified thereof within 45 days of submission of
such application, or it shall be deemed to be properly submitted.
D. Notice of a public hearing shall be caused to be placed in the official
newspaper, and notice of a public hearing shall be given to owners of
real property located within 200 feet in all directions of the subject
property as required by Chapter 38, Land Use Procedures.
A. A key map showing the entire subdivision and its relation to
surrounding areas.
§ 234-10 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 234-11
234:611
B. The tract name, zone, Tax Map sheet, block and lot number, date,
reference meridian, graphic scale and the following names and
addresses:
(1) Name and address of the record owner or owners.
(2) Name and address of the subdivider.
(3) Name and address of the person who prepared the map.
C. Acreage of the tract to be subdivided, to the nearest tenth of an acre.
D. Contours at five-foot intervals for slopes averaging 10% or greater and
at two-foot intervals for land of lesser slope.
E. The location of existing and proposed property lines, streets, buildings,
watercourses, railroads, bridges, culverts, drainpipes and any natural
features, such as wooded areas and rock formations.
F. Plan of proposed utility layouts (sewers, storm drains, water) showing
feasible connections to existing or any proposed utility systems. Water
mains shall be installed in a gridiron system to provide continuous
circulation. No dead-end lines shall be permitted. The Township
Engineer will be required to certify to the Planning Board that water
main sizes and water pressures are adequate to handle the demand of
the new subdivision area before permission will be given to connect to
municipal supply. He will also certify that the surrounding storm drains
and sanitary sewers are adequate to handle peak-flow demands of the
new area to be developed. The Township Engineer will further certify to
the Planning Board that utility lines are large enough to adequately
service the fully developed neighboring areas which might arise in the
future. When an individual water supply or sewage disposal system is
proposed, the plan for such system must be approved by the
appropriate local, county or state health agency. When a public sewage
disposal system is not available, the developer shall have percolation
tests made and submit the results with the discussion plat. On any plat
of more than four residential lots, no lot of less than 15,000 square feet
in area, or more if so specified by the Township Department of Health,
shall be approved by the Planning Board if inaccessible to sewers,
unless the subdivider enters into contract and bond with the Township
to make the necessary sewer connections, extend the necessary sewers
to existing sewers and, if necessary due to topographic conditions,
install force mains. Any subdivision or part thereof which does not meet
with the established requirements shall not be approved. Any remedy
proposed to overcome such a situation shall first be approved by the
appropriate local, county or state health agency.
G. Type of proposed residential structure, including the area of livable
floor space.
H. A copy of any protective covenants or deed restrictions applying to the
land being subdivided shall be submitted with the discussion plat.
§ 234-11 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 234-11
234:612
§ 234-12. Review and discussion.
The Planning Board and the subdivider shall review and discuss the
problems peculiar to the area and the subdivider's recommended solutions.
The Planning Board shall guide the planning of each subdivision on the
basis of experience, knowledge, technical assistance, guidance from the
Master Plan, Official Map, Chapter 268, Zoning, and all other applicable
ordinances, additional data supplied by the subdivider upon request of the
Planning Board and from additional data and recommendations supplied at
the request of the Board by any other municipal, county or state department
or agent.
§ 234-13. Conclusions and recommendations; effect of approval.
[Amended 1-31-1977 by Ord. No. 77-35]
I. A certificate from the Township Tax Collector that all property taxes or
assessments are paid and current. [Added 5-6-1991 by Ord. No.
91-383]
A. Following the review and discussion referred to in § 234-12, the
Planning Board shall return one copy of the discussion plat, together
with a letter entitled "Letter of Conclusions and Recommendations"
advising the subdivider of all conclusions and recommendations arrived
at by the Planning Board that should be considered in the preparation
of an application for approval of a major subdivision. The Planning
Board's conclusions and recommendations with regard to a review of a
discussion plat shall not be binding upon the Planning Board and under
no circumstances shall be deemed or construed as authority to proceed
with construction.
B. If the Planning Board required any substantial amendment in the layout
of improvements proposed by the developer, an amended application
shall be submitted and proceeded upon, as in the case of the original
application for development. The Planning Board shall, if the proposed
subdivision complies with this chapter and statutory provision, grant
preliminary approval to the subdivision.
C. Upon the submission to the administrative officer of a complete
application for a subdivision of 10 or fewer lots, the Planning Board
shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 45 days of the date of
such submission or within such further time as may be consented to by
the developer. Upon the submission of a complete application for a
subdivision of more than 10 lots, the Planning Board shall grant or deny
preliminary approval within 95 days of the date of such submission or
within such further time as may be consented to by the developer.
Otherwise the Planning Board shall be deemed to have granted
preliminary approval to the subdivision.
D. Effect of preliminary approval. Preliminary approval of a major
subdivision pursuant to this chapter shall, except as provided in
§ 234-11 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 234-13
234:613
Subsection D(4) of this section, confer upon the applicant the following
rights for a three-year period from the date of the preliminary approval:
(1) That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be changed, including but not
limited to use requirements, layout and design standards for
streets, curbs and sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions; and offtract
improvements, except that nothing herein shall be construed
to prevent the municipality from modifying by ordinance such
general terms and conditions of preliminary approval as relate to
public health and safety.
(2) That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or a section or
sections of the preliminary subdivision plat, as the case may be.
(3) That the applicant may apply for and the Planning Board may grant
extensions on such preliminary approval for additional periods of at
least one year but not to exceed a total extension of two years,
provided that if the design standards have been revised by
ordinance, such revised standards may govern.
(4) In the case of a subdivision of an area of 50 acres or more, the
Planning Board may grant the rights referred to in Subsections
D(1), (2) and (3) above for such period of time, longer than three
years, as shall be determined by the Planning Board to be
reasonable, taking into consideration the number of dwelling units
and nonresidential floor area permissible under preliminary
approval, economic conditions and the comprehensiveness of the
development. The applicant may apply for thereafter and the
Planning Board may thereafter grant an extension to preliminary
approval for such additional period of time as shall be determined
by the Planning Board to be reasonable, taking into consideration
the number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area
permissible under preliminary approval, the potential number of
dwelling units and nonresidential floor area of the section or
sections awaiting final approval, economic conditions and the
comprehensiveness of the development, provided that if the design
standards have been revised, such revised standards may govern.
§ 234-13 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 234-13
234:614
ARTICLE IV
Final Approval Procedure
§ 234-14. Submission of application for final approval; fee; approval
procedure. [Amended 1-31-1977 by Ord. No. 77-35]
A. Where the applicant has complied with the provisions of this chapter
and conditions of preliminary approval, the applicant desiring final plat
approval shall submit to the administrative officer, at least one week but
not more than two weeks prior to the Planning Board meeting at which
consideration is desired, an original, on linen or Mylar, and 15 copies of
a completed application form and shall pay the appropriate fee to the
administrative officer. A fee of $75 for a subdivision containing 25 lots
or less and $100 for a subdivision having more than 25 lots shall be paid
to the administrative officer. The administrative officer shall
immediately notify the Planning Board upon receipt of an application
for final approval.
B. The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing on the application for
approval of major subdivisions, the date thereof to be set by the
Secretary of the Planning Board. Notice of a public hearing shall be
caused to be given in the official newspaper and to owners of real
property within 200 feet of the subject property and a public hearing
held in accordance with Chapter 38, Land Use Procedures.
C. Copies of the plat presented to the Planning Board for final approval
shall be forwarded by the Secretary of the Planning Board at least five
days prior to the hearing to the following persons:
(1) Township Engineer.
(2) Police Chief.
(3) Building Inspector.
(4) Township Manager.
(5) Secretary of the Advisory Shade Tree Committee.
(6) Director of Fire Prevention Bureau.
(7) Such other municipal, county or state officials as directed by the
Planning Board.
(8) Two copies of the plat and a notice of the hearing thereon shall be
transmitted by the Secretary of the Planning Board, prior to the
hearing, to the Planning Board or, if there is none, then to the
governing body of every municipality, any part of the boundary of
which lies within 200 feet of any part of the subdivision.
D. Final approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days after
submission of a complete application to the administrative officer or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
§ 234-14 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 234-14
234:615
Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period prescribed shall
constitute final approval, and a certificate of the administrative officer
as to the failure of the Planning Board to act shall be issued on request
of the applicant, and it shall be sufficient in lieu of written endorsement
or other evidence of approval herein required and shall be so accepted
by the county recording officer for purposes of filing subdivision plats.
Whenever review or approval of the application by the County Planning
Board is required by Section 5 of P.L. 1968, c. 285 (N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3),
the Municipal Planning Board shall condition any approval that it
grants upon timely receipt of a favorable report on the application by
the County Planning Board or approval by the County Planning Board
by its failure to report thereon within the required time.
E. Township Engineer's endorsement of approval on plat. Before final
approval of the plat, the Planning Board shall require an endorsement
on the plat by the Township Engineer approving the design and location
of all utilities. No such endorsement of approval shall be made by the
Township Engineer until he is in receipt of a map showing all utilities in
exact location and elevation identifying those portions already installed,
nor until the subdivider has complied with one or both of the following:
(1) Installed all improvements in accordance with the requirements of
these regulations and Township specifications.
(2) Furnished performance guaranties in accordance with the
requirements of § 234-22.
F. Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95 days from the date
of signing of the plat, unless within such period the plat shall have been
duly filed by the developer with the county recording officer. The
Planning Board may for good cause extend the period for recording for
an additional period not to exceed 190 days from the date of signing of
the plat. No subdivision plat shall be accepted for filing by the county
recording officer until it has been approved by the Planning Board as
indicated on the instrument by the signature of the Chairman and
Secretary of the Planning Board or a certificate of failure to act has
been issued. The signatures of the Chairman and Secretary shall not be
affixed until the developer has posted the guaranties required by the
Planning Board based upon this chapter. If the county recording officer
records any plat without such approval, such recording shall be deemed
null and void; and, upon request of the municipality, the plat shall be
expunged from the official records. It shall be the duty of the county
recording officer to notify the Planning Board in writing within seven
days of the filing of any plat, identifying such instrument by its title,
date of filing and official number.
G. Effect of final approval of major subdivision. The zoning requirements
applicable to the preliminary approval first granted and all other rights
conferred upon the developer, whether conditionally or otherwise, shall
not be changed for a period of two years after the date of final approval,
provided that the rights conferred by this section shall expire if the plat
§ 234-14 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 234-14
234:616
§ 234-15. Preparation of final plat; information to be included.
has not been duly recorded within the time period provided. If the
developer has followed the standards prescribed for final approval
and has duly recorded the plat, the Planning Board may extend such
period of protection for extensions of one year but not to exceed three
extensions. Notwithstanding any other provision, the granting of final
approval terminates the time period of preliminary approval for the
section granted final approval.
H. Incorporation of modifications; variances.
(1) Unless the subdivision is approved without change, the final plat
for recording will have incorporated all changes or modifications
required by the Planning Board. If the Planning Board requires any
substantial amendment in the layout of improvements, proposed by
the subdivider, that have been the subject of a hearing, an amended
plat must be submitted and proceeded upon as in the case of the
original plat.
(2) If the Planning Board disapproves any plat, the findings and
reasons for such disapproval shall be stated upon the records of the
Planning Board, and the applicant shall be given a copy. If the final
plat is approved and, as approved, such plat shall contain a lot or
lots which fail to comply with the minimum dimension and area
requirements of Chapter 268, Zoning, of the Code of the Township
of Cedar Grove, the Planning Board shall then consider the
granting of the variance by following the procedure outlined in
zoning for the granting of variances and pursuant to the ancillary
powers of the Planning Board established in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60.
I. Township Clerk's certification. The Township Clerk may be called upon
to certify to the Planning Board that deeds and conveyances for all
property which is to be given for public purposes, such as park areas,
streets, easements and the like, are being held in escrow so that they
may be transferred to the Township at such time as the signatures
authorizing final approval are placed on the final plat plan.
A. The map or plat of all or a portion of the subdivision which is presented
to the Planning Board for final approval shall be clearly and legibly
drawn or reproduced on tracing cloth at a scale of not less than one
inch equals 100 feet. All levels shall be based on North American
Datum. A bench mark for levels shall be noted on the plat. All plats shall
be designed and drawn by a New Jersey licensed land surveyor; except
that, where improvements to the land other than monuments are to be
installed, such improvements shall be designed by a New Jersey
licensed engineer.
B. The plat described in Subsection A of this section shall be designed in
compliance with the requirements and standards established by the
§ 234-14 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 234-15
234:617
provisions of Article VI and all applicable state statutes and shall show
or be accompanied by the following information:
(1) Date, name and location of the subdivision, name of owner, graphic
scale and reference meridian.
(2) Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, street names,
easements and other rights-of-way, all lot lines and other site lines,
with accurate dimensions, bearings or deflection angles and radii,
arcs and central angles of all curves.
(3) The purpose of any easement shall be designated, and the proposed
use of sites other than residential shall be noted.
(4) Each block shall be numbered, and the lots within each block shall
be numbered consecutively and in accordance with the Tax Map.
(5) House numbers as designated by the Township Engineer.
(6) Minimum building setback line on all lots and other sites.
(7) Location and description of all monuments.
(8) Names of owners of adjoining land.
(9) Certification by an engineer or surveyor as to the accuracy of the
details of the plat.
(10) Certification that the applicant is agent or owner of the land or that
the owner has given consent under an option agreement.
(11) When approval of a plat is required by any officer or body of
another governmental jurisdiction, such as the county or state,
then such approval shall be certified on the plat.
(12) Cross-sections and profiles of streets approved by the Township
Engineer shall accompany the final map.
(13) Plans and profiles of storm and sanitary sewers and water mains.
(14) Certificate from the Township Tax Collector that all taxes are paid
to date.
(15) A key map showing the entire subdivision and its relation to
surrounding areas. [Added 1-31-1977 by Ord. No. 77-35]
(16) The tract name, zone, Tax Map sheet, block and lot number, date,
reference meridian, graphic scale and the following names and
addresses: [Added 1-31-1977 by Ord. No. 77-35]
(a) Name and address of the record owner or owners.
(b) Name and address of the subdivider.
(c) Name and address of the person who prepared the map.
§ 234-15 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 234-15
234:618
(17) Acreage of the tract to be subdivided to the nearest tenth of an
acre. [Added 1-31-1977 by Ord. No. 77-35]
(18) Contours at five-foot intervals for slopes averaging 10% or greater
and at two-foot intervals for land of lesser slope. [Added
1-31-1977 by Ord. No. 77-35]
(19) The location of existing and proposed property lines, streets,
buildings, watercourses, railroads, bridges, culverts, drainpipes
and any natural features, such as wooded areas and rock
formations. [Added 1-31-1977 by Ord. No. 77-35]
(20) Plan of proposed utility layouts (sewers, storm drains, water)
showing feasible connections to existing or any proposed utility
systems. Water mains shall be installed in a gridiron system to
provide continuous circulation. No dead-end lines shall be
permitted. The Township Engineer will be required to certify to the
Planning Board that water main sizes and water pressures are
adequate to handle the demand of the new subdivision area before
permission will be given to connect to the municipal supply. He will
also certify that the surrounding storm drains and sanitary sewers
are adequate to handle peak-flow demands of the new area to be
developed. The Township Engineer will further certify to the
Planning Board that utility lines are large enough to adequately
service the fully developed neighboring areas which might arise in
the future. When an individual water supply or sewage disposal
system is proposed, the plan for such system must be approved by
the appropriate local, county or state health agency. When a public
sewage disposal system is not available, the developer shall have
percolation tests made and submit the results with the plat. On any
plat of more than four residential lots, no lot of less than 15,000
square feet in area, or more if so specified by the Township
Department of Health, shall be approved by the Planning Board if
inaccessible to sewers, unless the subdivider enters into contract
and bond with the Township to make the necessary sewer
connections, extend the necessary sewers to existing sewers and, if
necessary due to topographic conditions, install force mains. Any
subdivision or part thereof which does not meet with the
established requirements shall not be approved. Any remedy
proposed to overcome such a situation shall first be approved by
the appropriate local, county or state health agency. [Added
1-31-1977 by Ord. No. 77-35]
(21) Type of proposed residential structure, including the area of livable
floor space. [Added 1-31-1977 by Ord. No. 77-35]
(22) A copy of any protective covenants or deed restrictions applying to
the land being subdivided shall be submitted with the discussion
plat. [Added 1-31-1977 by Ord. No. 77-35]
§ 234-15 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 234-16
234:619
§ 234-16. Time limits for decisions on applications involving more
than one matter; referral of applications. [Amended 11-4-1974 by
Ord. No. 74-24; 1-31-1977 by Ord. No. 77-35]
§ 234-17. Granting of exceptions authorized; simultaneous approval
of other matters. [Amended 1-31-1977 by Ord. No. 77-35]
A. Whenever an application for approval of a subdivision plat includes a
request for relief pursuant to the Planning Board's power to hear
certain variance applications as prescribed by ordinance and otherwise
provided by law, the Planning Board shall grant or deny approval of the
application within 95 days after submission by the developer of a
complete application to the Planning Board or within such further time
as may be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the Planning Board
to act within the period prescribed shall constitute approval of the
application, and a certificate of the Board Secretary as to the failure of
the Planning Board to act shall be issued on request of the applicant,
and it shall be sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other
evidence of approval herein required and shall be so accepted by the
county recording officer for purposes of filing subdivision plats.
B. Whenever an application for development is made to the Board of
Adjustment, accompanied by an application for subdivision approval
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-76 and Chapter 38, Land Use Procedures,
the Board of Adjustment shall grant or deny approval of the application
within 120 days after submission by a developer of a complete
application to the administrative officer or within such further time as
may be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the Board of
Adjustment to act within the period prescribed shall constitute approval
of the application, and a certificate of the Secretary of the Board of
Adjustment as to the failure of the Board of Adjustment to act shall be
issued on request of the applicant, and it shall be sufficient in lieu of the
written endorsement of other evidence of approval herein required and
shall be so accepted by the county recording officer for purposes of
filing subdivision plats.
C. Whenever review or approval of the application by the County Planning
Board is required by Section 5 of P.L. 1968, c. 285 (N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3),
in the case of a subdivision, the Municipal Board of Adjustment shall
condition any approval that it grants upon timely receipt of a favorable
report on the application by the County Planning Board or approval by
the County Planning Board or by its failure to report thereon within the
required time.
D. An application under this section may be referred to any appropriate
person or agency, including the Planning Board, for its report, provided
that such reference shall not extend the period of time within which the
Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act.
A. The Planning Board, when acting upon applications for preliminary or
minor subdivision approval, shall have the power to grant such
§ 234-16 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 234-17
234:620
§ 234-18. Granting of relief incident to application. [Amended
1-31-1977 by Ord. No. 77-35]
The ancillary powers of the Planning Board and the Zoning Board of
Adjustment to grant relief to an applicant, which relief is generally within
the powers of the other Board, as are incident to the primary relief sought
in the application, shall be as set forth in Chapter 38, Land Use Procedures,
of the Code of the Township of Cedar Grove.
§ 234-19. Filing of maps and documents. [Amended 1-31-1977 by
Ord. No. 77-35]
Any maps or documents for which approval is sought at a hearing shall be
on file and available for public inspection at least 10 days before the date
of the hearing, during normal business hours, in the offices of the Building
Inspector and Secretary to the municipal agency exercising jurisdiction.
The applicant may produce other documents, records or testimony at the
hearing to substantiate or clarify or supplement the previously filed maps
and documents.
exceptions from the requirements for subdivision approval as may be
reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of the provisions
for subdivision review and approval of this chapter if the literal
enforcement of one or more provisions of this chapter is impracticable
or will exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining
to the land in question.
B. The Planning Board shall have the power to review and approve or deny
conditional uses or site plans simultaneously with review for
subdivision approval without the developer being required to make
further application to the Planning Board or the Planning Board being
required to hold further hearings. The longest time period for action by
the Planning Board, whether it is for subdivision, conditional use or site
plan approval, shall apply. Whenever approval of a conditional use is
requested by the developer pursuant to this subsection, notice of the
hearing on the plat shall include reference to the request for such
conditional use.
§ 234-17 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 234-19
234:621

ARTICLE V
Installation of Improvements; Performance Guaranties86
§ 234-20. Improvements to be installed or guaranteed for
installation. [Amended 8-5-1963; 1-31-1977 by Ord. No. 77-35]
As a condition to the granting of final approval, the subdivider will install
in accordance with Township specifications or shall furnish performance
guaranties for the ultimate installation of the following improvements or
any other improvements where required:
A. Streets.
B. Street signs.
C. Curbs.
D. Sidewalks shall be required in all subdivisions and shall be four feet
wide; unless, however, the Planning Board finds that there should be
sidewalks on only one side of the street, or that no sidewalk should be
provided because of one of the following conditions which the Planning
Board shall also find exists and further finds that the public safety will
not be adversely affected thereby:
(1) The new street shown on the subdivision plat is an extension of an
existing street where there is a sidewalk on only one side or there is
no sidewalk, as the case may be.
(2) There are other subdivisions in the neighborhood where there are
sidewalks on only one side of the street or no sidewalks, and it
would be unreasonable to require a sidewalk on more than one side
of the street or any sidewalk.
(3) The open or rural character of the subdivision development would
be best preserved by a sidewalk on only one side of the street or by
no sidewalk.
E. Shade trees.
F. Topsoil protection. No topsoil shall be removed from the site or used as
spoil. A minimum depth of six inches of topsoil shall be stabilized and
maintained in all open areas. The subdivider shall ensure that no
rubbish or debris (dead trees and the like) is left on public land at the
completion of his project.
G. Monuments as required by state statute.
H. Water mains, culverts, storm sewers and sanitary sewers or other
means of sewage disposal, drainage structures and all appurtenances
to such facilities. All such installations shall be properly connected to
86.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 201, Public Improvement Specifications.
§ 234-20 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 234-20
234:623
§ 234-21. Inspection and approval. [Amended 12-17-1979 by Ord.
No. 79-119]
All improvements listed in § 234-20 shall be subject to inspection and
approval by the Township Engineer, who shall be notified by the subdivider
at least 24 hours prior to the start of any construction. No underground
installations shall be covered until inspected and approved. The subdivider
shall be responsible for the cost of Township inspection. The Township will
utilize either regular Township personnel or the services of a competent
outside inspection firm, and the Township will further bill the developer
on a regular basis for all inspection services as well as the cost of testing
materials utilized in building public improvements required under this
chapter and Township specifications. The Township inspection shall in no
way be construed as engineering supervision or as final acceptance of work
completed. It shall be the responsibility of the engineer for the subdivider
to submit in writing to the Township Engineer any proposed changes or
deviations from the approved construction plans. It will further be the
the Township, county and state systems and shall be adequate to handle
all present and probable future development.
I. Fireboxes as required by the Fire Department.
J. Rear yard electric service and telephone service shall be required and
easements therefor shall be provided as set forth in § 234-15B(2). If,
however, the Township Planning Board finds that one of the following
conditions exists and further finds that the public safety, public good
and general welfare will not be adversely affected thereby, the
requirement for rear yard electrical and telephone service may be
waived and the service installed in the bed of the street, provided that:
(1) The street or streets in the subdivision are an extension of an
existing street or streets which have the electrical and telephone
service within the bed of the street and the area of the subdivision
and area of land proposed to be in street use would not exceed that
in Subsection J(3) of this section.
(2) The physical characteristics or topography of land within the
subdivision is such that it would be impractical to require rear line
service.
(3) The total area of the subdivision does not exceed five acres and the
total area of land to be used for street purposes within the
subdivision, not including existing developed streets, does not
exceed 27,500 square feet.
K. Ornamental streetlighting and underground conduits therefor, with
location being determined by the Township Engineer.
L. The subdivider shall be responsible for setting final property grades in
such a way as to protect property from the action of runoff water. The
Township Engineer will approve final grades for the subdivision.
§ 234-20 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 234-21
234:624
responsibility of the engineer for the subdivider to record such approved
changes or deviations on the final as-built plans before submitting them to
the Township. On-site inspection fees will be charged to major subdivisions
for engineering time at a uniform rate of $15 per hour.
§ 234-22. Performance guaranties for uncompleted work.
If the improvements specified in § 234-20 have all been completed, the
Township Engineer shall so advise the subdivider. If they have not been
completed, the Township Engineer shall estimate the cost of work required
to complete the improvements, and the subdivider shall furnish adequate
performance guaranties, as herein defined and required, prior to and as
a condition to Planning Board approval of the final plat. An adequate
performance guaranty shall include compliance with the following
provisions of Subsections A, B and D or, in lieu thereof, the following
provisions of Subsections C and D:
A. A performance bond, issued by a bonding or surety company licensed to
do business in this state, in a maximum amount equivalent to 90% of the
aforesaid Township Engineer's estimated cost. Such bond shall be
approved as to form by the Township Attorney and posted with the
Township Clerk.
B. A deposit, in cash, in an escrow account, equivalent to at least 10% of
the aforesaid Township Engineer's estimated cost, which escrow
account may be drawn upon by the Township in the event that it
becomes necessary for the Township to complete the improvements or
portions thereof left undone by the subdivider after the deadline set for
completion.
C. A deposit, in cash, in an escrow account, equivalent to 100% of the
aforesaid Township Engineer's estimated cost, which escrow account
may be drawn upon by the Township in the event that it becomes
necessary for the Township to complete the improvements or portions
thereof left undone by the subdivider after the deadline set for
completion.
D. A contract executed between the subdivider and the Township,
approved by the Township Attorney, providing for the completion of all
the requirements in this chapter, setting a time limit for said
completion, setting forth therein that no certificate of occupancy shall
be made available until such time as all improvements adjacent to and
serving the individual structure are completed to the satisfaction of the
Township Engineer and providing for an adequate maintenance
guaranty.
§ 234-21 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 234-22
234:625

ARTICLE VI
Design Standards
§ 234-23. Compliance required.
The subdivider shall observe the requirements and principles of land
subdivision in the design of each subdivision or portion thereof, as
hereinafter set forth in this article.
§ 234-24. General standards.
The subdivision plat shall conform to design standards that will encourage
good development patterns within the municipality. Where either or both
an Official Map or Master Plan has or have been adopted, the subdivision
shall conform to the proposals and conditions shown thereon. In acting
upon plats, the Planning Board shall require, among other conditions in
the public interest, that the tract shall be adequately drained and that the
streets shall be of sufficient width and suitable grade and suitably located
to accommodate the prospective traffic, to provide access for fire-fighting
equipment to buildings and to be coordinated so as to compose a convenient
system, relating properly to the existing street system.
§ 234-25. Street specifications.
A. The arrangement of streets not shown on the Master Plan or Official
Map shall be such as to provide for the appropriate extension of
existing streets.
B. Minor streets shall be so designed as to discourage through traffic.
C. Subdivisions abutting arterial streets shall provide a marginal service
road or reverse frontage with a buffer strip for planting or some other
means of separation of through and local traffic as the Planning Board
may determine appropriate.
D. The minimum right-of-way width shall be measured from lot line to lot
line and shall be in accordance with the following schedule:
(1) Arterial streets: 80 feet to 120 feet.
(2) Collector streets: 60 feet.
(3) Minor streets: 60 feet.
(4) Marginal access streets: 60 feet.
(5) The right-of-way width for internal roads and alleys in multifamily,
commercial and industrial developments shall be determined on an
individual basis and shall in all cases be of sufficient width and
design to safely accommodate the maximum anticipated traffic,
parking and loading needs and access for fire-fighting equipment.
§ 234-23 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 234-25
234:627
E. No subdivision showing reserve strips controlling access to streets shall
be approved, except where the control and disposal of land comprising
such strips has been placed in the governing body under conditions
approved by the Planning Board.
F. Subdivisions that adjoin or include existing streets that do not conform
to widths as shown on the Master Plan or Official Map or to the street
width requirements of this chapter shall dedicate additional width
along either one or both sides of said road. If the subdivision is along
one side only, 1/2 of the required extra width shall be dedicated.
G. Grades of arterial and collector streets shall not exceed 4%. Grades on
other streets shall not exceed 10%, except in special instances where
the topography of the land to be subdivided is such as to make it
impossible to otherwise develop such land; and, in such instances, the
Planning Board shall determine the grade. No street shall have a
minimum grade of less than 1/2 of 1%.
H. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as is possible and
in no case shall be less than 60º. The block corners at intersections
shall be rounded at the curbline with a curve having a radius of not less
than 15 feet or as recommended by the State or County Highway
Departments.
I. Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
prohibited.
J. A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse
curves of arterial and collector streets.
K. When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one point
by more than 10º, they shall be connected by a curve with a radius of
not less than 100 feet for minor streets and of not less than 300 feet for
arterial and collector streets.
L. All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of sufficient
radius to provide a smooth transition and proper sight distance.
M. Dead-end streets of a permanent nature shall provide a turnaround at
the end with a radius of 50 feet and tangent, whenever possible, to the
right side of the street. If a dead-end street is of a temporary nature, a
similar turnaround shall be provided and provision made for future
extension of the street into adjoining properties. Dead-end streets shall
not exceed a maximum length of 600 feet; provided, however, that the
Council may by resolution, upon recommendation to it by the Planning
Board, waive this requirement. [Amended 3-21-1966 by Ord. No.
66-5]
N. No street shall have a name which will duplicate or be likely to be
confused with the names of existing streets. The continuation of an
existing street shall have the same name. All street names shall be
approved by the Planning Board.
§ 234-25 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 234-25
234:628
§ 234-26. Block specifications.
§ 234-27. Lot specifications.
§ 234-28. Specifications for public use and service areas.
O. Wherever possible, more than one street access to a subdivision shall
be provided.
A. Block length and width or acreage within bounding roads shall be such
as to accommodate the size of lot required in the area by Chapter 268,
Zoning, of the Code of the Township of Cedar Grove and to provide for
convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic.
B. In blocks over 1,000 feet long, pedestrian walkways may be required in
locations deemed necessary by the Planning Board. Such walkway shall
be 10 feet wide and be straight from street to street when possible and
shall be paved. Lots abutting such a walkway shall be treated as a
corner lot.
C. For commercial, group housing or industrial use, block size shall be
sufficient to meet all area and yard requirements for such use.
A. Lot dimensions and area shall not be less than the requirements of
Chapter 268, Zoning, of the Code of the Township of Cedar Grove,
provided that this subsection shall not be construed to deprive any
owner or subdivider of the right to apply under N.J.S.A. 40:55-39c87 to
the Board of Adjustment for a variance where a proposed major or
minor subdivision containing a lot or lots which do not comply with the
minimum dimension and area requirements of the said Chapter 268,
Zoning, has been otherwise approved in accordance with the provisions
of § 234-8B or 234-18.
B. Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight
streets and radial to curved streets.
C. Each lot must front upon a public street at least 50 feet in width, except
lots fronting on streets described in § 234-25D(5) of this article.
D. Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of existing streets,
lots shall begin at such extra width line; and all setbacks shall be
measured from such line.
E. Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for their
intended use, due to factors such as rock formations, flood conditions or
similar circumstances, the Planning Board may, after adequate
investigation, withhold approval of such areas.
87.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:55-39c was repealed by P.L. 1975, c. 291, and replaced by N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70.
§ 234-25 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 234-28
234:629
A. In large scale developments, easements along rear property lines or
elsewhere for utility installation may be required. Such easements shall
be at least 15 feet wide and located in consultation with the companies
or Township departments concerned.
B. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway
channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or
drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such
watercourse, and such further width or construction, or both, as will be
adequate for the purpose.
C. Natural features, such as trees, brooks, hilltops and views, shall be
preserved whenever possible in designing any subdivision containing
such features.
D. Where required by the Planning Board, the subdivider shall reserve
from 5% to 10% of the land for recreational purposes.
E. Any land shown on the Master Plan as proposed for park, playground,
school site or other public use may be designated and reserved for such
use.
§ 234-28 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 234-28
234:630
ARTICLE VII
Penalties for Noncompliance
§ 234-29. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-31-1977 by Ord. No.
77-35; 10-23-2006 by Ord. No. 06-656]
If, before final subdivision approval has been granted, any person transfers
or sells or agrees to transfer or sell, except pursuant to an agreement
expressly conditioned on final subdivision approval, as owner or agent, any
land which forms a part of a subdivision for which municipal approval is
required by this chapter, such person shall be subject to a penalty not to
exceed $2,000 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both,
and each lot disposition so made may be deemed a separate violation.
§ 234-30. Civil remedies.
In addition to the penalty set forth in § 234-29, if the streets in the
subdivision are not such that a structure on said land in the subdivision
would meet requirements for a building permit under Section 3 of Chapter
434 of the Laws of 1953 (N.J.S.A. 40:55-1.32)88, the Township may institute
and maintain civil action:
§ 234-31. Lien upon portions of land.
In any civil action referred to in § 234-30, the transferee, purchaser or
grantee shall be entitled to a lien upon the portion of the land from which
the subdivision was made that remains in the possession of the subdivider
or his assigns or successors. The lien shall secure the return of any deposit
made or purchase price paid and also a reasonable search fee, survey
expense and title closing expense, if any. Any such action must be brought
within two years after the date of the recording of the instrument of
transfer, sale or conveyance of said land or within six years, if unrecorded.
A. For injunctive relief.
B. To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to such a
contract or sale if a certificate of compliance has not been issued in
accordance with Section 24 of Chapter 433 of the Laws of 1953 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1.2489).
88.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:55-1.32 was repealed by P.L. 1975, c. 291, and replaced by
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32, 40:55D-38 to 40:55D-41 and 40:55D-44.
89.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:55-1.24 was repealed by P.L. 1975, c. 291, and replaced by
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-56.
§ 234-29 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 234-31
234:631

ARTICLE VIII
Copies of Provisions; Appeals
§ 234-32. Copies of chapter available for use of public.
Copies of this chapter shall be made available to the public at the office of
the Township Clerk upon payment of a reasonable charge therefor as fixed
by resolution of the governing body.
§ 234-33. Appeals. [Added 1-31-1977 by Ord. No. 77-35]
Any person aggrieved by any final decision of the Planning Board pursuant
to this chapter may appeal such final decision to the governing body of the
Township in accordance with the procedures provided in Chapter 38, Land
Use Procedures, of the Code of the Township of Cedar Grove.
§ 234-32 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 234-33
234:633
Chapter 237
SWIMMING POOLS, PRIVATE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use procedures — See Ch. 38.
Building construction — See Ch. 102.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 119.
Housing standards — See Ch. 158.
Hydrants and sprinklers — See Ch. 161.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 179.
Plumbing — See Ch. 194.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 197.
Sewers — See Ch. 217.
Soil removal — See Ch. 226.
Public swimming pools — See Ch. 239.
Water — See Ch. 259.
Wells, cisterns and holes — See Ch. 265.
Zoning — See Ch. 268.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Authority to adopt general police
regulations — See N.J.S.A. 40:69A-29.
§ 237-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL — Includes artificially constructed swimming
pools or tanks and portable pools, together with all walkways which are
above ground level, railings, fences and other appurtenances forming an
integral part of the pool or tank, established or maintained upon any
premises by any individual for his own or his family's use or for use by
guests of his household.[Amended 11-4-1974 by Ord. No. 74-22]
WADING POOL — Includes artificially constructed pools not designed or
used for swimming, with a maximum area of 120 square feet and a
maximum pool depth of 24 inches.
§ 237-2. Permit required.
A. It shall be unlawful to establish or construct a private swimming pool
without first having obtained a permit therefor in the manner
hereinafter prescribed.
B. No permit shall be required for a wading pool.
§ 234-33 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 237-3
237:634
§ 237-3. Application procedure. [Amended 8-7-1961; 1-14-1974 by
Ord. No. 74-22]
Application for a permit under this chapter shall be made to the Township
Building Inspector by the owner of the property. The application shall be
accompanied by two sets of plans and specifications or proper descriptive
brochures.
§ 237-4. Review of application; issuance of permit. [Amended
8-7-1961; 1-14-1974 by Ord. No. 74-22]
The Building Inspector shall not pass on the structural features or durability
of the proposed private swimming pool but shall review the application
for compliance with the rules and regulations hereinafter set forth. If the
application complies with such rules and regulations, has been approved by
the Department of Health and the proposed private swimming pool is one
which is totally above ground, the Building Inspector shall issue a permit
for the construction or installation of such pool. If the application complies
with the rules and regulations, has been approved by the Department of
Health and the proposed private swimming pool is one which is not totally
above ground, the Building Inspector shall, within five days after receipt
of the application, or following any additional length of time as agreed
to by the applicant, file said application with the Planning Board which
shall review the application in accordance with the site plan requirements
for drainage and landscaping. If the proposed private swimming pool is
one which is not totally above ground, the Building Inspector shall issue a
permit for the construction or installation of such pool only after approval of
the application by the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall take action
in passing on the application within 45 days from receipt of the application
or within any additional time as agreed to by the applicant. If the Planning
Board fails to take action within such a time period, the application shall be
deemed to have been approved by the Planning Board.
§ 237-5. Fees. [Amended 8-7-1961; 11-7-1988 by Ord. No. 88-326]
§ 237-6. Construction materials.
All material used in the construction of private swimming pools shall be
waterproof and easily cleaned. The bottom and sides of the pool shall be
A. The minimum fee for a permit issued under this chapter shall be $100.
If the construction costs of the private pool shall be in excess of $1,000,
there shall be charged an additional fee in accordance with the
schedule of fees for a building permit prescribed in Section 118.2 of the
Basic Building Code as changed and modified by the Building Code of
the Township, as set forth in § 102-3 of the Code of the Township of
Cedar Grove. [Amended 11-4-1974 by Ord. No. 74-22]
B. Permit fees shall be collected by the Building Inspector at the time of
the issuance of the permit.
§ 237-3 SWIMMING POOLS, PRIVATE § 237-6
237:635
either white or a light color, except that aluminum paint shall not be used
as a finish. Sand or earth bottoms shall not be used.
§ 237-7. Water supply.
There shall be no physical connection between a potable public or private
water supply system at a point below the maximum flow line of the pool or to
a recirculating or heating system of a pool unless such physical connection
is so installed and operated that no pool water can be discharged or
siphoned into a potable water supply system.
§ 237-8. Drainage system. [Amended 11-4-1974 by Ord. No. 74-22;
11-7-1988 by Ord. No. 88-326]
All private swimming pools hereinafter constructed shall be provided with
not over one two-inch diameter galvanized-iron pipe, or equal drain
approved by the Township Engineer, extending from said pool to either a
brook or storm sewer.
§ 237-9. Water supply standards; test equipment.
§ 237-10. (Reserved)90
§ 237-11. Lighting.
No artificial lighting shall be maintained or operated in connection with said
pool in such manner as to be a nuisance or an annoyance to neighboring
properties.
A. All private swimming pools, when open for use, shall at all times be
maintained and operated so that the water quality shall meet the
following standards:
(1) Bacterial. Free chlorine residual in excess of 0.3 parts per million,
or not more than one positive confirmed coliform test in any fiftycubic-
centimeter portion.
(2) Chemical. The water shall be alkaline as measured by a pH test.
(3) Physical. The clarity shall be such that a black and white disk, six
inches in diameter, is visible at the bottom of the pool at the
deepest point.
B. Equipment necessary for daily chemical testing shall be kept on the
premises at all times when the pool is in operation.
90.Editor's Note: Former § 237-10, Location requirements, amended 8-7-1961 and 11-4-1974
by Ord. No. 74-22, was repealed 3-6-1989 by Ord. No. 89-340.
§ 237-6 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 237-12
237:636
§ 237-12. Fencing requirements.
Every private swimming pool shall be completely enclosed by a fence not
less than 48 inches high, of durable construction, with openings no greater
than six inches and having at least one gate. Where possible, the fence
should be located at least three feet from the edge of the pool. The gate or
gates shall remain securely locked at all times when the pool is not in use.
§ 237-13. Compliance required; enforcement.
Every private swimming pool constructed or to be constructed in the
Township shall at all times comply with the requirements of all health
authorities having jurisdiction in the premises, and any nuisance or hazard
to health which may exist or develop in or in consequence of or in
connection with any such swimming pool shall forthwith be abated and
removed by the person in possession of such pool, upon receipt of notice
from the Building Inspector, Health Officer or other designated official
named by the Department of Health.
§ 237-14. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-17-1962;
7-30-1984 by Ord. No. 84-222; 10-23-2006 by Ord. No. 06-656]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000 or by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 239
SWIMMING POOLS, PUBLIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Advisory Health Council — See Ch. 31.
Places of amusement — See Ch. 88.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 179.
Use of recreation areas — See Ch. 205.
Sewers — See Ch. 217.
Soil removal — See Ch. 226.
Private swimming pools — See Ch. 237.
Water — See Ch. 259.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Adoption of health codes by reference — See
N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 et seq.
§ 237-12 SWIMMING POOLS, PUBLIC § 239-1
239:637
§ 239-1. Applicability.
This chapter shall not be deemed to apply to or include swimming or wading
pools established or maintained upon any premises by any individual for his
own or his family's use or for the use of guests of his household.
§ 239-2. Definitions. [Amended 1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 77-64]
§ 239-3. Adoption of standard code by reference. [Amended
1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 77-64]
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SWIMMING POOL CODE OF NEW JERSEY (1970) — That certain code
approved by the State Department of Health for adoption by reference
by local boards of health in accordance with law, being a code:
Regulating and controlling the location and construction, alteration
and operation of swimming pools as therein defined.
(1)
Regulating and controlling the issuance of licenses to locate and
construct, alter or operate swimming pools as therein defined.
(2)
(3) Declaring and defining certain swimming pools as nuisances.
B. Whenever the following words, terms or phrases are used in the
Swimming Pool Code of New Jersey (1970), they shall have the
following meanings herein given:
BOARD OF HEALTH — The Department of Health of the Township.
REGISTERED MAIL — Includes certified mail.
A. Pursuant to and in accordance with the Public Health and Sanitation
Codes Adoption by Reference Act (N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 to 26:3-69.6),
there is hereby established and adopted as the Swimming Pool Code of
the Township the whole of the Swimming Pool Code of New Jersey
(1970). A printed copy of said code is annexed to and incorporated by
reference in this chapter.
B. The Swimming Pool Code of New Jersey (1970) is hereby incorporated
in this chapter by reference and made a part hereof as fully as though it
had been set forth at length herein.
C. In accordance with law, 10 printed copies of the Swimming Pool Code of
New Jersey (1970) have been placed on file in the office of the Township
Clerk and in the office of the Health Officer of the Township and shall
remain on file in said offices for the use and examination of the public so
long as this chapter shall remain in effect.
§ 239-1 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 239-4
239:638
§ 239-4. License required. [Amended 1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 77-64]
No person shall operate a swimming pool until the licenses or permits
therefor as required by the Swimming Pool Code of New Jersey (1970) shall
have been issued by the Department of Health.
§ 239-5. Fee. [Amended 11-19-1979 by Ord. No. 79-117]
The fee for a license or renewal of a license under this chapter shall be
$250 per annum; except that swimming pools maintained exclusively as
accessory uses for training or testing functions in conjunction with a related
commercial business shall pay a fee of $50 per annum.
§ 239-6. Term of license.
Licenses issued under this chapter shall expire on April 15 of each year.
§ 239-7. Renewal procedure.
An application for renewal of a license issued under this chapter shall be
submitted, together with the required fee, at least 10 days prior to April 15
of each year.
§ 239-8. Denial, revocation or suspension of license; appeals.
§ 239-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-17-1962; 1-9-1978
by Ord. No. 77-64; 7-30-1984 by Ord. No. 84-222; 10-23-2006 by
Ord. No. 06-656]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, including the
Swimming Pool Code of New Jersey (1970), shall, upon conviction thereof,
be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000 or by imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
A. A license required under this chapter may be denied or suspended or
revoked by the Township Health Officer, as head of the Department of
Health, for failure to comply with any provision of this chapter,
including the Swimming Pool Code of New Jersey (1970) incorporated
herein by reference. [Amended 1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 77-64]
B. The person whose license has been denied or suspended or revoked
may take an appeal as provided in § 31-7 of the Code of the Township of
Cedar Grove.
§ 239-4 SWIMMING POOLS, PUBLIC § 239-9
239:639
Chapter 242
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 55. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 251.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Power to license taxicabs — See N.J.S.A.
40:52-1.
§ 239-9 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 239-9
242:640
ARTICLE I
Taxicab Licenses
§ 242-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TAXICAB — Includes any automobile or motor vehicle, commonly called
"taxi," engaged in the business of carrying passengers for hire, which is held
out, announced or advertised to operate on and over the public streets or
highways of the Township and, particularly, accepts persons who may offer
themselves for transportation from a place within the Township.
§ 242-2. Taxicab license required.
No taxicab shall be operated along any street in the Township for the
purpose of accepting passengers within the Township unless and until the
owner, lessee or bailee of the vehicle shall first obtain a license therefor,
commonly known as a "taxicab license," granted by the Council and issued
by the Township Clerk. Only such duly authorized taxicabs are authorized
to accept passengers within the Township limits.
§ 242-3. Conformity of vehicle required.
No taxicab license shall be granted authorizing the operation of any vehicle
as a taxicab unless said vehicle conforms with all the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 242-4. Limitation on number of licenses.
The Council hereby finds and determines that the number of taxicabs
necessary for the convenience of residents of the Township shall not exceed
15 in number. Taxicab licenses shall not be issued and outstanding for more
than 15 taxicabs unless the Council, by resolution, from time to time shall
find and determine that the public convenience and necessity require a
greater or lesser number than 15 and fixes said maximum number.
§ 242-5. License application.
All applications for taxicab licenses shall be made in writing under oath
upon forms furnished by the Township Clerk and approved by the Council.
The applicant shall set forth completely the information therein requested
and file said application with the Township Clerk. The application shall be
accompanied by the license fee prescribed in § 242-9.
§ 242-6. Investigation of applicant; report.
Upon the filing of the application for a taxicab license, the Township Clerk
shall refer the same to the Chief of Police, who shall conduct an
investigation of the applicant and make a report of such investigation. The
§ 242-1 TAXICABS § 242-6
242:641
report and a copy of the traffic and police record of the applicant, if any,
shall be attached to the application, which shall be returned to the Township
Clerk for presentation to the Council.
§ 242-7. Approval and issuance.
§ 242-8. Compliance with statutory provisions on insurance and
power of attorney required.
No taxicab licensee shall operate, cause or permit to be operated any
taxicab unless the provisions of Article I of Chapter 16 of Title 48 of the
Annotated Statutes of New Jersey, as amended and supplemented (N.J.S.A.
48:16-1 et seq.), relating to liability and property damage insurance and
power of attorney, have been and continue to be complied with, unless
otherwise required by state law.
§ 242-9. Term of license; fee; renewal.
A. If the Council finds that the applicant is fit, willing and able to provide
such public transportation and to conform to the provisions of this
chapter, the Council shall approve the issuance of a taxicab license.
B. Upon payment of the fee prescribed in § 242-9, the Clerk shall then
issue a taxicab license which shall state:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The number and description of the vehicles authorized under such
license.
(3) The minimum hours of service to be provided.
(4) The approved location of the cabstand, if any.
(5) The date of issuance thereof.
A. A taxicab license shall be issued for a term of one year commencing
January 1 and expiring on December 31 of the year of its issuance.
B. The annual license fee shall be: [Amended 4-20-1987 by Ord. No.
87-289]
(1) Taxicab owner: $25 each.
(2) Fleet owner: minimum of $150.
(3) Additional fee for each taxicab in excess of six: $35 each.91
91.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, dealing with license renewal, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 4-20-1987 by Ord. No. 87-289.
§ 242-6 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 242-10
242:642
§ 242-10. Transfer of licenses prohibited.
No taxicab license may be sold, assigned, mortgaged or otherwise
transferred.
§ 242-11. Substitution of vehicles.
Vehicles listed on the license may be substituted or replaced by other
vehicles only after the vehicle sought to be substituted shall have been
inspected and written approval given by the Chief of Police that such vehicle
complies with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 242-12. Suspension or revocation of license; notice; appeals.
A. The Council shall have the authority to suspend or revoke any taxicab
license issued under this chapter whenever, for just cause and in the
public interest, the Township Council deems suspension or revocation is
warranted including, but not by way of limitation, where the licensee
has:
(1) Discontinued operations for more than 30 days.
(2) Violated any ordinance of the Township or the laws of the United
States or the State of New Jersey, the violation of which reflects
unfavorably on the fitness of the licensee to offer public
transportation.
(3) Violated any of the provisions of this chapter.
(4) Performed any act which would be a basis for a denial of the
application.
B. Prior to suspension or revocation, the licensee shall be given written
notice of the action proposed to be taken and the reasons therefor and
shall have an opportunity to be heard.
§ 242-10 TAXICABS § 242-12
242:643

ARTICLE II
Taxicab Driver Permits
§ 242-13. Driver's permit required.
No person shall operate a licensed taxicab for hire upon the streets of the
Township, and no person who owns or controls a licensed taxicab shall
permit it to be so driven, and no taxicab licensed by the Township shall be so
driven at any time for hire, unless the driver of said taxicab shall have first
obtained and shall have then in force a taxicab driver's permit duly issued
by the Township Clerk.
§ 242-14. Qualifications.
No taxicab driver's permit shall be granted unless the applicant therefor:
§ 242-15. Application procedure.
All applications for taxicab driver's permits shall be made in writing under
oath upon forms furnished by the Township Clerk and approved by the
Council and shall be filed with the Clerk. The applicant shall set forth
completely the information therein requested and shall have attached
thereto the Township Physician's certificate referred to in § 242-14. The
application shall be accompanied by two photographs of the applicant of the
size of 2 1/2 inches by 2 1/2 inches and the permit fee set forth in § 242-19.
§ 242-16. Investigation of applicant; report.
Upon the filing of the application for a taxicab driver's permit, the Township
Clerk shall refer the same to the Chief of Police, who shall conduct an
investigation of the applicant and make a report of such investigation. The
report and a copy of the traffic and police record of the applicant, if any,
shall be attached to the application, together with the indicated approval or
disapproval, and shall be returned to the Township Clerk.
§ 242-17. Consideration of application; criteria for approval;
appeals.
A. Is at least 18 years of age. [Amended 12-18-1972 by Ord. No. 72-20]
B. Submits with his application a certificate from the Township Physician,
at the applicant's own cost, certifying that the applicant has been
examined within the preceding 30 days and that he has no infirmity of
body or mind which might render him unfit for the safe operation of a
taxicab.
A. The Chief of Police, after considering the application for a taxicab
driver's permit and the police report and Township Physician's
certificate attached thereto, shall approve or reject the application.
B. The Chief of Police may refuse to approve the grant or renewal of a
taxicab driver's permit to any applicant:
§ 242-13 TAXICABS § 242-17
242:645
§ 242-18. Issuance.
Upon the approval of the Chief of Police of a taxicab driver's permit and
upon payment of the permit fee prescribed in § 242-19, the Township Clerk
shall issue to the applicant the permit, upon which shall appear his name,
address, age, description, signature and the name of the taxicab licensee
employing him, and a photograph of the applicant of the size of 2 1/2 inches
by 2 1/2 inches shall be attached to such permit.
§ 242-19. Term of permit; fee; renewal.
§ 242-20. Suspension or revocation; appeals.
(1) Convicted of a crime.
(2) Convicted of driving a motor vehicle resulting in death to any
person or of driving a motor vehicle while under the influence of
intoxicating liquor or a narcotic or habit-producing drug.
(3) Convicted of violating any federal or state law relating to
prostitution or to the use, possession or sale of narcotic drugs or
intoxicating liquors.
(4) Who has been an habitual violator of traffic laws.
(5) Who has been an habitual user of intoxicating liquors or narcotic
drugs.
(6) Whose automobile driver's license issued by the State of New
Jersey or whose Township driver's permit to operate a taxicab has
been suspended or revoked.
(7) Whenever for just cause the Chief of Police finds the applicant unfit
to drive a taxicab.
C. If the application is rejected, the applicant, within 30 days, may request
a personal appearance before the Council to offer evidence as to why
his application should be reconsidered.
A. A taxicab driver's permit shall be issued for a term of one year,
commencing on January 1 and expiring on December 31 of the year of
its issuance.
B. The fee for a taxicab driver's permit shall be $10 per year, payable to
the Township Clerk. [Amended 4-20-1987 by Ord. No. 87-289]
C. The taxicab driver's permit may be automatically renewed upon
approval of the Chief of Police and the successful passing of a physical
examination given by the Township Physician at the applicant's expense
and upon payment to the Township Clerk of the annual fee of $10,
unless the permit for the preceding year has been revoked. [Amended
4-20-1987 by Ord. No. 87-289]
§ 242-17 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 242-20
242:646
§ 242-21. Permittee limited to working for designated employer.
§ 242-22. Display of permit.
Every driver of a taxicab licensed under this chapter shall post the taxicab
driver's permit issued to him by the Township, including the photograph
thereon, in such conspicuous place as to be in full view of all passengers
while he is operating the taxicab.
A. The Chief of Police shall have and is hereby given the authority to
suspend or revoke any taxicab driver's permit issued under this article
if the permittee has:
(1) Violated any of the provisions of this chapter.
(2) Violated any of the ordinances of the Township or the laws of the
United States or of the State of New Jersey, the violation of which
reflects unfavorably on the fitness of the permittee to drive a
taxicab.
(3) Performed any act which would be the basis for a denial of the
application.
B. A person whose permit is suspended or revoked may, within 30 days,
request a personal appearance before the Council to offer evidence as
to why the suspension or revocation should be reconsidered.
A. The holder of a taxicab driver's permit shall not operate a taxicab
licensed under this chapter except for the employer designated in his
permit.
B. If the holder of a taxicab driver's permit shall voluntarily terminate his
employment for his employer designated in his permit or is discharged
from such employment, said employer shall, within 24 hours, so notify
the Township Clerk in writing. In such case, the permit shall be
automatically canceled and terminated, and the permit shall be
surrendered to the Township Clerk. If, during the same calendar year,
such driver applies for a reinstatement of his taxicab driver's permit, no
fee shall be charged for the issuance of such permit.
§ 242-20 TAXICABS § 242-22
242:647

ARTICLE III
Construction of and Equipment for Taxicabs
§ 242-23. Arrangement of doors.
§ 242-24. Required lights.
Every taxicab shall be equipped with the following lights:
A. All taxicabs shall have four doors, two leading into the passenger's
compartment and two leading into the driver's compartment. The doors
shall be so constructed that they may be opened from the inside and the
outside. Each door shall be constructed with an approved safety lock.
B. All upholstery covering or interior lining of any taxicab, except the roof
lining, shall be of leather or other nonabsorbent and washable material.
C. Removable floor mats shall be provided of rubber or other
nonabsorbent material.
A. A passenger compartment light adequate to illuminate the interior of
the passenger's compartment and with a switch easily accessible to the
passenger.
B. An exterior roof light of an approved design, on both sides of which
shall be placed the word TAXI in letters of at least three inches in
height.
§ 242-23 TAXICABS § 242-24
242:649

ARTICLE IV
Inspections
§ 242-25. Inspection of taxicab required prior to issuance of
license.
Before a taxicab license is issued under this chapter, the taxicab for which
such license is requested shall be driven by the applicant or his
representative to a place designated by the Chief of Police and shall be
inspected by the Chief of Police or his representative to ascertain whether
such taxicab complies with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 242-26. Inspections after issuance of taxicab license.
§ 242-27. Inspection failure.
Any taxicab licensed under this chapter which is found, after police
inspection, to be unsafe or in any way unsuitable for taxicab service or
to fail to conform to the requirements of this chapter may be immediately
ordered out of service by the Chief of Police and, before again being placed
in service, shall be delivered to the Chief of Police or his representative for
reinspection.
§ 242-28. Record of inspections.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to maintain detailed records
covering inspections of taxicabs.
A. Subsequent to the issuance of the taxicab license and during the
months of April, August and December, taxicabs shall be driven by the
licensee or his representative to a place designated by the Chief of
Police and shall be similarly inspected by the said Chief or his
representative to ensure the continued maintenance of the safe and
sanitary operating conditions as required by this chapter.
B. In addition to the inspections required by Subsection A of this section, it
shall be the duty and right of the Chief of Police or his representative, at
irregular intervals, to inspect the taxicab for the purpose of
ascertaining whether or not this chapter is being violated.
§ 242-25 TAXICABS § 242-28
242:651

ARTICLE V
Fares, Rates and Schedules
§ 242-29. Issuance of rate card; display required; changes.
For every taxicab for which a taxicab license shall be granted under this
chapter, the Township Clerk shall issue a rate card setting forth a complete
schedule of the rates or fares to be charged all passengers as set forth in
the application. Such rate card shall, at all times, be displayed in a card
frame and posted within plain view of all passengers. Any person charging
in excess of the posted rates shall be deemed to have violated this chapter.
Any changes in rates would necessitate an amendment to the application.
§ 242-30. Receipts to be furnished upon request.
The driver of any taxicab shall, upon demand by the passenger, render to
such passenger a receipt for the amount charged, on which shall be the
name of the holder of the taxicab license, license number, amount of fare
and date of transaction.
§ 242-31. Refusal to pay legal fare prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the legal fare after
having hired the taxicab, and it shall be unlawful for any person to hire any
such vehicle with intent to defraud the person from whom it is hired of the
value of such service.
§ 242-29 TAXICABS § 242-31
242:653

ARTICLE VI
Service, Operation and Conduct of Drivers
§ 242-32. Service required of taxicab licensees.
All persons engaged in the taxicab business in the Township operating
under the provisions of this chapter shall render an overall service to the
public desiring to use taxicabs. Holders of taxicab licenses shall maintain a
central place of business and keep the same open for at least the minimum
hours stipulated on the license, for the purpose of receiving calls for taxicab
service and dispatching taxicabs pursuant thereto. All licensees or their
representatives shall answer all calls received for taxicab services inside
the Township limits as soon as they can do so. If said services cannot be
rendered within a reasonable time, they shall then notify the prospective
passenger as to how long it will be before the call may be answered and
give the reason therefor. Any holder of a taxicab license issued under this
chapter who shall refuse to accept a call for taxicab service anywhere within
the Township limits at any time when such licensee has taxicabs available,
or who shall fail or refuse to give overall service, shall be deemed to have
violated this chapter.
§ 242-33. Required service.
§ 242-34. Maximum number of passengers; restrictions on
passengers in front seat.
§ 242-35. Additional customers.
No driver shall permit any other person to occupy or ride in any taxicab
unless the person or persons first employing the taxicab shall consent to the
acceptance of the additional passenger or passengers.
§ 242-36. Receipt and discharge of passengers.
Drivers of taxicabs shall not receive or discharge passengers in the
roadway, but shall pull up to the right-hand sidewalk as nearly as possible
A. No driver shall refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person upon
request, unless the driver is previously engaged or unable to comply or
prohibited from so doing by the provisions of this chapter.
B. A driver shall comply with all reasonable and lawful requests of his
passenger or passengers as to the speed of the vehicle and the route to
be taken.
A. At no time shall more than two persons, in addition to the driver, ride in
the front seat of any taxicab.
B. No cab driver shall permit more than five passengers, in addition to
himself, to be carried as passengers in the taxicab. A child under five
years of age shall not be counted as a passenger.
§ 242-32 TAXICABS § 242-36
242:655
or, in the absence of a sidewalk, to the extreme right-hand side of the road
and there receive or discharge passengers, except upon one-way streets,
where passengers may be discharged on either the right- or left-hand
sidewalk or side of the roadway in the absence of a sidewalk.
§ 242-37. Personal appearance of driver.
Drivers of taxicabs shall be clean and neat in appearance at all times.
§ 242-38. Disposition of lost articles.
Every driver of a taxicab shall thoroughly search the interior of such taxicab
at the termination of each trip for any article of value which may be left in
such taxicab by a passenger. Any article found therein shall be immediately
returned to the passenger owning it, if he is known; otherwise, it shall be
deposited with the licensee of the taxicab at the conclusion of the driver's
tour of duty. A written report, in duplicate, of the finding and deposit of such
article shall be made by the said licensee within 24 hours to the Chief of
Police.
§ 242-39. Daily records to be kept; records to be open for
inspection.
The driver of each taxicab shall keep a daily record upon which all trips
are recorded, showing time and place of origin and destination of each trip
and amount of fare charged therefor. All such records shall be retained for
two years by the licensee of the taxicab, who shall be responsible for the
maintenance of daily records of all taxicabs operated by him. The forms
for such daily records shall be furnished by the said licensee after prior
approval thereof by the Chief of Police. All such records to be maintained by
the licensee shall be open to inspection by the Chief of Police at any time.
§ 242-40. Accidents.
Any motor vehicle accident involving a taxicab and causing injury to a
person or persons or to property of another in excess of $100 shall be
reported immediately by the driver to the police; and the said taxicab shall
not be moved until released by the police, except in an emergency where
there is immediate danger to life or limb.
§ 242-36 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 242-40
242:656
ARTICLE VII
Enforcement; Penalties
§ 242-41. Designation of enforcement official.
The Chief of Police shall be charged with the duty of enforcing the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 242-42. False statements in application deemed a violation.
Any person who shall make false statements in any application for a license
or permit under this chapter or in any record that he is required to maintain
under this chapter shall be guilty of violating this chapter.
§ 242-43. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-17-1962]
A. Any person who violates or permits, aids or abets the violation of any
provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by
a fine not exceeding $2,000 or by imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues. [Amended 7-30-1984 by Ord. No. 84-222; 10-23-2006
by Ord. No. 06-656]
B. In addition to the penalty provided in Subsection A of this section, any
taxicab license or taxicab driver's permit may be suspended or revoked,
as provided in §§ 242-12 and 242-20.
§ 242-41 TAXICABS § 242-43
242:657
Chapter 244
TOWING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 55. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 251.
§ 244-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:11-5(1)(u), a list of towing contractors to provide towing services for
the Township of Cedar Grove ("Township") on a rotating basis, and to
establish, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.49, regulations governing
contractors engaged in the removal of motor vehicles.
§ 244-2. Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the
following meanings, unless context clearly indicates otherwise:
ABANDONED — Any automobile which is parked in a public place or on
a person's property without the property owner's consent, without the
current year's registration or license plates, as required by law, for a period
of more than 48 hours or is positioned so as to constitute an obstruction to
traffic.
AUTOMOBILE — A private passenger automobile of a private passenger,
station wagon, or sport utility vehicle type that is owned or leased and is
neither used as a public or livery conveyance for passengers not rented to
others with a driver; and a motor vehicle with a pickup body, or delivery
sedan, a van, or a panel truck or a camper type vehicle used for recreational
purposes owned by an individual, not customarily used in the occupation,
profession or business of the owner(s).
BASE OF SERVICE — The location where the towing contractor stations its
tow vehicle(s) when not in use.
BASIC TOWING SERVICE — The removal and transportation of an
automobile at the request or call of authorized personnel or members of the
Police Department as may be required when abandoned, disabled, damaged
in accidents, illegally parked, recovered after being stolen or in cases of
emergency, from a highway, street, or other public or private road, or a
parking area, or from a storage facility, and other services normally incident
thereto, but does not include recovery of an automobile from a position
beyond the right-of-way or berm, or from being impaled upon any other
object within the right-of-way or berm.
CAR CARRIER — A car carrier shall have a commercially manufactured
chassis certified by the manufacturer. The vehicle shall be equipped with
a hydraulically powered winch. The tilt bed or slide back shall be
§ 242-43 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 244-2
244:658
hydraulically operated. The vehicle shall also be equipped with tie-down
chains, proper safety lights and amber rotation emergency flashing lights.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of the Police Department of the Township
or his/her designee.
LIGHT DUTY — A light duty wrecker shall have a commercially
manufactured chassis certified by the manufacturer for light duty towing.
Each shall be equipped with a commercially manufactured lifting apparatus
with dual rear wheels, safety chains, proper safety lights, rear floodlights
and amber rotation emergency flashing lights.
MOTOR VEHICLE ACCIDENT — An occurrence in which a private
passenger automobile comes in contact with any other object for which the
private passenger automobile must be towed or removed for placement in
a storage facility. This includes all situations which are accidental to one
person even if caused by the intentional acts of another.
NONBASIC TOWING SERVICES — All towing services which are not basic
towing services or private passenger automobiles, as defined herein.
STORAGE SERVICES — The maximum allowable amount of storage charges
to be charged per twenty-four-hour period or a fraction thereof. Each new
twenty-four-hour period begins at 12:01 a.m.
TOWING CONTRACTOR — A licensed individual or entity placed upon the
rotary list that performs towing services for the Township.
TOWNSHIP STORAGE FACILITY — A storage area or lot owned by the
Township.
TOW VEHICLE — Only those vehicles equipped with a boom or booms,
winches, slings, tiltbeds, wheel lifts, or under reach equipment specifically
designed by its manufacturer for the removal or transport of private
passenger automobiles.
§ 244-3. Rotary list of towing contractors.
A. This chapter establishes a list of towing contractors to provide basic
and nonbasic towing services for the Township on a rotating basis. The
Police Department will maintain the rotary list and determine the time
period for each rotation. The list of towing contractors shall be
determined by and under the direct supervision of the Chief of Police.
B. A towing contractor shall be placed on the rotary list in the order in
which its application was approved. Each new towing contractor shall
initially be placed last on the list. No towing contractor may be listed
more than once and no contractor shall be permitted to lease its tow
vehicles to another licensed tow contractor in order to receive multiple
listings.
C. Towing services must be provided on a twenty-four-hour, seven-daysper-
week basis. It is required that a tow vehicle be on the site of the
event within 15 minutes of the time of the call from the Police
Department. If a towing contractor is called and for any reason does not
§ 244-2 TOWING § 244-3
244:659
§ 244-4. License required; application.
or cannot perform the requested towing service, the next towing
contractor on the list will be called to perform the towing service.
D. If no towing contractor on the rotating list is able to perform towing
services when necessary, the Township is entitled to have said service
performed by a towing contractor not contained on the rotating list.
E. During adverse weather conditions or other emergency conditions, all
towing contractors on the rotating list shall give priority to requests for
towing services made by the Township over requests made by third
parties.
A. A person or entity seeking placement on the rotary list shall be required
to submit an application and receive the approval of the Police
Department before issuance of a towing contractor's license.
B. All applicants are required to complete a form furnished by the
Township Clerk, providing any and all information prescribed by the
Chief of Police. This information includes, but is not limited to, the
following:
(1) The name, business address, telephone number, driver's license
number, social security number of the owner of the towing
company. If the owner is a corporation, the application shall contain
the name, residence, business address, and telephone number of
every stockholder owning more than 10% of issued stock, as well as
the entity's employer identification number.
(2) Policies or certificates of insurance coverage as provided in this
chapter.
(3) The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of two business
references who have known the applicant for at least two years.
(4) Certification that the applicant will be able to provide towing
services anywhere in the Township with a maximum response time
of 15 minutes.
(5) Certification that storage facilities and service will be available as
provided in this chapter.
(6) Certification of consent to appointing Township Clerk as the
applicant's true and lawful attorney for the purpose of accepting
and acknowledging service of legal process by any court of
competent jurisdiction against the applicant.
(7) A sketch plan indicating the location of the storage area, the
number of vehicles that can be properly stored, and the total
square footage of the storage area.
§ 244-3 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 244-4
244:660
§ 244-5. Denial, suspension or revocation of license; hearings.
C. Each towing contractor must be able to demonstrate to the Township
that it is thoroughly qualified and experienced in the towing and
removal of vehicles of all types, and that it has adequate facilities,
equipment, expertise, licensing, and personnel to perform the services
required by these specifications in a manner satisfactory to the Police
Department. Among other requirements promulgated from time to time
by the Police Department, these specifications include storage capacity
of up to 30 vehicles, storage facility equipped with a security fence,
ample lighting, and twenty-four-hour security cameras. The towing
contractor's storage facilities shall not be located more than 2.5 miles
from any Township border. [Amended 6-20-2005 by Ord. No.
05-631]
D. The Police Department will conduct a background check of the towing
contractor, its officers, and employees prior to making a determination
of placement on the towing list. Any persistent violations and/or high
incident of motor vehicle accidents in the past 10 years may warrant a
driver ineligible. A conviction of a felony will disqualify any contractor
unless waived by the Township upon application and for good cause.
E. A towing license may be denied, suspended, or revoked upon any of the
following grounds:
(1) Submitting a fraudulent or misleading application.
(2) A criminal conviction of the towing operator or a named principal
of the towing operator.
(3) Failure to respond reliably and promptly to calls for assistance or
any other unsatisfactory performance action which interferes with
the proper operation of the rotating system maintained by the
Police Department.
(4) Failure to utilize safe and adequate equipment as defined in this
chapter.
(5) Violations of motor vehicle laws and/or municipal ordinances.
(6) Failure or refusal to tow or remove a motor vehicle when requested
to do so by an appropriate municipal official.
(7) Violations of Chapter 268, Zoning, or any other applicable
ordinances or codes of the Township pertaining to the use or
condition of the premises used by the licensee in conducting the
towing business.
(8) Violations of the provisions of this chapter or any of its rules,
regulations, and policies promulgated under it.
F. Licenses shall be issued for a period from January 1 to December 31
and renewed for the succeeding year if all qualifications are met.
§ 244-4 TOWING § 244-5
244:661
§ 244-6. Enforcement; regulations.
The Police Department in general and the Chief of Police in particular
shall enforce the provisions of this chapter as well as rules and regulations
adopted under it.
A. When an application for a license is denied by the Township, the
applicant may request a hearing on said application by the service of a
notice requesting a hearing. Said notice shall be served on the
Township Clerk. At the next regularly scheduled meeting of the
governing body, a hearing date shall be set which shall be no less than
seven days nor more than 30 days from the date of governing body's
scheduled meeting.
B. Proceedings for the suspension or revocation of a license shall be
initiated by the service of a notice of charges proffered against the
licensee. Said notice shall be served by the Chief of Police or his/her
designee, either personally or by certified mail, return receipt
requested, and shall contain a date, time and place for a hearing to be
held by the governing body of the Township. Said hearing shall be
scheduled no less than seven days nor more than 30 days after the
notice of the proposed suspension or revocation shall be served upon
the licensee. The licensee shall have the right to file an answer to the
notice and to appear in person, or be represented by counsel, and give
testimony at the place and time fixed for the hearing.
A. Cards and statement of rates.
(1) The contractor, at its own expense, shall prepare a written
statement of rates on three-inch-by-five-inch printed cards which
will be provided to the Police Department for distribution to vehicle
owners at the scene of an accident.
(2) The rate card shall provide information on claiming a vehicle, the
name of the business, its owner, tower's license number, as well as
the business location, telephone number and hours of operation for
the public. The card shall also state its rates for towing services,
and include all methods of acceptable payment.
(3) The rates applicable to towing services performed shall be posted
in a conspicuous place, visible to the public at the contractor's
place of business.
(4) The contractor shall, at its expense, prepare a printed bill for
distribution to the customer, reflecting the fee to be paid in
accordance with the rates stated on the printed card, unless
otherwise approved by the Police Department. The bill shall also
include the information set forth in Subsection A(2), as well as a
statement to the effect that all complaints shall be referred to the
Police Department. The format of this form shall be approved by
the Township Manager.
§ 244-5 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 244-6
244:662
(5) The contractor shall accept from any owner, or his representative,
methods of payment in the form of cash, certified check, money
order and by at least one major credit card. A major credit card is
defined as one issued under American Express, Discover, Master
Card, or Visa. The contractor is not obligated to accept personal
checks for payment.
B. Hours of service.
(1) Towing services must be provided on a twenty-four-hour, sevenday-
per-week basis. It is required that a tow vehicle be on the site
of the event within 15 minutes of the time of the call from the Police
Department. The contractor shall provide the Police Department a
telephone number which will be manned at all times to quickly
dispatch tow vehicles.
(2) The contractor's normal hours of operation for the public shall be
from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. The Police
Department shall be provided twenty-four-hour access to the tow
contractor's yard.
C. Employees.
(1) The towing contractor shall employ a sufficient number of
employees to comply with the minimum operational requirements.
(2) No person shall be employed by the contractor for towing under
this chapter unless he or she has submitted to a background check
and has been approved by the Police Department.
(3) All drivers of the contractor shall be over the age of 18 years and
must have a valid, current, New Jersey State driver's license, shall
be in good health, and shall possess good community standing.
(4) In order to keep information current, the contractor will be
required to submit a roster of drivers to the Police Department on a
monthly basis. No driver shall perform services unless previously
listed by the contractor and approved by the Police Department.
(5) Complaints of any kind, relative to service, overcharging, theft of
parts, damage to towed vehicles, discourteous treatment, and the
like, shall be referred to the Police Department for investigations.
(6) All employees of the contractor shall wear uniform clothing with a
name patch indicating the employee's first name and name of the
contractor's company. All employees shall be clean, neat, and make
a good appearance. All employees of the contractor will be required
to wear photo identification badges.
(7) The contractor agrees that the owners or officers of the contractor
shall be responsible, except as otherwise provided by law, for the
negligent acts of their employees while acting under this chapter.
§ 244-6 TOWING § 244-6
244:663
D. Conduct of contractors and operators generally. No person owning or
operating a tow vehicle shall:
(1) Stand at any public street, intersection, or any public property,
awaiting for employment, without first obtaining the consent of a
police officer, or stand on any private property without first
obtaining the consent of the owner of the property.
(2) Seek employment by repeatedly and persistently driving his tow
vehicle in a short space in front of any disabled vehicle or by
otherwise interfering with the properly and orderly progress of
traffic along the public highways. The contractor shall wait until it
receives official notification from the Police Department of the
Township before commencing operations.
(3) Permit or invite loitering within or near the tow vehicle.
(4) Solicit, demand, or receive from any person any pay, commission or
compensation whatsoever, except the proper fee for transporting
the disabled vehicle in accordance with the schedule of service
rates listed in those specifications.
(5) Pay any gratuity, tip, moneys or compensation of any kind to any
third person not involved in the accident or to any Township
employee, for information as to the location of the accident, or for
soliciting the employment of licensee's services, nor give any
gratuities, fees or other compensation or gifts to any Township
employee.
(6) Act in an unprofessional manner, be discourteous or disrespectful
to members of the public as well as representatives of the
Township. While members of the public, especially those whose
cars may have been towed or impounded, may at times resort to
strong language, threats and unbecoming behavior toward the
contractor, the contractor and its employees are expected to
exercise restraint and not to respond in kind, and thereby reflect
unfavorably on the Township.
E. Classification of equipment.
(1) The contractor must provide with its application a detailed listing
of the equipment to be utilized while on the towing list. The listing
shall include the following information: type of vehicle, storage
location of vehicles and whether vehicle is owned or leased. All
leased and rented equipment must be permanently located at the
contractor's base of service at all times during the term of the
contract. Each piece of the equipment must meet the minimum
standards set forth herein. Equipment that cannot meet these
minimum standards shall not be used for the towing list. The
contractor is solely responsible for the safety, maintenance, and
operation of each piece of equipment utilized while on the towing
list. The contractor shall provide a minimum of one light duty
§ 244-6 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 244-6
244:664
wrecker, one car carrier vehicle and one of those vehicles shall be
equipped with four-wheel drive.
(2) The Police Department shall keep a register of the names of all
those owning or operating tow vehicles accepted on the towing list,
together with the license number, the description of such wreckers
and the date and complete record of inspections made of them by
the Police Department. This register shall be maintained by the
contractor. All operators being used on the tow list shall meet all of
the licensing requirements of the Township.
(3) The towing contractor shall supply manufacturer's certification of
the lifting capacities of the devices on each type of vehicle with
application submission. A certified testing laboratory test result is
also acceptable for rating lift capacity.
(4) Tow vehicles shall be equipped with two-way communications with
tow contractor's office facilities. These communications shall be
available 24 hours a day.
(5) Tow vehicles shall be equipped at all times with safety vests for
operators, first aid kits, hand tools, lockout kits, flashlight, broom,
shovel, work gloves and receipts for services rendered. No
additional charge for use of this equipment is permitted.
(6) Tow vehicles shall be kept in a clean and neat appearance so as to
be reasonably accommodating to persons who may come in contact
with such vehicles.
(7) Tow vehicles shall have the name, address, and telephone number
of the contractor painted on or permanently attached to both sides
of the tow vehicle in compliance with Motor Vehicle and Traffic
Laws of New Jersey (Title 39 of the Revised Statutes).
(8) All tow vehicles shall be properly permitted by the State of New
Jersey for the use of flashing amber emergency lights. Permits shall
be in compliance with Motor Vehicle and Traffic Laws as
referenced above.
(9) All tow vehicles shall be registered in the name of the contractor in
compliance with Motor Vehicle and Traffic Laws as referenced
above.
F. Record book of vehicles towed.
(1) The contractor shall record all vehicles towed in a book kept for
such purposes. The details of each disabled vehicle towed, serviced
or transported together with full information of the towed vehicle
and name and address of the owner and the charges paid for his
services. Full information of the towed vehicle shall include, but not
be limited to, the vehicle's license number, VIN registration
number, make, model, color and year. The record book herein
§ 244-6 TOWING § 244-6
244:665
described shall be kept open for inspection at all times by any
duly authorized representative of the Township. A monthly towing
record containing the information herein stated above shall be filed
with the Police Department and the Township Clerk setting forth
the details of all tows by vehicle type, date, time of day, sector,
and whether additional services were required. Each incident shall
be reported using the invoice number used for billing. The form of
these reports shall be approved by the Chief of Police.
(2) The contractor shall maintain a record of all personal property in a
towed vehicle that it can observe in sight at the time the vehicle
comes into possession.
(3) Authorized representatives of the Township shall have access to
any of the records required to be kept by the contractor.
(4) There shall be a consecutive, sequential control number assigned
by the Police Department to be used in every instance by the
Township and the contractors. All forms, communications, and
other documents memorializing the transaction shall use this
control number.
G. Policies and procedures.
(1) The Chief of Police is hereby authorized and empowered to
establish from time to time written policies and procedures as may
be reasonable and necessary to obtain compliance with the terms
of this chapter and the laws of the State of New Jersey. All written
policies promulgated by the Chief of Police shall be approved by
resolution of the Township Council.
(2) All regulations, policies and procedures as well as the tower's rate
cards shall be made available for inspection by the public at the
Township Clerk's office during normal business hours.
H. Disputes and adjustments.
(1) Complaints by motor vehicle owners of price gouging or any other
objectionable practice by any tow contractor will be referred to the
Chief of Police who shall promptly investigate and resolve any
disputes.
(2) Any disputes over the interpretation of this chapter, including the
reasonableness of any charges assessed, shall be settled amicably,
if possible, through negotiations between the contractor, the Police
Department and the Township Manager.
(3) In cases where the Township has mistakenly directed that a vehicle
be towed or has acted on incorrect information supplied by official
sources, the contractor will be reimbursed by the Township only for
the minimum applicable towing fee as stipulated herein.
I. Subcontracts and leases.
§ 244-6 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 244-6
244:666
§ 244-7. Towing and storage fee schedule.
§ 244-8. Nonbasic towing service.
This chapter is not intended to regulate or set fees for nonbasic towing
services or the towing or storage of trucks and buses. Such service, if
requested, shall be billed at reasonable prevailing rates. The towing
contractor shall submit a list of fees in advance for nonbasic towing to the
(1) Towing contractors shall not lease or rent equipment without the
written approval of the Township. The equipment must comply with
the minimum requirements of these specifications and the contract
to lease or rent equipment must be at least for the duration of
service with the Township. All leased and rented equipment must
be permanently located at the contractor's base of service at all
times while the contractor is on the tow list. Copies of all leases
must be filed with the Township Clerk.
(2) Except as set forth in Subsection I(3) below, the tow contractor
shall not be able to subcontract his equipment or portions of the
work to other tow contractors.
(3) In the event that a tow contract on the rotating list is unavailable
due to vacation, the tow contractor may subcontract his equipment
or work for a maximum of two weeks twice per year only to another
tow contractor who is approved by the Chief of Police.
A. The following fees are established as being the usual, customary, and
reasonable rates which shall be charged for towing and storage of
automobiles defined as basic towing service:
(1) Towing of impounded cars: $95. [Amended 9-8-2003 by Ord. No.
03-598; 2-14-2005 by Ord. No. 05-626]
(2) Towing cars (if flatbed is required): $100. [Amended 9-8-2003 by
Ord. No. 03-598; 2-14-2005 by Ord. No. 05-626]
(3) Storage: $30 for each calendar day. [Amended 9-8-2003 by Ord.
No. 03-598]
(4) Yard charge only for accidents: $40.
B. There shall be no additional charges, other than those provided in the
fee schedule, including, but not limited to, flat-bedding, waiting time,
winching, up-riding, cleanup costs, and additional labor.
C. The above towing charges shall not apply when the operator of vehicle
elects either a specific tower or to be towed to a destination other than
the licensed storage facility. In such cases, the towing charges shall be
mutually agreed upon between the operator of the vehicle and the
towing contractor.
§ 244-6 TOWING § 244-8
244:667
Chief of Police, who shall have the sole discretion in determining reasonable
prevailing rates.
§ 244-9. Charge for service.
§ 244-10. Insurance.
A. The towing fees set forth for basic towing service and those billed for
nonbasic towing service are the amounts that the towing contractor will
charge to the vehicle owner or representative. Unless otherwise
provided in this chapter, the Township shall never be responsible for
payment of any towing charges, except for Township-owned vehicles.
B. In the event the Police Department requires a vehicle involved in a
crime or a fatal accident to be held for investigation, the Chief of Police
may, after review of all of the circumstances, waive storage fees, or a
portion thereof, incurred up to the date of release.
A. Towing contractors shall be required to purchase, maintain, and
provide during the time of service on the rotary list proof of insurance
furnished by a reputable insurance company licensed to do business in
the State of New Jersey, containing the following coverage with liability
limits as set forth below:
(1) Garage liability/comprehensive general liability insurance policy in
an amount not less than $1,000,000 combined single limit covering
bodily injury and property damage liability including but not
limited to personal injury; products liability (where applicable),
independent contractor, and completed operation coverage.
(2) Garagekeepers' legal liability insurance policy in an amount not
less than $500,000. Said policy must include both comprehensive
and collision, and an endorsement to include "on hook."
(3) Automobile liability insurance policy in an amount not less than
$500,000 combined single limit covering bodily injury and property
damage liability including but not limited to owned, nonowned, and
hired vehicles.
(4) Workers' compensation insurance as required by law, including, but
not limited to, statutory New Jersey workers' compensation
benefits, and employers' liability of at least $100,000.
(5) Excess/umbrella liability. In the event that garage liability and/or
automobile liability cannot be purchased up to the required
$1,000,000 limit, an excess liability or umbrella liability policy must
be purchased to effect a total liability limit of $1,000,000. Excess or
umbrella liability policies will not be required for garage and
automobile policies that meet or exceed the $1,000,000 minimum
limit.
§ 244-8 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 244-10
244:668
§ 244-11. Indemnity.
The towing contractor will execute an agreement to hold harmless,
indemnify and defend, at contractor's expense, the Township, its employees
and officials from any and all claims, demands, suit or action for personal
injury or property damage brought against the Township, its employees and
officials for any activities which arise out of any services performed under
this chapter.
Chapter 246
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Shade Tree Committee — See Ch. 67.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 100.
Sales and storage of Christmas trees — See
Ch. 116.
Property maintenance — See Chs. 197 and
198.
Use of recreation areas — See Ch. 205.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 234.
§ 246-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Tree Removal and Protection Ordinance
of the Township of Cedar Grove."
§ 246-2. Findings and purpose.
The Township Council of the Township of Cedar Grove finds: that the
preservation, protection and planting of trees aids in the stabilization of soil
by the prevention of erosion and sedimentation; reduces stormwater runoff
and the potential damage it may create; aids in the removal of pollutants
from the air and assists in the generation of oxygen; provides a buffer
and screen against noise and pollution; provides protection against severe
weather; aids in the control of drainage and restoration of denuded soil
subsequent to construction or grading; provides a haven for birds and other
wildlife and otherwise enhances the environment; protects and increases
property values; conserves and enhances Township's physical and aesthetic
appearance; and generally protects the public health and safety as well as
the general welfare.
§ 246-3. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:
MAJOR TREE — A deciduous tree with a mature height of at least 50 feet
which shall be of a caliper of at least 2 1/2 inches measured 4 1/2 feet
B. The garage liability and automobile liability policies shall name the
Township as additional insured and certificate holder.
§ 244-10 TREES § 246-3
246:669
above the ground when planted (e.g., red Norway, silver or sugar maple;
sweetgum; London plane tree; American sycamore; white, red or pin oak;
American elm; yellow or white poplar; or copper beech).
MINOR TREE — An evergreen tree, ornamental tree or other small tree at
least six feet in height at time of planting (e.g. birch, dogwood, Japanese
maple, cherry, crabapple, magnolia, Bradford pear, willow, cedar, spruce,
pine, fir or hemlock).
PERSON — The owner of a parcel of real estate or any other individual,
group, company, firm, corporation, partnership, association, society or other
legal entity.
SPECIES — For purposes of this chapter, the common name of the tree.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation, whether installed on, above or below the
surface of a parcel of land.
§ 246-4. Permit required. [Amended 12-18-2006 by Ord. No.
06-664]
No person shall cut down or remove any tree of a caliper of four inches or
greater measured at a height of 4 1/2 feet above the ground without a tree
removal permit, except that a person may remove two trees within a twentyfour-
month period without applying for a tree removal permit pursuant to
this chapter.
§ 246-5. Application procedure.
A. Application for a tree removal permit shall be made by submission of
the following:
(1) An original and two copies of an application on forms provided by
the Township containing the following information: the name and
address of the applicant; the street address and tax lot and block of
the property in question; and the number of trees to be removed.
The Township Manager, or his designee, may require the
submission of additional information that will assist in the
processing of the tree removal permit. [Amended 12-18-2006 by
Ord. No. 06-664]
(2) An original and two copies of a tree removal plan consisting of a
map drawn to scale showing the location of all trees to be removed,
the species of such trees and their caliper. In the event that the
application is for the removal of more than five trees, the tree
removal plan must be prepared, signed and sealed by a licensed
professional engineer or land surveyor, and must show the location
of all existing and proposed structures on the property, together
with the distance, up to 15 feet, that the trees proposed to be
removed are located from such structures and from property lines.
§ 246-3 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 246-5
246:670
§ 246-6. Fees. [Amended 12-18-2006 by Ord. No. 06-664]
The fee for a tree removal permit shall be $100.
§ 246-7. Standards for application review.
The following standards for review of applications shall apply:
(3) An original and two copies of a tree mitigation plan, if mitigation is
required pursuant to § 246-7D hereof, consisting of a map drawn to
scale showing the location of all trees to be planted, the species of
such trees and their caliper or size as required.
(4) An original and two copies of a separate list of the trees to be
removed identifying each tree on the tree removal plan by species
and caliper, and stating the condition of each tree as "dead" or
"good," and further explaining why removal is justified under the
standards of this chapter. [Amended 12-18-2006 by Ord. No.
06-664]
(5) The application fee pursuant to § 246-6.
B. The applicant shall place a one-inch-wide red, yellow or blue ribbon
around the trunk of each tree to be removed at a height of 4 1/2 feet
above the ground so that the proposed tree removal may be inspected
in the field.
A. Permitted removal. No tree shall be permitted to be removed unless the
tree is:
(1) Located within the building footprint of a proposed principal
building.
(2) Located between the curblines of a proposed roadway approved
pursuant to Chapter 234, Subdivision of Land.
(3) Located within the roadway right-of-way but outside the curbline of
a proposed roadway approved pursuant to Chapter 234,
Subdivision of Land, subject to the provisions of Subsection D(8) of
this section.
(4) Dead or poses a safety hazard.
(5) Located within 15 feet of any building.
(6) Located within the area of a proposed driveway, walkway, utility
line, accessory building or any other structure.
(7) Located in a front yard area proposed to be landscaped.
(8) Located in a recreation area which shall not exceed an area of land
equal to 50% of the rear yard of a lot on which a building is
proposed or measured within the first 80 feet from the rear
§ 246-5 TREES § 246-7
246:671
building line, less areas in the side yards and rear yard where trees
are to be removed pursuant to other provisions of this subsection.92
B. Conflict with other laws. Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to
the contrary, no tree removal shall be permitted where prohibited by
Chapter 268, Zoning (e.g., buffer zones and crestline provisions), or any
other municipal, state or federal statute, ordinance or regulation.
C. Hardship appeal. In the event that an applicant believes the standards
set forth in Subsection A above constitute a hardship which prohibits a
reasonable use of all or substantially all of the property in question, an
applicant may seek relief from the governing body of the Township of
Cedar Grove. In the event that such relief is sought, the applicant shall
submit an additional eight copies of the documents required to be
submitted, together with 11 copies of a written statement as to the
reasons for the claimed hardship. In addition, the applicant shall submit
a fee for the hearing of the matter in the amount of $300. The governing
body, upon submission of a complete application to the Township Clerk,
shall schedule a public hearing in connection with the requested relief.
The applicant shall cause to be published in an official newspaper of the
municipality a notice setting forth the time, date and place of the
hearing to be so held, together with a brief statement of the relief
requested. Such notice must be published within 10 days prior to the
date of the hearing. Additionally, the applicant shall cause to be served
upon all property owners within 200 feet of the property in question a
similar notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal
service. Proof of publication and service of notice shall be required to
be submitted prior to the hearing. At the hearing, the applicant shall
present witnesses under oath, and any other interested parties may do
the same. All witnesses shall be subject to cross-examination. The
decision of the governing body shall be binding upon the municipal
official in charge of enforcement and administration of this chapter.
D. Mitigation. Mitigation for tree removal shall be required as follows:
(1) No mitigation shall be required in connection with tree removal
conducted pursuant to a permit issued under Subsection A(1) and
(2) of this section. [Amended 12-18-2006 by Ord. No. 06-664]
(2) Mitigation shall be required pursuant to Subsection D(4) of this
section in the event of tree removal pursuant to Subsection A(5)
through (8) of this section.
(3) In the event of tree removal pursuant to Subsection A(4), no
mitigation shall be required if the tree has been planted for at least
five years, there has been no damage to the tree by construction or
otherwise by any person, and there has been no soil-moving within
15 feet of such tree within such five years; otherwise, mitigation
shall be required pursuant to Subsection D(4) of this section.
92.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(9), regarding being permitted to be removed in a site
plan, was repealed 12-18-2006 by Ord. No. 06-664.
§ 246-7 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 246-7
246:672
(4) For each tree for which mitigation is required, pursuant to
Subsection D(2) and (3) above, the following shall apply:
[Amended 12-18-2006 by Ord. No. 06-664]
(a) For each tree removed pursuant to the standards of this
chapter of a caliper of four inches to no more than six inches,
the applicant shall plant a major or minor tree as defined in
this chapter on the property in question, or in the event that
the applicant asserts the planting would be inappropriate and
the Township arborist agrees, the applicant may in lieu of such
planting provide to the municipality a payment equal to the
cost of such planting as determined by the Township arborist
pursuant to § 246-7(D)(5)(a).
(b) For each tree removed pursuant to the standards of this
chapter of a caliper of more than six inches, the applicant shall
plant a major tree as defined in this chapter on the property in
question, or in the event that the applicant asserts the planting
would be inappropriate and the Township arborist agrees, the
applicant may in lieu of such planting provide to the
municipality a payment equal to the cost of such planting as
determined by the Township arborist pursuant to
§ 246-7(D)(5)(a).
(5) Monies collected by the Township pursuant to § 246-7(D)(4)(a) and
(b) shall be collected and expended pursuant to following the
procedures.
(a) The Township arborist, who shall be a trained forester or a
certified tree expert, shall determine and maintain a schedule
setting forth the replacement costs for major or minor trees
required to be planted pursuant to § 246-7(D)(4) (“Mitigation
Fee Schedule”). The Mitigation Fee Schedule shall set forth the
data and information used by the Township arborist to
determine the replacement costs in the Mitigation Fee
Schedule.
(b) Funds remitted to the Township pursuant to § 246-7(D)(4) shall
be deposited and maintained in a separately designated bank
account (“Tree Fund”).
(c) Monies in the Tree Fund may only be expended for the planting
of shade and/or ornamental trees in any public street, public
park or public right-of-way at locations on the Tree Planting
Schedule defined in § 246-7(D)(5)(e).
(d) Each December, the Township shall publish an inventory of
trees located on public streets, public parks and public rightsof-
way (“tree inventory”). The Township arborist shall be
required to maintain and update the tree inventory.
§ 246-7 TREES § 246-7
246:673
§ 246-8. Performance bond. [Amended 12-18-2006 by Ord. No.
06-664]
Except in the event of tree removal pursuant to an approved subdivision or
site plan where a performance bond to assure tree planting was posted, as
a precondition to the issuance of a permit where mitigation is required, the
applicant shall post a cash bond to assure mitigation in an amount equal to
the amount determined by the Township arborist for each minor and major
tree to be planted pursuant to § 246-7(D)(4). The bond shall be returned to
the applicant upon completion of the required mitigation.
§ 246-9. Protection of existing trees.
(e) In conjunction with the publication of the tree inventory, the
Township shall publish a schedule of trees on the tree
inventory to be replaced or new tree plantings to be made on
public streets, public parks or public rights-of-way in the
ensuing twelve months (“tree planting schedule”). The
Township shall then notice and hold public hearings on the tree
planting schedule.
(f) Trees purchased with monies in the tree fund shall be planted
at locations on the tree planting schedule nearest to the site(s)
that generated the remittance of monies pursuant to
§ 246-7(D)(4).
(6) In the event that it is unknown or in question in any given instance
as to whether mitigation should be determined on the basis of a
minor tree or major tree, mitigation shall be required on the basis
of a major tree.
(7) In the event that it is unknown how many trees were removed from
any given site, and removal took place without a tree permit issued
pursuant to this or the predecessor Chapter 246, adopted August 5,
1963, as may have been amended, the number of trees requiring
mitigation shall be computed by assuming trees over six inches in
caliper existed 30 feet on center and plotting the maximum number
of those trees as circles of a fifteen-foot radius without having the
circles overlap or extend beyond the property lines or drip lines of
existing trees.
(8) In connection with tree removal pursuant to Subsection A(3) of this
section, it shall be required that the applicant plant major trees, on
center a distance of 30 feet, as street trees between the curbline
and the edge of the right-of-way in a location determined by the
Township Engineer and the official administering this chapter.
(9) Mitigation in any instance is not to be considered a penalty, but
rather an implementation of the purposes of this chapter.
Mitigation shall not be a substitute for, but shall be in addition to
any penalty imposed for violation of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 246-7 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 246-9
246:674
§ 246-10. Administration and enforcement. [Amended 3-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 07-669]
This chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Township Manager
or his designee. The Township arborist, who shall assist in the enforcement
of this chapter as set forth herein, shall be selected through a fair and
open process pursuant to N.J.S.A. 19:44A-20.3 et seq. After the selection
of the Township arborist, the Township shall enter into a contract with the
arborist, which shall set forth the fees charged by the arborist for providing
services to the Township. The Township’s contract with the arborist shall
be published with the publication of the tree inventory and tree planting
schedule as provided herein.
A. In connection with any construction, subsequent to tree clearing but
prior to the issuance of a building permit or start of construction, snow
fencing or other protective barrier acceptable to the official charged
with the administration and enforcement of this chapter shall be placed
around trees that are not to be removed. The protective barriers shall
be placed at least 10 feet from the trunk of any tree and shall remain in
place until all construction activity is terminated. No equipment,
chemicals, soil deposits or construction materials shall be placed within
any area so protected by barriers. Any landscaping activities
subsequent to the removal of the barriers shall be accomplished with
light machinery or hand labor.
B. No person shall:
(1) Cut down or remove any tree except as permitted by this chapter or
allow or cause such cutting or removal.
(2) Cause or allow any willful damage, injury or disfigurement of any
tree growing within the Township. For purposes of this subsection,
the actions of any person shall be deemed willful if the damage,
injury or disfigurement of any tree is caused as the result of but not
limited to the following: cutting, gashing or slitting of any tree; the
pouring of any liquid or other material on any tree; or on the nearby
ground; the construction or placement of any nonporous material
on the ground around any tree so as to cut off air, light or water
from the roots; or placement or removal of any soil from within 10
feet of any tree.
(3) Store or pile building material or debris or place construction
equipment within 10 feet of any tree.
C. In the event that any tree to be saved in connection with construction as
set forth above or any tree planted in mitigation shall die within two
years after planting, it shall be replaced by the applicant or the
property owner within six months.
§ 246-9 TREES § 246-11
246:675
§ 246-11. Appeals. [Amended 3-5-2007 by Ord. No. 07-669]
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the official charged with the
administration and enforcement of this chapter shall have the right, within
10 days of the issuance of any decision by such official, to appeal to the
Township Council, which shall take action as it deems necessary in the
matter. In the event of such an appeal, the procedures set forth with
reference to applications based on hardship contained in § 246-7C of this
chapter shall apply.
§ 246-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-23-2006 by Ord.
No. 06-656]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000 or by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days, or both, and each tree removed or damaged
in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a separate offense.
Chapter 248
OPEN SPACE TRUST FUND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use procedures — See Ch. 38.
Redevelopment plans — See Ch. 206.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 234.
Zoning — See Ch. 268.
§ 248-1. Establishment of fund.
There is hereby established an Open Space Trust Fund, which fund shall be
administered by the governing body of the Township of Cedar Grove.
A. Powers and duties. The governing body of the Township of Cedar Grove
is authorized by majority vote to make the acquisition of lands,
acquisition of property or easements within the Township of Cedar
Grove for active and passive recreation, and for conservation purposes.
The governing body shall determine the amount of funds that it will
make available for each acquisition.
B. Funding. There is hereby established a reserve in the Township's
general capital fund which shall be known and designated as the "Open
Space Trust Fund." A separate bank account shall be opened and
maintained for this purpose.
(1) The funds from the account may be used, as directed by the
governing body, to acquire vacant land, easements and
development rights. The funds from the account may also be used
to acquire land which has improvements on it at the time of
acquisition provided that the principal purpose of the acquisition is
§ 246-11 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 248-1
246:676
§ 248-2. Establishment of Open Space Trust Committee.
There is hereby established an Open Space Trust Committee, which shall
consist of seven members whose terms and powers are hereinafter set forth.
§ 248-3. Membership of Committee.
The Open Space Trust Committee shall be comprised of the following
persons:
to preserve open space. In the event that the governing body shall
find it appropriate to apportion the cost of acquisition between
open space and improvements, it may do so and charge the Open
Space Trust Fund for the approximate value that the governing
body deems relative to open space and the Township's capital
account for the value that it determines attributable to
improvements.
(2) The Open Space Trust Fund shall be funded through the dedication
to the fund of an amount of up to $0.02 per $1,000 of assessed
valuation of each annual tax levy. The Open Space Trust Fund shall
also be permitted to accept donations and testamentary bequests.
The monies accumulated within the Open Space Trust Fund may be
utilized for the acquisition of land and/or easements. Any and all
interest accruing shall remain in the Open Space Trust Fund and
may be utilized for the above-described purposes. [Amended
1-25-2010 by Ord. No. 10-704; 12-20-2010 by Ord. No.
10-721]
(3) After five years from the date of enactment of this chapter, the
Township Council shall review the desirability of the continuation
of additional funding of the Open Space Trust Fund and either
authorize the continuation or termination of the fund. In the event a
determination is made not to continue funding, this chapter shall
no longer be valid five years from the date of its enactment. 93
C. Disposition of property or other interests in land. No property or
interest in land acquired with monies from the Open Space Trust Fund
shall be leased, sold or otherwise disposed of by the Township until the
disposition has been authorized by the Township Council after and in
accordance with a binding public referendum.
A. One member of the Township Council of the Township of Cedar Grove
appointed by the Township Council.
93.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 08-693, adopted 12-15-2008, provided that the Open Space
Trust Fund is extended up to and including 12-31-2010; and that the Open Space Trust
Fund Committee, established by § 248-2, shall remain charged with the duties originally
set forth by § 248-5. Ordinance No. 10-721, adopted 12-20-2010, further extended the
Open Space Trust Fund up to and including 12-31-2012, and also provided that the
Committee shall remain charged with and discharge the duties set forth by § 248-5.
§ 248-1 TREES § 248-3
246:677
§ 248-4. Terms of office.
§ 248-5. Powers and duties.
B. A Township employee of the Township of Cedar Grove appointed by the
Township Council. [Amended 2-12-2001 by Ord. No. 01-550]
C. Five residents, plus two alternate residents, of the Township approved
by the Township Council. [Amended 3-15-2004 by Ord. No. 04-608]
A. The member of the Township Council appointed to the Open Space
Trust Committee shall have a term of one year.
B. The Director of Community Development's term shall be for one year.
C. The balance of the members of the Committee shall be appointed by the
Township Council and shall serve for a period of three years, except
that the respective terms of office of the originally appointed members
shall be as follows:
(1) Two members shall serve for terms of three years;
(2) Two members shall serve for terms of two years;
(3) One member shall serve for a term of one year.
D. The term of each member, except for the initial term, shall begin on the
first day of January, and each member shall continue in office until his
successor shall be appointed.
A. The Open Space Trust Committee's powers and duties shall be limited
to those enumerated herein. The Open Space Trust Committee shall
serve in an advisory capacity to the Township Council.
B. The Open Space Trust Committee shall prepare a report recommending
the parcels of land which may be acquired in fee. The Open Space Trust
Committee shall also develop and maintain an updated open space and
recreation plan. The Open Space Trust Committee shall submit to the
Township Council the properties which it recommends the Township
acquire. The Township Council shall review the properties submitted
and make a determination as to which properties are to be acquired, if
any.
C. After reviewing the properties referred to above, the Township Council
may proceed to acquire by gift, purchase or by eminent domain
proceedings, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 20:3-1 et seq., the identified parcels
within the financial constraints established by the Township Council.
D. The Open Space Trust Committee shall hold public meetings, which
public meetings shall be held in accordance with the Open Public
§ 248-3 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 248-5
246:678
Chapter 251
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 55.
Parades — See Ch. 184.
Use of recreation areas — See Ch. 205.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 230.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 242.
Towing — See Ch. 244.
Unlicensed vehicles — See Ch. 254.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Power of municipalities to regulate
traffic — See N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.
Meeting Act,94 and the Committee shall give appropriate notification of
said meetings.
E. The Open Space Trust Committee shall select from among its members
a Chair and a Vice Chair to serve as the presiding officer in the absence
of the Chair. The Chair and Vice Chair shall serve one year terms, and
no Chair or Vice Chair shall serve for more than two consecutive terms.
The Committee shall also select a Secretary whose function shall be to
maintain minutes of the Committee's meetings and records of the
proceedings of the Committee.
94.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 248-5 TREES § 248-5
246:679

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 251-1. Definitions.
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the New Jersey
Statutes Annotated shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases
used herein.
§ 251-2. Repealer.
All former traffic ordinances of the Township of Cedar Grove are hereby
repealed, except that this repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution
or punishment of any person for any act done or committed in violation of
any ordinance hereby repealed prior to the taking effect of this chapter.
§ 251-3. Severability.
If any part or parts of this chapter are held to be invalid for any reason,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter.
§ 251-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-23-2006 by Ord. No.
06-656]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, or
except as specifically provided in some other section of this chapter, every
person convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $2,000 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both.
§ 251-1 TREES § 251-4
246:681

ARTICLE II
Parking
§ 251-5. Regulations not exclusive.
The provisions of this article imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other and more restrictive
provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles as set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any other New Jersey statute or as
hereinafter provided.
§ 251-6. Parking prohibited at all times.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule I (§ 251-34) attached to and made a part of
this chapter.
§ 251-7. Parking prohibited during certain hours.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule II
(§ 251-35) of any day upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in
said Schedule II attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 251-8. Stopping or standing prohibited.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle during the times specified in
Schedule III (§ 251-36) of any day upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described in said Schedule III attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 251-9. Parking time limited.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown in
Schedule IV (§ 251-37) at any time between the hours listed in said
Schedule IV of any day upon any of the streets or parts of streets described
in Schedule IV attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 251-10. Angle parking.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts thereof
described in Schedule V (§ 251-38) attached to and made a part of this
chapter except at the angle designated and only within the painted white
stall lines.
§ 251-10.1. Restricted handicapped parking at residences. [Added
10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 17-812]
A. Parking prohibited. No person except as permitted under this section
shall park a motor vehicle in any restricted handicapped parking zone
in front of any residence so designated by ordinance pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.6.
§ 251-5 TREES § 251-10.1
246:683
B. Designation of restricted handicapped parking zones.95 Restricted
handicapped parking zones in front of a residence may be established
from time to time by the Mayor and Council by ordinance, provided that
such residence is occupied by a handicapped person or persons as
defined by law, and:
(1) A windshield placard or wheelchair symbol license plate has been
issued for a vehicle owned by the handicapped person, or by
another occupant of the residence who is a member of the
immediate family of the handicapped person, by the Division of
Motor Vehicles pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1949, c. 280
(N.J.S.A. 39:4-204 et seq.); and
(2) Provided such parking is not otherwise prohibited and the
permitting thereof would not interfere with the normal flow of
traffic.
C. Delineation and signs. The designated restricted parking zones
established in front of residences by ordinance shall be delineated by or
at the direction of the Chief of Police, who shall see to the erection of
appropriate signs pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198.
D. Establishment, the Chief of Police shall provide for the procedure for
the establishment of restricted handicapped parking zone, residence of
handicapped person.
E. Upon the lapse of windshield placard or wheelchair symbol license
plates, whether caused by the failure of the permittee to reapply, or the
death of the permittee, or for any other reason, the restricted
handicapped parking zone, residence of handicapped person, shall be
deemed no longer to be so designated, and all restrictive delineations
and signs shall be removed upon the direction of the Chief of Police.
F. No overnight parking is permitted in any restricted handicapped
parking zone nor is parking permitted in any restricted handicapped
parking zone in violation of the Township's ordinances regarding snow
removal.
G. Penalties. Any person parking a motor vehicle in a restricted parking
space or zone as set forth in this section without a permit shall be
subject to punishment pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, Subsection (3)c.
95.Editor's Note: See § 251-52.1, Schedule XX: Designated Restricted Handicapped Parking
Spaces.
§ 251-10.1 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 251-10.1
246:684
ARTICLE III
Truck Exclusions
§ 251-11. Truck routes established.
A. There is hereby established a system of truck routes within the
township. All trucks having a gross weight in excess of four tons shall
be excluded from all streets in the township except the streets or parts
of streets described in Schedule VI (§ 251-39), attached to and made a
part of this chapter, which form a part of the system of truck routes
upon which trucks are permitted to travel and operate.
B. Nothing within this section shall be construed as preventing such
trucks from making deliveries of merchandise or other property along
streets from which such trucks are excluded or as excluding from any
street in the township any trucks used by public utility companies in
connection with the construction, installation, operation or
maintenance of public utility facilities.
§ 251-11 TREES § 251-11
246:685

ARTICLE IV
One-Way Streets
§ 251-12. One-way streets designated. [Amended 8-21-2000 by Ord.
No. 00-538]
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VII (§ 251-40),
attached to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as oneway
streets in the direction indicated and at the times prescribed.
§ 251-12 TREES § 251-12
246:687

ARTICLE V
Stop and Yield Intersections
§ 251-13. Through streets designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule VIII (§ 251-41), attached to and made a part
of this chapter, are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall
be installed on the near right side of each street intersecting the through
street except where yield signs are provided for in the designations.
§ 251-14. Stop intersections designated. [Amended 1-17-1994 by
Ord. No. 93-432]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
in Schedule IX (§ 251-42) and Schedule IX-A (§ 251-42.1), attached to and
made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as stop intersections.
Stop signs shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 251-15. Yield intersections designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
in Schedule X (§ 251-43) attached to and made a part of this chapter are
hereby designated as yield intersections. Yield signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
§ 251-13 TREES § 251-15
246:689

ARTICLE VI
Special Zones and Areas
§ 251-16. Loading zones designated.
The locations described in Schedule XII (§ 251-45), attached to and made a
part of this chapter, are hereby designated as loading zones.
§ 251-17. Taxi stands designated.
The locations described in Schedule XII (§ 251-45), attached to and made a
part of this chapter, are hereby designated as taxi stands.
§ 251-18. Bus stops designated.
The locations described in Schedule XII (§ 251-46), attached to and made a
part of this chapter, are hereby designated as bus stops.
§ 251-16 TREES § 251-18
246:691

ARTICLE VII
Turn Prohibitions
§ 251-19. U-turns.
No person shall make a U-turn on any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule XIV (§ 251-47) attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 251-20. Turns at intersections.
No person shall make a turn of the kind designated (left, right, all) at any of
the locations described in Schedule XV (§ 251-48) attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 251-21. Prohibited right turns on red signal.
No person shall turn a vehicle to make a right turn when facing a steady red
signal (stop indication) at any of the locations described or during any of the
hours or on any of the days indicated in Schedule XVI (§ 251-49) whenever
official signs are present prohibiting such turn.
§ 251-19 TREES § 251-21
246:693

ARTICLE VIII
Emergency No Parking
§ 251-22. Designation of snow emergency no-parking areas.
§ 251-23. Posting of signs.
§ 251-24. Removal of vehicles.
Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this article shall
be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of
traffic and any peace officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle.
The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal and storage which
may result from such removal before regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ 251-25. Effectiveness of article.
The effectiveness of this article is contingent on signs being erected as
required by law.
A. Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers
the street or highway, no vehicle shall be parked on either side of any of
the streets or parts thereof described in Schedule XVII (§ 251-50)
attached to and made a part of this chapter.
B. The above parking prohibitions shall remain in effect after the snow has
ceased until the streets have been plowed sufficiently and to the extent
that parking will not interfere with the normal flow of traffic.
A. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
streets or sections of streets where temporary emergency no-parking
signs are displayed. The Chief of Police or, in his absence, the ranking
police officer is authorized to declare an emergency and to direct the
posting of said emergency no-parking signs when weather conditions,
accidents, fires or public celebrations dictate or require the avoidance
of hazards or other conditions which interfere with the free flow of
traffic.
B. Notification that emergency no-parking signs are being or will be
posted shall be given to the operator or owner of any vehicle which has
been parked prior to the posting of the signs.
§ 251-22 TREES § 251-25
246:695

ARTICLE IX
Speed Limits
§ 251-26. Limits established.
The speed limit for both directions of traffic along the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule XVIII (§ 251-51), attached to and made a part
of this chapter, is hereby established at the rate of speed indicated.
§ 251-27. Posting of signs.
Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above designated speed limits as authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 251-26 TREES § 251-27
246:697

ARTICLE X
No-Passing Zones
§ 251-28. No-passing zones established.
No-passing zones are hereby established and maintained along those
streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XIX (§ 251-52), attached
to and made a part of this chapter, as authorized by the New Jersey
Department of Transportation in accordance with the sketch dated and
numbered as indicated.
§ 251-28 TREES § 251-28
246:699

ARTICLE XI
Off-Street Parking
§ 251-29. Parking in designated spaces.
No person shall park any vehicle at any location described in this article
except in a designated parking space provided for the general public and
within the spaces appropriately marked upon the pavement of such
location.
§ 251-30. Essex County Hospital parking areas.
No person shall park any vehicle within the Essex County Hospital grounds
except in the following designated parking lots:
A. Parking Lot No. 1: located on the east side of Fairview Avenue south of
the Administration Building.
B. Parking Lot No. 2: located on the east side of Fairview Avenue north of
Henry Smith Drive.
C. Parking Lot No. 3: located north and west of Lukes Street and Sachs
Circle.
D. Parking Lot No. 4: located east of the Wright Building and north of
Keeney Street.
E. Parking Lot No. 5: paved area bounded by the laundry, power plant and
maintenance buildings south of Dill Drive at its eastern end.
F. Parking Lot No. 6: paved area north and west of the auditorium.
G. Parking Lot No. 7: paved areas of the southeast and northwest sides of
the Wright Pavillion.
H. Parking Lot No. 8: paved areas on north and south sides of the graduate
nurses' home.
I. Parking Lot No. 9: paved area east of Rawson Hall along Snavely Street,
paved area on west side of Rawson Hall and paved areas north and
south of attendants' home, which is south of Rawson Hall.
J. Parking Lot No. 10: east side of Walker Way running from male
attendants' home to Ward 60.
K. Parking Lot No. 11: paved area west of student nurses' home and
graveled area along east of roadway running from this area to Read
Road.
L. Parking Lot No. 12: graveled area east and south of occupational
therapy building running along Treadwell Street.
M. Parking Lot No. 13: area east of morgue building which is east of Smith
Drive.
§ 251-29 TREES § 251-30
246:701
§ 251-31. Cedar Grove municipal properties. [Amended 10-19-1987
by Ord. No. 87-300]
N. 96Parking Lot No. 14: area north of Administration Building off Smith
Drive. This parking lot is for special permit parking only. All vehicles
parked therein shall be properly identified. Permits may be obtained
from the Essex County Hospital Administrator's office. [Added 4-18-83
by Ord. No. 83-195]
O. Parking Lot No. 15: paved area along south side of Dining Room No. 1
east of DeCamp Drive.
P. Parking Lot No. 16: areas north and south of driveway running west of
Fairview Avenue to Fire House.
Q. Parking Lot No. 17: paved area south of main kitchen, along east side of
DeCamp Drive opposite kitchen running from Wards 11 to 17, and
graveled area bounded by Barry Street, DeCamp Drive and Wards 10
and 11.
R. Parking Lot 18: paved area along west side of DeCamp Drive and Dining
Room No. 1 overpass to Dining Room No. 2 overpass.
S. Parking Lot No. 19: along southwest side of Walker Drive running past
storehouse and bakeshop.
T. Parking Lot No. 20: paved area at termination of Robertson Road
northeast of reception building.
A. No person shall park any vehicles within the limits of Township of Cedar
Grove property except in the following locations:
(1) Municipal Building parking lot: located south of the Cedar Grove
Municipal Building bordered by Pompton Avenue, Bowden Road
and Cedar Street.
(2) Community Park.
(a) Parking Lot No. 1: located south of the swimming pool
bathhouse.
(b) Parking Lot No. 2: located east of Parking Lot No. 1.
(c) Parking Lot No. 3: located north of the asphalt tennis courts on
Bowden Road.
(d) East side of the park access road between a point 300 feet
southwest of Little Falls Road and the southwest corner of
Parking Lot No. 1.
96.Editor's Note: Former Subsection N, which pertained to Parking Lot No. 14, was repealed
2-22-1983 by Ord. No. 83-192.
§ 251-30 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 251-31
246:702
§ 251-32. Board of Education properties.
No person shall park any vehicle within the limits of the Cedar Grove Board
of Education property except in the following locations:
§ 251-33. Handicapped parking spaces. 97 [Added 4-21-1986 by Ord.
No. 86-260]
The following areas shall be designated as handicapped parking spaces for
use by persons who have been issued special identification cards by the
New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles. No other person shall be permitted
to park in these spaces.
(3) Bowden Pond Tennis Courts: paved and gravel area adjacent to
tennis courts on Little Falls Road.
(4) Morgan's Farm parking lot: located north of the farmhouse on
Pompton Avenue. [Added 11-7-1994 by Ord. No. 94-450]
B. No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit specified
below upon any of the following municipal parking areas:
Parking Area Hours
Maximum
Time Location
Municipal
Building
Parking Lot
8:00 a.m.
to 5:00
p.m.
30 mins. The first 5 spaces south of the
library footbridge
30 mins. The first 5 spaces east of the
designated handicapped
parking space next to the
walkway between the post
office and Municipal Building
A. Memorial High School parking lots: located on the east and west sides
of the school building.
B. Leonard R. Parks School parking lot: located north of the school
building and west of Pompton Avenue.
C. Ridge Road School parking lot and circular driveway: located east of
the school building and west of Ridge Road.
D. North End School parking lot: located on the east side of the school
building.
E. South End School parking lot: located to the south and east of the
school building.
97.Editor's Note: Former § 251-33 restricted parking in front and side yards and was
relocated as part of Zoning Ord. No. 75-66, adopted 2-20-1978 (since superseded). See
now Ch. 268, Zoning.
§ 251-31 TREES § 251-33
246:703
A. The first space east of the designated walkway between the post office
and the Municipal Building and the first space opposite the library
footbridge in the municipal parking complex.
B. The first two spaces west of the swimming pool bathhouse entrance in
Community Park.
C. The first parking space at the westerly end of the customer parking
area at the Cedar Grove Post Office. [Added 6-15-1992 by Ord. No.
92-402]
D. The first three parking spaces south of the exit door at Cedar Grove
Foodtown. [Added 6-15-1992 by Ord. No. 92-402]
E. One parking space on the north side and one parking space on the
south side of the entrance facing Pompton Avenue at Charlie Brown's
Restaurant. [Added 6-15-1992 by Ord. No. 92-402]
F. The first parking space located in the northerly row of parking spaces
behind Montclair Savings Bank. [Added 6-15-1992 by Ord. No.
92-402]
G. The first two parking spaces in front of the main entrance at Cedar
Grove Manor nursing home. [Added 6-15-1992 by Ord. No. 92-402]
H. The first two parking spaces on the south side of Friendly's Restaurant.
[Added 6-15-1992 by Ord. No. 92-402]
I. Two parking spaces in front of the main entrance of Channel Lumber.
[Added 6-15-1992 by Ord. No. 92-402]
J. One parking space on the north side of the rear entrance at First DeWitt
Savings. [Added 9-21-1992 by Ord. No. 92-406]
K. One parking space on the north side of the rear entrance at the retail/
professional office building at 388 Pompton Avenue. [Added
9-21-1992 by Ord. No. 92-406]
L. Four parking spaces across from the entrance of CVS Pharmacy, east of
the shopping cart pen and the first parking space to the east of the
catch basin in the fire zone at the building located at 387 Pompton
Avenue. [Added 9-21-1992 by Ord. No. 92-406; 10-5-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-502]
M. Two parking spaces south of the main entrance in front of the Friar
Tuck Inn. [Added 9-21-1992 by Ord. No 92-406]
N. Two spaces east and across from the main entrance of Pilgrim State
Bank. [Added 9-21-1992 by Ord. No. 92-406]
O. The first parking space on the west side of the main entrance and the
first parking space on the east side of the building at VFW Post 6255.
[Added 9-21-1992 by Ord. No. 92-406]
§ 251-33 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 251-33
246:704
P. The first two parking spaces located in the southerly row of parking
spaces within the parking lot at Morgan's Farm north of the farmhouse.
[Added 11-7-1994 by Ord. No. 94-449]
Q. The first parking space located at the western corner of the front of the
building at Belleville Wire Cloth Company located at 18 Rutgers
Avenue. [Added 11-7-1994 by Ord. No. 94-449]
R. The parking space opposite the entrance on the south side of the
building and the first parking space located in the row of spaces
southeast of the entrance at Il Tulipano Restaurant located at 1131
Pompton Avenue. [Added 11-7-1994 by Ord. No. 94-449]
S. Two parking spaces located on each side of the first walkway at the East
Bradford Avenue entrance of the parking lot at St. Catherine of Siena
Church located at 339 Pompton Avenue. [Added 11-7-1994 by Ord.
No. 94-449]
T. The first parking space located at the northerly corner of the front of
the building and the first parking space nearest the entrance on the
south side of the building at 1384 Pompton Avenue. [Added 11-7-1994
by Ord. No. 94-449; amended 8-21-1995 by Ord. No. 95-462]
§ 251-33 TREES § 251-33
246:705

ARTICLE XII
Schedules
§ 251-34. Schedule I: No Parking.
In accordance with the provisions § 251-6, no person shall park a vehicle at
any time upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Sides Location
Bortic Road North From Route 23 to Little Falls Road
Bowden Road East From Pompton Avenue to Little Falls Road
Bowden Road North From the east curbline of Pompton
Avenue to a point 150 feet east thereof
Canfield Road North From a point 125 feet east of the west
curbline of Sand Park Road to a point 175
feet east thereof
Canfield Road South From a point 200 feet west of the curbline
of Village Park Road to a point 100 feet
west thereof
Cedar Ridge
Drive [Added
8-18-1986 by
Ord. No.
86-276]
South Entire length
Cedar Street North From the curbline of Route 23 to a point
175 feet east thereof98
Church Street
[Added
9-23-1991 by
Ord. No.
91-388]
North From the curbline of Route 23 to a point
100 feet west thereof
Church Street
[Added
9-23-1991 by
Ord. No.
91-388]
South From the curbline of Route 23 to the
intersection of Elm Drive
Commerce Drive North From Pompton Avenue to a point 900 feet
east thereof
Commerce Drive South From Pompton Avenue to Little Falls Road
East Bradford
Avenue
North From the Montclair Town line to Pompton
Avenue
East Bradford
Avenue
South From the Montclair Town line to Ridge
Road
98.Editor's Note: The entry for Church Street, which immediately followed this entry, was
repealed 9-23-1991 by Ord. No. 92-388.
§ 251-34 TREES § 251-34
246:707
Name of Street Sides Location
East Bradford
Avenue
South For 50 feet in front of St. Catherine's
Church
Fairview Avenue Both From a point 200 feet south of Skytop
Road to the Verona Township line (Essex
County Hospital grounds)
Fairview Avenue
(Essex County
Hospital
grounds)
East From the south side of the entrance
driveway to a point 60 feet north of the
north side of the exit driveway
Fairview Avenue West From the south side of the entrance
driveway to a point 60 feet north of the
north side of the exit driveway
Fairview Avenue
(Essex County
Hospital
grounds)
West From the south side of the entrance to
the Doctor's Cottage to a point 40 feet
south thereof
Forest Road West From Westland Road to Beverly Road
Franklin Street South From the curbline of Routes 23 to a point
175 feet west thereof
Grissing Court
[Added
2-22-1983 by
Ord. No.
83-192]
North From the east curbline of Route 23 to a
point 100 feet east thereof
Grissing Court
[Added
2-22-1983 by
Ord. No.
83-192]
South From the east curbline of Route 23 to a
point 185 feet east thereof
Grove Avenue East From West Bradford Avenue to Pompton
Avenue
Grove Avenue
[Added
2-2-1981 by
Ord. No. 81-
147]
West From Route 23 to Rutgers Avenue
Haller Drive
[Added
1-22-2001 by
Ord. No.
01-547]
North/South From Ridge Road to a point 100 feet west
thereof
Highland Road North From the curbline of Route 23 to the east
curbline of Overlook Road
§ 251-34 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 251-34
246:708
Name of Street Sides Location
Lewis Road South Entire length
Little Falls Road South From the east curbline of Pompton
Avenue to a point 550 feet east of
Peckmantown Road
Little Falls Road West From the intersection of Bowden Road to
Peckman River Bridge (Bowden's Pond
and basketball courts area)
Montclair
Avenue
North From Pompton Avenue to Donato Drive
Mountain
Avenue [Added
2-2-1981 by
Ord. No.
81-147]
North From West Lindsley Road to North
Caldwell Town line.
Old Quarry Road
[Added
10-3-1983 by
Ord. No.
83-203]
North From Sunset Terrace to the Montclair
Town line
Otsego Road
[Added
6-18-1979 by
Ord. No. 79-94]
Both Entire length
Ozone Avenue North From the curbline of Route 23 to a point
200 feet west thereof
Ridge Road East From Bradford Avenue to a point
1,513.97 feet south thereof
Ridge Road East From Reservoir Drive to Little Falls Line
Rugby Road North From the west curbline of Ridge Road to
a point 360 feet west thereof
Rutgers Place North Entire length
Sand Park Road North From the west curbline of Village Park
Road to a point 300 feet west thereof
Sand Park Road West From the north curbline of Commerce
Road to a point 950 feet north thereof
South Mountain
Avenue
South From the curbline of Route 23 to a point
175 feet west thereof
Stevens Avenue North From Route 23 to Meadowbrook Lane
Sweetwood
Drive
South From Pompton Avenue to Ira Road
Union Street North From the curbline of Route 23 to Garrett
Street
§ 251-34 TREES § 251-34
246:709
Name of Street Sides Location
Village Park
Road
West From the west curbline of Commerce
Road to a point 150 feet west thereof
Village Park
Road
West From a point 200 feet west of the north
curbline of Commerce Road to the south
curbline of Canfield Road
Vincent Road
[Added
8-13-1990 by
Ord. No.
90-366]
North From the curbline of Route 23 to a point
1,310 feet west thereof
Vincent Road
[Added
8-13-1990 by
Ord. No.
90-366]
South From the curbline of Route 23 to a point
1,325 feet west thereof
Vreeland Lane Both Entire length
Weaver Street
[Added
12-18-2017 by
Ord. No.
17-820]
Both Entire length
West Bradford
Avenue
Both From the curbline of Pompton Avenue
(Route 23) to a point 175 feet west
thereof
§ 251-35. Schedule II: No Parking Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 251-7, no person shall park a any
vehicle between the hours listed upon any of the following streets or parts
of streets:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
All county roads Both 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Entire length
Birch Road [Added
1-2-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-547]
East 7:30 a.m. to
8:30 a.m. /
2:30 p.m. to
3:45 p.m.
(Mon. - Fri.)
(Sept. 1 -
June 30)
From north curbline of Fox
Road to south curb line of
Essex Road
§ 251-34 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 251-35
246:710
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Birch Road [Added
1-2-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-547]
West 7:30 a.m. to
8:30 a.m.
(Mon. - Fri.)
(Sept. 1 -
June 30)
From a point 25 feet south
of the south curbline of
Fox Road continuing to a
point 190 feet south
Cedar Grove Board
of Education
property or Cedar
Grove Municipal
Park
North 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.
Entire length
Haller Avenue
[Added 3-15-2004
by Ord. No.
04-607]
South 2:15 p.m. to
3:15 p.m.
(Mon. - Fri.)
(Sept. 1 -
June 30)
From south curbline of
Ridge Road continuing to
a point 250 feet west
Harper Terrace
[Added 1-7-2002
by Ord. No.
01-571]
North 7:30 a.m. to
8:30 a.m.
(Mon. - Fri.)
(Sept. 1 -
June 30)
From Oak Place in an
easterly direction 175 feet
Lewis Road [Added
12-17-1979 by
Ord. No. 79-120;
amended
11-16-1987 by
Ord. No. 87-303]
North 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
From a point 235 feet west
of the curbline of Grove
Avenue to a point 500 feet
west thereof
Oak Place [Added
2-28-2000 by Ord.
No. 00-526]
East/
West
7:30 a.m. to
8:30 a.m. /
2:30 p.m. to
3:30 p.m.
(Mon. - Fri.)
(Sept. 1 -
June 30)
From Harper Terrace to
South End School property
line
Sherman Avenue
[Added 3-15-2004
by Ord. No.
04-607]
South 2:15 p.m. to
3:15 p.m.
(Mon. - Fri.)
(Sept. 1 -
June 30)
From south curbline of
Ridge Road continuing to
a point 250 feet west
Stevens Road
[Added 1-2-2001
by Ord. No.
01-547]
West 7:30 a.m. to
8:30 a.m.
(Mon. - Fri.)
(Sept. 1 -
June 30)
From North End School
driveway entrance to a
point 200 feet north
§ 251-35 TREES § 251-36
246:711
§ 251-36. Schedule III: No Stopping or Standing.
In accordance with the provisions of § 251-8, no person shall stop or stand
a vehicle between the times specified upon any of the following described
streets or parts of streets:
Name of
Street Side Hours Location
Birch Road East All From the curbline of Highland
Road to the prolongation of the
south curbline of Fox Road
Birch Road West All From the prolongation of the
north curbline of Highland Road
to a point 50 feet north thereof
Birch Road West All From the prolongation of the
north curbline of Highland Road
to a point 50 feet south thereof
Fairview
Avenue [Added
5-16-1988 by
Ord. No.
88-315]
Both All From the curbline of Pompton
Avenue to a point 520 feet west
thereof
Gross Avenue99 East All From the southerly curbline of
West Bradford Avenue to a point
50 feet south thereof
Harper Terrace South 7:30 a.m. to
3:30 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday
From the curbline of Forest
Road to the curbline of Bently
Road
Highland Road North All From the prolongation of the
west curbline of Overlook Road
to the curbline of Birch Road
Montclair
Avenue
North All From the east curbline of Route
23 to a point 140 feet east
thereof
Montclair
Avenue
South All From the east curbline of Route
23 to a point 140 feet east
thereof
Myrtle Avenue North All From the west curbline of Route
23 to a point 150 feet west
thereof
99.Editor's Note: This street was added pursuant to Res. No. 35461, adopted 9-29-1977 by
the Essex County Board of Chosen Freeholders
§ 251-36 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 251-36
246:712
Name of
Street Side Hours Location
Myrtle Avenue South All From the west curbline of Route
23 to a point 150 feet west
thereof
§ 251-37. Schedule IV: Time Limit Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 251-9, no person shall park a vehicle
for longer than the time limit shown upon any of the following streets or
parts of streets:
Name of
Streets Sides Maximum Hours Time Location
All Township
and state roads
[Amended
2-2-1981 by
Ord. No.
81-147]
Both 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m.
30 min. Entire length
Bennett Avenue
[Added
2-2-1981 by
Ord. No.
81-147]
East 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m., except
Saturdays and
Sundays
2 hrs. Entire length
Bowden Road North 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m., except
Saturdays and
Sundays
2 hrs. From the east
curbline of
Pompton Avenue
to the
prolongation of
the center line of
Bruce Court
Briarhill Road
[Added
7-16-2012 by
Ord. No.
12-745]
South 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m., except
Saturdays and
Sundays
2 hrs. From Ridge Road
to a point 200 feet
east thereof
Briarwood
Terrace
Both 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m., except
Saturdays and
Sundays
2 hrs. From Ridge Road
to the Fairway
Cedar Street Both 8:00 an. to 4:00
p.m., except
Saturdays and
Sundays
2 hrs. From Ridge Road
to Sunset Terrace
§ 251-36 TREES § 251-37
246:713
Name of
Streets Sides Maximum Hours Time Location
Cedar Street Both 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m., except
Saturdays and
Sundays
2 hrs. From Ridge Road
to Eastwood Place
Clover Court Both 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m., except
Saturdays and
Sundays
2 hrs. From Ridge Road
to Lynwood Road
Commerce Road North 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m., except
Saturdays and
Sundays
2 hrs. From a point 900
feet east of the
east curbline of
Pompton Avenue
to a point 125 feet
east of the east
curbline of Village
Park Road
Devonshire
Road South
[Added
5-16-1994 by
Ord. No.
94-438]
North 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m., except
Saturdays and
Sundays
2 hrs. From Ridge Road
to a point 250 feet
west along
curbline
Devonshire
Road South
[Added
7-16-2012 by
Ord. No.
12-745]
South 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m., except
Saturdays and
Sundays
2 hrs. From Ridge Road
to a point 250 feet
east thereof
Devonshire
Street [Added
2-2-1981 by
Ord. No.
81-147]
North 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m., except
Saturdays and
Sundays
2 hrs. Entire length
Grove Avenue
[Added
12-21-1981 by
Ord. No.
81-170]
West 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m., except
Saturdays and
Sundays
2 hrs. From the south
curb of Lewis
Road to a point
500 feet south
thereof
Haller Drive Both 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m., except
Saturdays and
Sundays
2 hrs. From Sherman
Avenue to Ridge
Road
§ 251-37 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 251-37
246:714
Name of
Streets Sides Maximum Hours Time Location
Highfield Lane Both 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m., except
Saturdays and
Sundays
2 hrs. From Briarwood
Terrace to
Squirehill Road
Highland Road
[Added
5-4-1987 by
Ord. No.
87-294]
South 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m., except
Saturdays and
Sundays
2 hrs. From a point 186
feet west of the
curbline of
Pompton Avenue
to a point 286 feet
east of the
curbline of
Overlook Road;
and beginning
again from the
west curbline of
Overlook Road to
the curbline of
Birch Road
Jefferson Street
[Amended
2-2-1981 by
Ord. No.
81-147;
11-15-2010 by
Ord. No.
10-713]
Both 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m., except
Saturdays and
Sundays
2 hrs. Entire length
Lakewood
Avenue [Added
7-16-2012 by
Ord. No.
12-745]
North 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m., except
Saturdays and
Sundays
2 hrs. From Ridge Road
to a point 200 feet
west thereof
Mountain Way Both 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m., except
Saturdays and
Sundays
2 hrs. From Ridge Court
to Reservoir Place
Pompton
Avenue
East 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m.
1 hr. From Bowden
Road to Little
Falls Road
Pompton
Avenue
East 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m.
1 hr. From Bradford
Avenue to a point
150 feet south of
Bowden Road
§ 251-37 TREES § 251-37
246:715
Name of
Streets Sides Maximum Hours Time Location
Pompton
Avenue
West 9:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
1 hr. From Bradford
Avenue to a point
260 feet south of
Church Street
Pompton
Avenue
West 9:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
1 hr. From Church
Street to Young
Avenue
Reservoir Place Both 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m., except
Saturdays and
Sundays
2 hrs. From Ridge Road
to Rockledge
Place
Ridge Court Both 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m., except
Saturdays and
Sundays
2 hrs. From Ridge Road
to Mountain Way
Ridge Road East 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m., except
Saturdays and
Sundays
2 hrs. From Reservoir
Drive to Briarhill
Road
Ridge Road
[Added
5-2-1988 by
Ord. No.
88-313]
West 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m., except
Saturdays and
Sundays
2 hrs. From Briarwood
Terrace to the
Little Falls
Township
boundary
Ridge Road West 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m., except
Saturdays and
Sundays
2 hrs. From Lakewood
Avenue to Union
Street
Rockledge Place Both 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m., except
Saturdays and
Sundays
2 firs. From Mountain
Way to Reservoir
Place
Route 23 East 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m.
1 hr. From Bowden
Road to Little
Falls Road
Route 23 East 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m.
1 hr. From East
Bradford Avenue
to a point 230 feet
north of the
intersection of
Cedar Street
§ 251-37 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 251-37
246:716
Name of
Streets Sides Maximum Hours Time Location
Route 23 West 9:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
1 hr. From Brunswick
Road to a point
650 feet south of
Grove Avenue
Route 23 West 9:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
1 hr. From a point 300
feet south of
Church Street to
Sweetwood Drive
Route 23 West 9:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
1 hr. From a point 850
feet south of
Grove Avenue to
Church Street
Rugby Road Both 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m., except
Saturdays and
Sundays
2 hrs. From Bowden
Road to the
property line of
the Cedar Grove
Memorial High
School
Sand Park Road East 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m., except
Saturdays and
Sundays
2 hrs. From the north
curbline of
Canfield Road to
the west curbline
of Village Park
Road
Sherman
Avenue
Both 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m., except
Saturdays and
Sundays
2 hrs. Entire length
South Mountain
Avenue
North 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m., except
Saturdays and
Sundays
2 hrs. From Pompton
Avenue to Birch
Road
Squirehill Road North 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m., except
Saturdays and
Sundays
2 hrs. From Ridge
Road to
Woodlawn Terrace
Squirehill Road South 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m., except
Saturdays and
Sundays
2 hrs. From Ridge Road
to Highfield Lane
§ 251-37 TREES § 251-37
246:717
Name of
Streets Sides Maximum Hours Time Location
Stevens Avenue West 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m., except
Saturdays and
Sundays
2 hrs. From a point 166
feet north of the
north curbline of
East Lindsley
Road to the Little
Falls township
boundary
Union Street
[Added
2-4-2013 by
Ord. No.
13-753]
Both 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m., except
Saturdays and
Sundays
2 hrs. From Ridge Road
to a point 200 feet
west thereof
Union Street
[Added
7-16-2012 by
Ord. No.
12-745]
North 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m., except
Saturdays and
Sundays
2 hrs. From Ridge Road
to a point 200 feet
west thereof
Village Park
Road
East 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m., except
Saturdays and
Sundays
2 hrs. From the north
curbline of
Commerce Road
to a point 150 feet
west thereof
Village Park
Road
West 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m., except
Saturdays and
Sundays
2 hrs. From a point 150
feet north of the
north curbline of
Commerce Road
to a point 50 feet
north thereof
§ 251-38. Schedule V: Angle Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 251-10, no person shall park a vehicle
upon any of the following streets or parts of streets except at the angle
indicated:
Name of Street Side Angle Location
(Reserved)
§ 251-39. Schedule VI: Truck Route System.
In accordance with the provisions of § 251-11, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as parts of the truck route
system of the Township of Cedar Grove:
§ 251-37 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 251-39
246:718
Street Location
Bradford Avenue Entire length
Commerce Road Entire length
Fairview Avenue Entire length
Grove Avenue Entire length
Lindsley Road Entire length
Little Falls Road Entire length
Normal Avenue Entire length
North Mountain Avenue Entire length
Pompton Avenue Entire length
Reservoir Drive From Ridge Road to Normal Avenue
Ridge Road Entire length
Stevens Avenue Entire length
§ 251-40. Schedule VII: One-Way Streets. [Amended 10-3-1983 by
Ord. No. 83-03; 8-21-2000 by Ord. No. 00-538]
In accordance with the provisions of § 251-12, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as one-way streets in the
direction indicated:
Name of Street Direction Limits
Times of Day on
Weekdays
Buena Vista Road North From Fox Road to
Essex Road
7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. /
2:30 p.m. to 3:30 p.m.
Crestmont Road North From East
Bradford Avenue to
Cedar Street
—
Fox Road
[Amended
1-22-2001 by
Ord. No.
01-547]
West From Birch Road
to Buena Vista
Road and from
Buena Vista Road
to Essex
7:30 a.m. to 8:45 a.m. /
2:30 p.m. to 3:45 p.m.
(Sept. 1 - June 30)
§ 251-41. Schedule VIII: Through Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 251-13, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as through streets. Stop
signs shall be installed on the near right side of each street intersecting the
through street, except where yield signs are provided for:
§ 251-39 TREES § 251-41
246:719
Name of Street Limits
Bently Road From the Verona borough line to Harper Terrace
Bowden Road From Pompton Avenue to Little Falls Road (yield
signs shall be installed on Highview Terrace and
Northview Terrace at its southernmost
intersection with Bowden Road)
Commerce Road From Route 23 (Pompton Avenue) to Little Falls
Road
Harper Terrace From Bently Road to Pompton Avenue (yield sign
shall be installed on Forest Road)
Harper Terrace [Added
1-19-1987 by Ord.
No. 87-287]
From Pompton Avenue to end (yield signs shall
be installed on Forest Road and Bently Road)
Montclair Avenue From Pompton Avenue to the Little Falls
Township line (yield signs shall be installed on
Donato Drive, Oak Drive and Ring Place)
Myrtle Avenue From Fairview Avenue to Pompton Avenue
Ozone Avenue From a point 100 feet west of David Road to
Pompton Avenue
Westland Road From Bently Road to Overlook Road
§ 251-42. Schedule IX: Stop Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 251-14, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections:
Stop Sign on At Intersection of
Bentley Road [Added 3-15-2004 by
Ord. No. 04-607]
Harper Terrace
Birch Road South Mountain Avenue
Essex Road [Added 2-19-1979 by
Ord. No. 79-84]
Birch Road
Forest Hills Way [Added 11-7-2016
by Ord. No. 16-800]
Westview Court
Fox Road [Added 2-19-1979 by Ord.
No. 79-84]
Birch Road
Franklin Street Elmwood Road
Haller Drive Sherman Avenue
Harper Terrace [Added 3-15-2004
by Ord. No. 04-607]
Bentley Road
Overlook Road [Added 2-19-1979 by
Ord. No. 79-84]
Highland Road
Sunset Terrace Cedar Street
§ 251-41 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 251-42
246:720
Stop Sign on At Intersection of
The Fairway [Added 11-4-1991 by
Ord. No. 91-393]
Briarwood Terrace
Westland Road Overlook Road
Winding Way Sunrise Terrace
Woodstone Drive [Added 11-7-2016
by Ord. No. 16-800]
Forest Hills Way
§ 251-42.1. Schedule IX-A: Multiway Stop Intersections. [Added
1-17-1994 by Ord. No. 93-432]
In accordance with the provisions of § 251-14, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as multiway stop intersections:
Intersection Stop Sign on
Overlook Road and Harper
Terrace
The right side of each approach to the
intersection
§ 251-43. Schedule X: Yield Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 251-15, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as yield intersections, and yield signs
shall be installed as follows:
Yield Sign on At Intersection of
Bently Road [Added 1-9-1987
by Ord. No. 87-287]
Harper Terrace
Elmwood Road Overlook Road
Old Quarry Road [Added
2-18-1980 by Ord. No.
80-123]
Sunset Terrace
Overlook Road [Added
1-17-1994 by Ord No.
93-432]
Harper Terrace (for traffic northbound
on Overlook Road to eastbound on
Harper Terrace)
Yorkshire Drive [Added
12-18-1995 by Ord. No.
95-468]
Devonshire Road-Devonshire Road South
and Yorkshire Drive
§ 251-44. Schedule XI: Loading Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 251-16, the following described
locations are hereby designated as loading zones:
Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 251-42 TREES § 251-45
246:721
§ 251-45. Schedule XII: Taxi Stands.
In accordance with the provisions of § 251-17, the following described
locations are hereby designated as taxi stands:
Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 251-46. Schedule XIII: Bus Stops. [Amended 5-4-1981 by Ord. No.
81-157; 7-27-1981 by Ord. No. 81-161100]
A. In accordance with the provisions of § 251-18, the following described
locations are hereby designated as bus stops.
(1) Along Ridge Road northbound on the easterly side thereof at:
(a) Jefferson Street, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of
Jefferson Street and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(b) Between Jefferson Street and Bradford Avenue, midblock,
beginning at a point 1,190 feet north of the northerly curbline
of Jefferson Street and extending 135 feet northerly therefrom.
(c) Bradford Avenue, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline
of Bradford Avenue and extending 100 feet northerly
therefrom.
(d) Briarhill Road, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of
Briarhill Road and extending 100 feet northerly therefrom.
(e) Cedar Street, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of
Cedar Street and extending 100 feet northerly therefrom.
(f) Ridge Court, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of
Ridge Court and extending 100 feet northerly therefrom.
(g) Reservoir Place, near side, beginning at the southerly curbline
of Reservoir Place and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(h) Lakewood Avenue, near side, beginning at the prolongation of
the southerly curbline of Lakewood Avenue and extending 105
feet southerly therefrom.
(i) Briarwood Terrace, near side, beginning at the prolongation of
the southerly curbline of Briarwood Terrace and extending 105
feet southerly therefrom.
(j) Squirehill Drive, near side, beginning at the prolongation of
the southerly curbline of Squirehill Drive and extending 105
feet southerly therefrom.
100. Editor's Note: This ordinance was approved by the Essex County Board of Chosen
Freeholders 1-13-1982.
§ 251-45 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 251-46
246:722
§ 251-47. Schedule XIV: U-Turn Prohibitions. [Amended 1-22-2001
by Ord. No. 01-547]
In accordance with the provisions of § 251-19, no person shall make a Uturn
at any of the following locations:
Name of Street Location
Birch Road Cul-de-sac area
Highland Road Cul-de-sac area
(2) Along Ridge Road, southbound on the westerly side thereof at:
(a) Squirehill Drive, near side, beginning at the northerly curbline
of Squirehill Drive and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(b) Briarwood Terrace, far side, beginning at the southerly
curbline of Briarwood Terrace and extending 100 feet
southerly therefrom.
(c) Lakewood Avenue, near side, beginning at the northerly
curbline of Lakewood Avenue and extending 105 feet northerly
therefrom.
(d) Sherman Avenue, near side, beginning at the northerly
curbline of Sherman Avenue and extending 105 feet northerly
therefrom.
(e) Between Rugby Road and Sherman Avenue, midblock,
beginning at a point 140 feet north of the northerly curbline of
Rugby Road and extending 135 feet northerly therefrom.
(f) Cedar Street, near side, beginning at the northerly curbline of
Cedar Street and extending 135 feet northerly therefrom.
(g) Union Street, far side, beginning at the southerly curbline of
Union Street and extending 100 feet southerly therefrom.
(h) Bradford Avenue, far side, beginning at the southerly curbline
of Bradford Avenue and extending 100 feet southerly
therefrom.
(i) Between Bradford and Devonshire Road, midblock, beginning
at a point 483 feet south of the southerly curbline of Bradford
Avenue and extending 135 feet southerly therefrom.
(j) Jefferson Street, near side, beginning at the prolongation of the
northerly curbline of Jefferson Street and extending 150 feet
northerly therefrom.
(k) Pompton Avenue, near side, beginning at the easterly curbline
of Pompton Avenue and extending 150 feet northerly
therefrom.
§ 251-46 TREES § 251-48
246:723
§ 251-48. Schedule XV: Prohibited Turns at Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 251-20, no person shall make a turn
of the kind designated below at any of the following locations:
Name of
Street
Direction of
Travel Prohibited Turn
At Intersection
of
(Reserved)
§ 251-49. Schedule XVI: Prohibited Right Turns on Red Signal.
In accordance with the provisions of § 251-21, no person shall make a right
turn when facing a steady red signal (stop indication) at any of the following
locations during the hours and on the days indicated:
Location Hours/Day
Prohibited Right Turn on Red
Signal
(Reserved)
§ 251-50. Schedule XVII: Snow Emergency No-Parking Areas.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 251-22, no person shall park a vehicle upon
either side of any of the streets or parts of streets thereof listed below,
whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers the
street or highway:
Name of Street Location
Bradford Avenue Entire length
Canfield Road Entire length
Commerce Road Entire length
Fairview Avenue Entire length
Grove Avenue Entire length
Lindsley Road Entire length
Little Falls Road Entire length
Normal Avenue Entire length
North Mountain Avenue Entire length
Pompton Avenue Entire length
Reservoir Drive Entire length
Ridge Road Entire length
Sand Park Road Entire length
Stevens Avenue Entire length
Village Park Road Entire length
§ 251-48 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 251-51
246:724
§ 251-51. Schedule XVIII: Speed Limits.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 251-26, speed limits are hereby established
upon the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Community Park
Road [Added
1-3-2000 by Ord.
No. 99-522]
20 Both directions
Little Falls Road
[Added 4-1-1991
by Ord.No. 91-379]
30 Both directions, between Pompton
Avenue and the Cedar Grove Township
corporate line
Reservoir Drive
[Added 4-1-1991
by Ord. No.
91-379]
35 Both directions, between Ridge Road
and Normal Avenue
Ridge Road [Added
2-17-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-482;
amended 9-2-2005
by Ord. No.
05-632; 12-5-2005
by Ord. No.
05-637]
40 (25) 40 miles per hour between Route 23
(Pompton Avenue) and the Cedar
Grove corporate line - Little Falls
Township corporate line, except 25
miles per hour when passing through
the Cedar Grove High School and
Cedar Grove Middle School zones,
during recess, when the presence of
children is clearly visible from the
roadway, while "25 MPH When
Flashing" signs are operating, or while
children are going to or leaving school,
during opening or closing hours
Vincent Road
[Added 11-6-2006
by Ord. No.
06-657]
25 Entire length in both directions
§ 251-52. Schedule XIX: No-Passing Zones.
Pursuant to § 251-28, no-passing zones are hereby established and shall be
maintained upon the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Location
Vincent Road [Added
10-15-1990 by Ord. No.
90-369]
From the curbline of Route 23 to a
point 1,325 feet west thereof
§ 251-51 TREES § 251-52.1
246:725
§ 251-52.1. Schedule XX: Designated Restricted Handicapped
Parking Spaces. [Added 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 17-812]
In accordance with § 251-10.1, a designated restricted handicapped parking
space is hereby established at the following location(s):
A. Directly in front of 38 Bowden Road, NJMVC Permit No. P1787054.
[Amended 12-3-2018 by Ord. No. 18-834]
§ 251-52.1 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 251-52.1
246:726
ARTICLE XIII
Midblock Crosswalks
[Added 5-19-1986 by Ord. No. 86-265]
§ 251-53. Midblock crosswalk established.
Midblock crosswalks shall be established across the roadways of Stevens
Avenue and Lindsley Road:
A. Along Stevens Avenue. A midblock crosswalk shall be established on
Stevens Avenue 200 feet south of the southerly curbline of Chase Place
at the south side of the Board of Education Driveway.
B. Along Lindsley Road. A midblock crosswalk shall be established on
Lindsley Road 875 feet east of the easterly curbline of Route 23.
§ 251-53 TREES § 251-53
246:727

ARTICLE XIV
Applicability of Subtitle One of Title 39 to Semipublic and Private
Roads, Streets, Driveways and Parking Lots
[Added 9-27-1999 by Ord. No. 99-515]
§ 251-54. Reservoir Ridge Condominiums.
The provisions of Subtitle One of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New
Jersey are made applicable to the semipublic roads, streets, driveways and
parking lots at the Reservoir Ridge Condominiums located in the Township
of Cedar Grove, County of Essex, State of New Jersey and the following
regulations shall be enforceable.
A. Through streets, stop intersections.
(1) Through streets. The following streets or parts of streets are
hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be installed
on the near right side of each street intersecting the through
street, except where yield signs are provided for in the designation.
Name of Street Limits
Glen Rock Road From the Little Falls Township
corporate line-Cedar Grove Township
corporate line in a southerly direction
to its most westerly terminus, as
indicated on site plans101
(2) Stop intersections. The following described intersections are
hereby designated stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed
as provided therein:
Intersection Stop Sign(s) on
Normal Avenue and Granite Drive Granite Drive
B. Speed limits.
(1) The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following
roadways are:
Name of Street Speed Limits
All roads 25 mph Entire length
(2) Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to
effect the above designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
C. Tow-away zone. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or
impede a normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading
101. Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk.
§ 251-54 TREES § 251-54
246:729
zones, oil fills, any grassy area, any pedestrian walkway or prevent in
any way a safety or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle
at the owner's expense.
D. Signage. All signs, posts or other necessary materials shall be installed
and paid for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
39:4-198 and N.J.S.A. 39:4-183.27.
E. Penalty. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey
statute, every person convicted of a violation of this section or any
supplement thereto shall be liable for a penalty of not more than $1,000
or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 251-54 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 251-54
246:730
Chapter 254
VEHICLES, UNLICENSED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 55.
Noise — See Ch. 176.
Use of recreation areas — See Ch. 205.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 251.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Adoption of police ordinances — See N.J.S.A.
40:69A-29.
§ 254-1. Operation on public property prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any type of unlicensed motordriven
vehicle or conveyance, including but not limited to snowmobiles,
two-wheel motor vehicles known as "minibikes," trail motorcycles, motor
scooters and four-wheel motor vehicles, commonly known as "go-carts,"
upon any public property or Township-owned land in the Township of Cedar
Grove, New Jersey.
§ 254-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TOWNSHIP-OWNED LAND AND PUBLIC PROPERTY — Includes, but shall
not be limited to, all parks, recreation areas, ball parks, parking areas, fire
access roads, sidewalk area, Board of Education property and any and all
other Township or publicly owned land and premises.
§ 254-3. Operation on private property prohibited without owner's
permission.
The operation of said motor-driven vehicles, as defined in § 254-1, is also
prohibited upon private property, except property of the operator, unless
the operator of said motor-driven vehicle has in his possession a written
authorization from the owner of said property to operate said vehicle on his
property.
§ 254-4. Careless, reckless or negligent operation prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to operate any unlicensed motor-driven vehicles, as
defined in § 254-1, in a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to
endanger the safety of any person or the property of any person.
§ 251-54 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 254-5
254:731
§ 254-5. Registration of vehicles.
The owner of such an unlicensed motor vehicle shall annually, between
March 15 and May 1, register said vehicle with the Police Department and
obtain a registration certificate which shall be maintained with the vehicle
at all times. The annual registration fee of $5 shall be made payable to the
Police Department. Nothing herein contained shall in any way be deemed
an assumption of responsibility by the Township for the proper operation or
mechanical condition of the unlicensed vehicle.
§ 254-6. Exceptions.
It shall not be unlawful for any employee of this Township to operate
motor-driven vehicles, as defined in § 254-1, for the purpose of maintaining,
repairing or doing any public works within the scope of his employment.
§ 254-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-9-1978 by Ord. No.
77-64; 7-30-1984 by Ord. No. 84-222; 10-23-2006 by Ord. No.
06-656]
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000 or by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 259
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 102.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 119.
Housing standards — See Ch. 158.
Hydrants and sprinklers — See Ch. 161.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 179.
Plumbing — See Ch. 194.
Public improvement specifications — See Ch.
201.
Individual sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
213.
Sewers — See Ch. 217.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 234.
Private swimming pools — See Ch. 237.
Public swimming pools — See Ch. 239.
Wells, cisterns and holes — See Ch. 265.
§ 254-5 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 254-7
254:732
ARTICLE I
General Provisions; Regulation of Use
§ 259-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MAIN or MAINS — All pipes, other than supply pipes and service pipes,
used for conveying water to or distributing water in the Township.
METER RATES — Rates or prices to be charged for water, based upon the
quantity consumed as measured by an approved water meter.
OWNER — Any person, firm, corporation or association owning any
property or premises which is or prospectively can be supplied with
Township water, or his duly authorized agent.
PREMISES — A building used for either business or residential purposes, or
both, together with the land appurtenant thereto and such outbuildings as
are used exclusively in connection therewith, or any part of a building with
the land appurtenant thereto when sold as a separate unit.
SERVICE PIPE — A pipe extending from the curb stop and valve at the
curbline into privately owned property for supplying water thereto. On
streets without curbs or within easement areas, the service pipe shall
extend from the curb stop and valve located within the street right-of-way
or easement limits.[Amended 11-16-1992 by Ord. No. 92-412]
SUPPLY PIPE — A pipe connected to the main and extending thence to
and including the curb stop and valve at the curbline of the street. On
streets without curbs or within easement areas, the curb stop and valve
shall be located entirely within the street right-of-way or easement
limits.[Amended 11-16-1992 by Ord. No. 92-412]
§ 259-2. Applications for new water service or changes in service.
The owner of any premises or his authorized agent desiring to use Township
water or to make a change in an existing water supply to any premises shall
first make application, in writing, to the Township for such water service,
upon forms furnished by the Township. Such application shall request the
installation to be made by the Township, subject to the provisions of this
chapter, and bear the consent and agreement that the applicant shall be
bound and governed by all the provisions of this chapter and all rules and
regulations hereafter adopted by the Township. Any misrepresentation of
facts contained in any application shall be deemed a violation of this section.
§ 259-3. Processing of application; inspections; payment of bills.
A. Upon receipt of an application for service, the Township Engineer may
make or cause to be made an inspection of the premises. Unless the
application is rejected for cause by the Township Engineer, he will
§ 259-1 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 259-3
254:733
§ 259-4. Use of Township water required; restrictions on use of
wells. [Amended 8-19-1963]
§ 259-5. Temporary service for building purposes.
§ 259-6. Authority to make inspections.
Duly authorized agents of the Township, upon presentation of credentials
provided by the Township, shall have access at any reasonable time to
any and all premises supplied with Township water for the purpose of
making any desired inspection thereof, including the examination of the
entire water supply and plumbing system upon said premises. Any person
render to the owner of the premises a bill in accordance with the
provisions of § 259-11A.
B. No additional connections or alterations to existing connections shall
be made to any premises unless and until charges of every nature due
the Township from such owner or against such premises are first paid.
A. Every owner of a premises with a frontage on a street in the Township
shall be required to obtain water for such premises from the Township,
unless special permission is granted by the Township Council to obtain
water from another public water supply. This subsection shall not apply
to the owner of premises using wells existing on December 17, 1962, for
drinking or sanitary purposes, in lieu of the public water supply system.
B. Water from wells constructed after December 17, 1962, in areas of the
Township where the public water system is available, shall be used only
for nonpotable purposes, such as for swimming pools, automobile
washing and lawn watering, and shall not be used for drinking or
sanitary purposes.
C. Any owner of premises connected to the Township water system shall
not be permitted to disconnect from the Township water supply in order
to use a well.
A. Written application for a permit to use Township water service in the
construction or repair of buildings or for other purposes shall be made
to the Township, upon forms furnished by the Township, by the owner of
such premises or the contractor for the work to be done. The character
of the work contemplated and the estimated quantities of the water to
be used shall be specified in such application.
B. No permit for temporary water service during construction or repair
shall be issued unless the fees prescribed in § 259-11C shall have first
been paid.
C. The Township Engineer may, at his option, furnish and install a meter
during the construction or repair of buildings upon the payment of the
fee therefor as prescribed in § 259-11B and, in addition, require a
deposit to ensure the return of the meter in good condition.
§ 259-3 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 259-6
254:734
who refuses to admit such duly authorized agent for the purpose of such
inspection, or hinders or interferes with him in the performance of such
inspection, shall be deemed to have violated this section and be subject to
the penalty prescribed in § 259-30 hereof.
§ 259-7. Discontinuance of service.
§ 259-8. Restrictions on use of water in air-conditioning systems.
The use of air-conditioning systems utilizing water without provision for
recirculation is prohibited.
§ 259-9. Interruptions of service.
In the event that it becomes expedient to shut off the water from any section
of the Township because of accidents or fire or in order to make repairs or
extensions or for other necessary purposes, the Township will endeavor to
give timely notice to those affected thereby and will, so far as practicable,
use its best efforts to prevent inconvenience or damage arising from any
such cause; but failure to give such notice or to receive the same will not
render the Township responsible or liable for damages to property or any
refund that may result therefrom or from any other cause.
A. Where it is desired to permanently discontinue the use of Township
water on any premises, a request to the Township is required and must
be made by the owner. Upon receipt of said notice, the water shall be
turned off at the curb stop, and thereafter charges for water for said
premises shall not be made.
B. In case of the temporary vacancy by the owner or occupant of any
premises, the water will be turned off at the curb stop by the Water
Department upon written request therefore stating the period of such
discontinuance, and will be turned on again on said last named date,
following the payment of the necessary charges.
C. Where the premises are left unoccupied or vacant, no rebate will be
allowed for water registered by the meter unless the water is turned off
at the curb stop, as in this section provided.
D. The Township may, at its discretion, shut off water from the premises of
any owner or consumer for violating any of the provisions of this
chapter, upon giving such owner or consumer at least 72 hours' notice
of such intended action. Such action shall not be deemed to be in lieu of
the penalty provisions of § 259-30 hereof. The notice required by this
subsection shall be given in person, by telephone or by mailing a copy
thereof, postage prepaid, at the post office in the Township, to the last
known address of the person to be notified, as the same appears on the
books of the Township; and the notice so given shall be conclusively
deemed to have been given at the time of such mailing.
§ 259-6 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 259-9
254:735

ARTICLE II
Rates, Charges and Fees; Collection
§ 259-10. Consumption rates and charges. [Last amended
10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 17-817102]
The rents, rates and charges for water supplied by the Township to any
premises is hereby fixed in accordance with the following schedule;
provided, however, that the same may be changed or altered by ordinance:
§ 259-11. Additional charges and fees. [Amended 8-9-1963;
3-21-1966 by Ord. No. 66-3; 3-18-1974 by Ord. No. 74-5; 2-2-1976
by Ord. No. 76-1; 10-6-1980 by Ord. No. 80-135; 11-7-1988 by Ord.
No. 88-326; 11-7-1994 by Ord. No. 94-452; 10-20-2003 by Ord. No.
03-601; 3-4-2019 by Ord. No. 19-838]
A. Schedule. Rate per 1,000 gallons: $5.
B. Minimum charges per quarter year when consumption charges at the
foregoing rates are less than $25 shall be $25.
A. For installation of supply pipes. The fees listed in the schedule below
shall be charged to cover the granting of permits for the installation of
supply pipes, including accessories from water main to and including
curb stops, for the various sized taps on all streets of the Township,
except those under the control of the county or state.
(1) Schedule.
Size of Tap
(inches) Charge
3/4 $900
1 $975
1 1/2 $1,085
2 $1,200
(2) For taps larger than two inches, charges will be quoted by the
Water Department, after application to the Construction
Department.
(3) Deductions from or additions to the foregoing charges shall be
made, where applicable, as follows:
(a) $50 shall be deducted whenever a trench is open.
(b) On state highways there shall be added an extra charge for any
fees that may be charged by the New Jersey State Highway
102. Editor's Note: This ordinance also stated that its provisions would be reflected in the
water billing date of 11-1-2017.
§ 259-10 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 259-11
254:737
Department. In addition, where it is necessary for the
Township to tunnel under or dig across Pompton Avenue for
the purpose of installing a water tap, a record of the costs
on the basis of cost of time and material, plus 20%, shall
be maintained for the job. The customer will be responsible
for paying any charges based on the above formula that may
exceed the normal charge for the tap listed above.
(c) On county-controlled highways, there shall be added an extra
charge to be paid in advance for inspection and repair of
pavement, as determined by the Essex County Highway
Department.
(d) Should the applicant choose to install the supply line as
mentioned above and only require the physical tap to the water
main, the charge will be as follows:
Size of Tap
(inches) Charge
3/4 $100.00
1 $125.00
1 1/2 $150.00
2 $175.00
Over 2 The charge will be quoted on the
application to the Water Department
B. For meter installation. The following fees shall be charged for the
installation of meters:
(1) For a three-fourths-inch meter: $300.
(2) For any other size meter: cost of meter, plus $150.
C. For permit for temporary water service during construction.
(1) The fee for a permit for temporary water service during
construction of a single-family residential property shall be $1,200
for a period of six months; and $600 for each three-month period
thereafter.
(2) The fee for temporary water service during construction of all other
properties shall be such amount as the Township Engineer
estimates will be the cost of water to be used or consumed, based
upon the established rates; provided, however, that in no case shall
such charge be less than $1,200 for a period of six months.
D. For meter tests. The fee for the test of the accuracy or condition of any
water meter made on the request of the owner shall be $150 payable in
advance.
§ 259-11 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 259-11
254:738
§ 259-12. Payment of bills; delinquent charges; discontinuance of
service.
§ 259-13. Unpaid charges become a lien.
Pursuant to the laws of the State of New Jersey, all charges for water,
including penalties, are liens upon the premises or property on account of
which such charge is incurred until paid and satisfied.
E. For thawing frozen pipes. The fee for the thawing of frozen pipes on
residential property shall be the actual cost to the Township to provide
such service, but not less than $375.
F. For use of sprinkler system. A rental fee of $150 per quarter shall be
charged for the use of a fire sprinkler system.
G. For inspection of installation or repairs of service pipes. A fee of $150
shall be charged for the inspection of, installation of or repairs to
service pipes.
H. For turn-on charge. A fee of $150 shall be charged for turning on the
curb stop.
I. For well permits. The fee for a permit to construct a well shall be $450.
The application for such permit, in the case of a well to be used for
sanitary purposes in areas of the Township where the public water
system is not available, shall be accompanied by a certificate stating
that the water is safe and that the quantity of water is sufficient to meet
the needs of the premises, before the well is put into operation.
J. For lawn irrigation systems. The fee for a permit for a lawn irrigation
system is $300.
K. Final water meter reading. The fee for final water meter reading shall
be $150.
L. For water service connection. The fee for a permit and inspection of a
water service connection shall be $4,000.
A. Bills for water consumed for any quarterly period or fraction thereof
shall be due and payable on the date thereof. The nonreceipt of a bill
will not constitute excuse for failure to pay.
B. In the event that such bills are not paid within 45 days after becoming
due and payable, a penalty of 10% will be added to and collected with
such charges; and water may be turned off from the consumer and not
again supplied until such arrears, with penalty and other charges, are
fully paid and satisfied.
§ 259-11 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 259-13
254:739

ARTICLE III
Regulation of Water System
§ 259-14. Control of system; unauthorized disturbance prohibited.
§ 259-15. Specifications for materials; maintenance of equipment;
cost; repairs; opening of new service pipes.
A. The water mains, supply pipes, curb stops, service pipes and meters
shall be under the exclusive control of the Township.
B. All persons, other than a duly authorized agent of the Township, are
forbidden to disturb, tamper with, injure, tap, change, obstruct access
to or interfere with any water main, supply pipe, service pipe, curb stop
or meter.
C. Under no circumstances shall curb stops be opened or closed by any
person not an authorized employee of the Township.
A. Service pipes, supply pipes, curb stops, meters and all necessary
plumbing parts used in the installation and maintenance of water
supply systems shall be of such material and manufacture as are
approved by the Township Engineer.
B. Supply pipes up to and including the curb stop and valve, either within
the street right-of-way or within easement limits, shall remain the
property of the Township. Supply pipes shall be maintained by the
Township up to and including the inlet side of the curb valve and only
within the street right-of-way or easement limit. No repairs will be
made by the Township on private property. In the event of a leak,
Township personnel shall shut off the curb valve. If, upon examination,
the leak stops, it shall be assumed that the leak is on the outlet side of
the valve, and it shall be the homeowner's responsibility to make the
necessary repairs as provided for in § 259-15C below. If the leak does
not stop, it shall be assumed that the leak is within the supply pipe and
the Township shall make the necessary repairs. [Amended
11-16-1992 by Ord. No. 92-412]
C. Service pipes shall be installed at the expense of the owner by a
plumber licensed to do plumbing work within the Township and shall be
installed in accordance with drawings and the materials specified
thereon on file in the office of the Township Engineer. Repairs may be
made by duly licensed plumbers on special written permission from the
Township; and in such case, a fee for the inspection of the work by the
Township, as prescribed in § 259-11 hereof, shall be collected from said
plumber previous to such inspection.
D. When new service pipes are installed in any premises, the curb stop
shall be left closed and thereafter will be opened only by the Water
Department upon request of the owner of such premises. A fee, as
prescribed in § 259-11G hereof, shall be collected from the licensed
§ 259-14 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 259-15
254:741
§ 259-16. Protection of service pipes from freezing.
Service pipes between the cellar wall and meter, likely to be exposed to
freezing temperatures, must be effectively protected from freezing by the
property owner.
§ 259-17. Extensions, changes and construction of mains.
Extensions to or changes in existing mains or the construction of new
mains within the Township may be initiated by the Township Council or
upon petition from property owners or citizens upon forms provided by the
Township. The Township Council shall prescribe the terms and conditions
upon which such petition will be granted and shall require the written
acceptance and guaranty thereof by the petitioner. After such petition shall
be granted by the Township Council, the Township Manager will direct the
Township Engineer to proceed as promptly as practicable with the work.
§ 259-18. Specifications for new water mains.
The minimum size of water pipe extensions shall be not less than eight
inches. No dead-end waterline shall be permitted without written consent of
the Township Engineer and Township Manager, in which case said officials
may also give permission for six-inch pipe on dead-end extensions of 600
feet or less.
§ 259-19. Meter required.
plumber installing the service pipes to cover inspection by the
Township and shall be paid prior to such inspection. The service pipe
trench shall not be backfilled until such inspection has been made.
A. All Township water used on any premises must pass through a meter
furnished by the Township, except for fire sprinkler connections and
temporary water services for construction purposes.
B. All persons using water supplied by the Township shall have the duty of
determining that such water is being supplied through a meter
furnished by the Township, except as otherwise provided in § 259-5
hereof. Any failure so to do shall not relieve such persons from any
liability therefor, and the Township shall determine the amounts of
water so used and the rates therefor.
C. All supply lines installed by the owner of any premises to service lawn
sprinklers or swimming pools must have installed at the owner's
expense a separate and independent meter furnished by the Township
and approved by the Municipal Engineer. [Added 11-16-1992 by Ord.
No. 92-412]
§ 259-15 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 259-20
254:742
§ 259-20. Installation of meters.
In all cases where meters are to be installed, the Township shall determine
the size, proper location and the manner in which such meter shall be
installed and protected. The meters shall be easily accessible for reading
and be placed in a free and clear space of at least two feet by two feet. The
decision of the Township Engineer in regard to these meters shall be final.
§ 259-21. Care of meters.
§ 259-22. Ownership of meters; unauthorized tampering with seals
prohibited.
A. The owner or occupant of the premises where the meter is installed
shall be held responsible for its care and protection from freezing or hot
water or from other injury thereto or interference by any person or
persons. In case of any injury to the meter or in case of its stoppage or
imperfect working, he shall give immediate notice to the Township.
B. Where replacement, repair or adjustment of any meter, whether owned
by the Township or not, becomes necessary due to the act, neglect or
carelessness of the owner or occupant of any premises, any expense to
the Township caused thereby shall be charged to and collected from the
owner of such premises.
C. Industrial, commercial and apartment meters. [Added 3-6-1978 by
Ord. No. 78-68]
(1) There shall be no service charges for customers with meters up to
and including one-inch meters. For meters larger than one inch, the
full cost for maintenance, repair and replacement shall be borne by
the owner of the premises. The Township reserves the right at all
times to inspect and supervise maintenance repairs, replacement
or removal of said meter. A certified test report is to be furnished to
the Township in accordance with the American Water Works
Association testing standards upon completion of meter repairs.
(2) A meter shall not be allowed to remain in service for a period
longer than that specified by the Engineering Department without
a complete overhaul and testing in accordance with the American
Water Works Association testing standards. The Water
Superintendent is to be notified in advance of the date and time of
the overhaul and test. A certified test report is to be furnished to
the Township in accordance with the American Water Works
Association testing standards upon completion of meter repairs.
(3) Testing, replacement and/or repair of water meters may be ordered
at any time, at the discretion of the Water Superintendent.
A. Meters controlling the services are and shall remain the property of the
Township and, at all times, shall be under the control of the Township.
§ 259-20 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 259-22
254:743
§ 259-23. Testing of meters.
The Township shall test the accuracy and condition of any meter upon the
written request of the owner or occupant and upon the payment in advance
of the fee prescribed in § 259-11. If the meter is found to register over 3%
fast, another meter will be substituted therefor and the test fee refunded;
and the Township Manager may adjust the last water bill upon such basis as
he may deem just and reasonable.
B. Meters shall be sealed by the Township and no person, except an agent
of the Township, shall disconnect, remove, break, injure or in any way
tamper with such seals.
§ 259-22 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 259-23
254:744
ARTICLE IV
Droughts and Water Shortages
§ 259-24. Declaration of findings and purpose.
The Township Council finds that the adoption of this article is necessary for
the public health, safety and welfare and is in the public interest because:
§ 259-25. Proclamation of emergency; promulgation of regulations.
Whenever the average amount of water in the reservoirs from which the
Township either directly or indirectly receives its water in any one month
falls 20% below the average amount of water in storage for the
corresponding months of a five-year period immediately preceding, and
whenever the Township Engineer upon an independent investigation
certifies that an emergency exists in said water supply, and whenever the
Town of Montclair, through its Director of the Department of Public Works,
shall proclaim the existence of an emergency in the water supply system of
the Town of Montclair (should the Township of Cedar Grove be purchasing
all or part of its potable water supply from the Town of Montclair), the
Township Manager may, for the protection of health, safety and general
welfare of the citizens and residents of the Township, proclaim the existence
of a water emergency and prescribe regulations to:
A. Of the long-continued droughts occurring from time to time in this area
of the state which result in a dangerous lowering of the Township's
potable water reserves and which threaten the preservation of the
public health, safety and welfare.
B. Past experience has demonstrated that appeals for voluntary aid for
water conservation are not and have not been as effective as necessary.
C. The Township, pursuant to contract, receives much of its potable water
from the Town of Montclair and is, therefore, greatly dependent upon
said municipality for its water.
D. The aforesaid droughts lower the surface reservoirs from which the
Town of Montclair obtains its water.
E. Under the terms of the aforesaid contract, the Township agrees to
cooperate and assist the Town of Montclair in the conservation of the
potable water supply and agrees to enforce restrictive measures at
least equal to those in force in the Town of Montclair.
F. The Town of Montclair has duly adopted an ordinance for the purpose of
conserving its water supply and to prevent the waste of water and
providing penalties for violations thereof.
G. Under the terms of that ordinance, the Township of Cedar Grove is
obligated to enforce similar restrictive measures for the conservation of
potable water.
§ 259-24 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 259-25
254:745
§ 259-26. Compliance with regulations required.
The proclamation of the emergency shall be conclusive of the fact of the
existence of such emergency and shall be binding upon all persons and
users, upon the filing of the same in the office of the Township Clerk and the
publication thereof, at least once, in the official newspaper or newspapers
circulating in the Township. The regulations set forth in the proclamation,
and any subsequent regulations made and published, as aforesaid, upon
filing thereof in the office of the Township Clerk, shall be deemed to have
the force and effect of regulations adopted under the authority of this
article, the same as if specifically incorporated and set forth herein. Every
owner, lessee, tenant and occupant of any building or premises connected
with the municipal water supply, and every user thereof, under any contract,
ordinance or statute, shall, upon the proclamation and promulgation of the
regulations as aforesaid, become bound thereby and by the provisions of
this article and shall conform thereto and comply therewith in the use of
water and the maintenance of the water service connections and equipment
for the purposes thereof.
§ 259-27. Notice to municipal departments to curtail use of water.
Upon the making of said proclamation of emergency, the Township Manager
shall forthwith give written notice to the appropriate departments of the
Township to refrain from all street and gutter flushing, hydrant flushing,
fire hose testing and other similar practices, except as said practices are
deemed necessary in the interest of public health or safety and until said
emergency is declared no longer to exist.
§ 259-28. Responsibilities for prevention of water waste.
A. Prohibit the use of water from the municipal supply for any purpose not
necessary to the health, safety and welfare of the public.
B. Allocate and prorate the available water supplies.
C. Reduce consumption by users.
D. Prevent waste for the period of duration of such emergency.
A. Every owner of buildings and premises connected with the municipal
water supply shall:
(1) Maintain or cause to be maintained the water service pipes,
fixtures and connections in good order and repair, in order to
ensure that there shall be no waste of water.
(2) Forthwith make or cause to be made necessary repairs to prevent
the waste of water.
B. Every lessee, tenant and occupant of any building or premises
connected with the municipal water supply shall:
§ 259-25 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 259-28
254:746
§ 259-29. Work to be done by Township in case of noncompliance;
owner to be charged.
Whenever an owner shall fail or refuse to make repairs so as to prevent
the waste of water, then the Township shall have the power to make such
repairs and to charge the cost thereof to the owner in the same manner as
other water charges are made, as by the statutes and ordinances provided,
or to shut off the water from such premises until such repairs are made by
the owner.
(1) Immediately notify the owner, or his agent, of any defective water
service pipes, fixtures or connections whereby water is being
wasted.
(2) Immediately notify the Township Water Department or Police
Department of any waste occurring by reason of defective water
service pipes, fixtures or connections.
C. Every owner and user of water shall, during the period of a water
emergency, be chargeable with notice of any waste of water due to
defective water service pipes, fixtures or connections, and of the
regulations promulgated under the proclamation. It shall be the duty of
the owner to forthwith make or cause to be made repairs necessary to
prevent such waste.
§ 259-28 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 259-29
254:747

ARTICLE V
Penalties
§ 259-30. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-30-1984 by Ord. No.
84-222; 10-23-2006 by Ord. No. 06-656]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or of any of the
regulations provided for herein shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished
by a fine not exceeding $2,000 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding
90 days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 259-30 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 259-30
254:749
Chapter 262
WEAPONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 55.
§ 262-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ARROW — Any shaft having a pointed end designed to be propelled any
distance by a bow.
BOW — Any bow, including, but not limited to, a crossbow, longbow,
recurved bow, or compound bow, or any variations thereof, that is or may be
used to propel a arrow or other projectile.
FIREARM —
TARGET PRACTICE — Use of any firearm, bow and arrow, or other weapon
or device to shoot at an object, such as a padded disk with a marked surface,
or other objects such as cans, wood, debris or the like, for the purpose of
testing a person's skill or accuracy in the use of a firearm, bow and arrow,
or other weapon or device.
Any handgun, rifle, shotgun, machine gun, automatic or semiautomatic
rifle, or any gun; or
A.
B. Any paintball gun, pellet gun, or "BB" gun; or
Any device or instrument in the nature of a weapon from which may
be fired or ejected any solid projectable ball, slug, pellet (including
a paintball pellet), missile or bullet, or any gas, vapor, paint or other
noxious thing, by means of a cartridge or shell or by the action of an
explosive or the igniting of flammable or explosive substances; or
C.
Without limitation any device which is in the nature of an air gun,
spring gun, wrist rocket, sling shot, or pistol or other weapon of a
similar nature in which the propelling force is a spring, elastic band,
carbon dioxide, compressed or other gas or vapor, air or compressed
air, or is ignited by compressed air, and ejecting a bullet, pellet or
missile or sufficient diameter and sufficient force to injure a person or
damage property, both personal and real.
D.
The definitions listed in Subsections A through D above shall be
liberally construed to permit any law enforcement officer to protect the
people and property of the Township.
E.
§ 259-30 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 262-1
262:750
TRAP SHOOTING — Use of any firearm, bow and arrow, or other weapon or
device to shoot at clay objects propelled into the air by spring mechanisms
or other means.
§ 262-2. Use of weapons prohibited.
No person shall at any time use a bow ad arrow, firearm, or other weapon
or device of any kind within the boundaries of the Township of Cedar Grove
except for the protection of life, limb or property.
§ 262-3. Exceptions.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to apply to:
§ 262-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-23-2006 by Ord. No.
06-656]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000 or by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days, or both.
Chapter 265
WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 102.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 119.
Housing standards — See Ch. 158.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 179.
Plumbing — See Ch. 194.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 197.
Public improvement specifications — See Ch.
201.
Individual sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
213.
Sewers — See Ch. 217.
Soil removal — See Ch. 226.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 230.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 234.
Private swimming pools — See Ch. 237.
Public swimming pools — See Ch. 239.
Water — See Ch 259.
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
General police ordinances — See N.J.S.A.
40:69A-29.
A. Any premises authorized by the Township Police Department for target
practice or trap shooting.
B. The use and discharge of any firearm or weapon by any person, officer
or official authorized pursuant to the laws of this state or of the United
States or pursuant to the ordinances of the Township.
§ 262-1 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 262-4
265:751
§ 265-1. Legislative findings; uncovered wells, cisterns, holes and
other excavations declared a nuisance.
The Council hereby finds that the existence on any lot or parcel of land in
the Township of any uncovered or open well, cistern, dangerous hole or any
other excavation which is not securely covered or otherwise equipped or
provided with appropriate safeguards in such manner as to prevent human
beings, animals or fowl from falling into or otherwise having access to the
same, is inimical to the public safety and welfare of the Township and its
inhabitants and is hereby declared a nuisance.
§ 265-2. Notice of violation; time to remedy.
§ 265-3. Noncompliance deemed violation.
Any owner or tenant, as the case may be, who fails or neglects to effect the
elimination of the safety hazard, after due receipt of the notice provided for
in § 265-2 hereof and within the time and manner therein prescribed, shall
be subject to the penalty prescribed in § 265-4 hereof.
§ 265-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-17-1962; 7-30-1984
by Ord. No. 84-222; 10-23-2006 by Ord. No. 06-656]
Any person who violates the provisions of § 265-3 of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000 or by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
A. Whenever it shall appear to the Building Inspector that the existence
upon any lot or parcel of land in the Township of any uncovered or open
well, cistern, hole or any other excavation which is not securely covered
or otherwise equipped with appropriate safeguards so as to prevent
human beings, animals or fowl from falling into or otherwise having
access to the same shall constitute a safety hazard, the Building
Inspector shall notify the owner or tenant of any such lot or parcel of
land whereon exists such safety hazard to eliminate the same within 10
days after service upon such owner or tenant of the written notice.
B. Service of any such notice shall be made upon the owner, lessee, tenant
or occupant either personally or by posting said notice on said premises
and mailing, by certified mail, a copy of said notice to the owner at his
last known post office address, if any. Service of the notice by posting
and mailing shall be deemed completed upon the posting and mailing
thereof.
§ 262-4 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 265-4
265:752
Chapter 268
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use procedures — See Ch. 38.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 119.
Dry-cleaning establishments — See Ch. 127.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 140.
Recycling — See Ch. 146, Art. III.
Gasoline stations — See Ch. 148.
Public improvement specifications — See Ch.
201.
Soil removal — See Ch. 226.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 234.
Open Space Trust Fund — See Ch. 248.
§ 265-4 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 265-4
265:753

ARTICLE I
Purpose
§ 268-1. Purpose and intent.
It shall be the purpose of this chapter to promote health, safety, morals
and general welfare; prevent the overcrowding of land and buildings; avoid
undue concentration of population; lessen congestion in the street; and
provide adequate light and air, with reasonable consideration to the
character of the zone and its peculiar suitability for particular uses and with
the objective of conserving the value of property and encouraging the most
appropriate use of land throughout the Township.
§ 268-1 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-1
265:755

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 268-2. Word usage and definitions.
A. Words and phrases. Words used in the present tense include the future.
The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular;
the word "lot" includes the word "plot"; the word "building" includes the
word "structure"; the word "zone" includes the word "district"; the word
"occupied" includes the word "designed" and the phrase "intended to be
occupied"; the word "use" includes the words "arranged" and
"designed" and the phrase "intended to be used"; and the word "shall" is
always mandatory.
B. Certain words and terms in this chapter are defined for the purpose
thereof as follows:
ACCESSORY USE OR BUILDING — A subordinate use or building, the
purpose of which is incidental and customary to that of the main use or
building and on the same lot.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure other than a building, which
is used exclusively for an accessory use.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The Zoning Officer, the Director of
Community Development, and/or the Planning/Zoning Coordinator.
APARTMENT — A room or suite of connected rooms on a single floor
designed or used for occupancy as a single dwelling unit by one family.
AREA, BUILDING — The total of areas taken on a horizontal plane at
the maximum exterior circumferential sections of the principal building
and all accessory buildings exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces
and steps.
AREA, LIVABLE OR HABITABLE — The sum of the gross horizontal
areas of a floor or several floors of a building measured between the
inside face of exterior walls, or from the center line of walls separating
two dwelling units, having a clear ceiling height of at least four feet, but
no more than 10% of the habitable floor area shall have a ceiling height
less than the prescribed ceiling height in the Building Code;103 no cellar
or garage space is to be considered to be included in livable area.
AREA, TOTAL FLOOR — The total area taken on a horizontal plane at
the maximum circumferential sections of each of the floor levels of the
principal building and all accessory buildings exclusive of uncovered
porches, terraces and steps.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building having its finished floor
surface either partially or completely below grade.
103. Editor's Note: See Ch. 119, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 268-2 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-2
265:757
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a construction
adapted to permanent, temporary, or continuous occupancy or use and
having a roof.
CATERING/BANQUET HALL — A large room or group of rooms that
typically provides waiter services for banquets, conventions, weddings
and other similar gatherings with food and beverages that are
preselected and either served at the table or self-serve buffet style
and is paid for on a per-person basis.[Added 7-18-2011 by Ord. No.
11-729]
CELLAR — A basement having a floor-to-ceiling height less than that
prescribed by the Building Code for livable/habitable areas, or having
less than 1/2 its floor-to-ceiling height above the average finished grade
of the adjoining ground.
CHILD-CARE CENTER — Any child-care facility regulated and licensed
by the Department of Human Services pursuant to P.L. 1983, c. 492
(N.J.S.A. 30:5B-1 et seq.).
CHURCH — Synonymous with "house of worship," as defined below.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — A motor vehicle used for commercial
purposes with or without an attached or permanently attached delivery
body, including vehicles such as catering or canteen trucks, buses, cube
vans, tow trucks, dump trucks, tanker trucks, tractor trailers, semitrailers
and any vehicle which has an exterior fixture or fixtures for the
purposes of carrying equipment, materials, or supplies for commercial
purposes.
COMMON — An unoccupied open space on a lot around which or on
the opposite sides of which two or more principal buildings face.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR THE DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED
— Any community residential facility licensed pursuant to P.L. 1977,
c. 448 (N.J.S.A. 30:11B-1 et seq.) providing food, shelter, and personal
guidance, under such supervision as required, to not more than 15
developmentally disabled or mentally ill persons, who require
assistance, temporarily or permanently, in order to live in the
community, including but not be limited to group homes, halfway
houses, intermediate care facilities, supervised apartment living
arrangements, and hostels. Such a residence shall not be considered
a health care facility within the meaning of the Health Care Facilities
Planning Act, P.L. 1971, c. 136 (N.J.S.A. 26:2H-1 et seq.). In the case
of such a community residence housing mentally ill persons, such
residence shall have been approved for a purchase of service contract
or an affiliation agreement pursuant to such procedures as established
by regulation of the Division of Mental Health and Hospitals of the
Department of Human Services.
DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED PERSON — A person who is
developmentally disabled as defined in Section 2 of P.L. 1977, c.
448 (N.J.S.A. 30:11B-2).
(1)
§ 268-2 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-2
265:758
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR PERSONS WITH HEAD INJURIES —
A community residential facility licensed pursuant to P.L. 1977, c. 448
(N.J.S.A. 30:11B-1 et seq.) providing food, shelter, and personal
guidance, under such supervision as required, to not more than 15
persons with head injuries, who require assistance, temporarily or
permanently, in order to live in the community, including but not limited
to group homes, halfway houses, supervised apartment living
arrangements, and hostels. Such a residence shall not be considered
a health care facility within the meaning of the Health Care Facilities
Planning Act, P.L. 1971, c. 136 (N.J.S.A. 26:2H-1 et seq.).
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR THE TERMINALLY ILL — Any
community residential facility operated as a hospice program providing
food, shelter, personal guidance, and health care services, under such
supervision as required, to not more than 15 terminally ill persons.
COMMUNITY SHELTER FOR VICTIMS OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE —
Any shelter approved for a purchase of service contract and certified
pursuant to standards and procedures established by regulation of the
Department of Human Services pursuant to P.L. 1979, c. 337 (N.J.S.A.
30:14-1 et seq.), providing food, shelter, medical care, legal assistance,
personal guidance, and other services to not more than 15 persons
who have been victims of domestic violence, including any children of
such victims, who temporarily require shelter and assistance in order
to protect their physical or psychological welfare.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district
only upon a showing that such use in a specified location will comply
with the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such
use as contained in the regulations herein, and upon the issuance of an
authorization therefor by the reviewing board.
CONSERVATION EASEMENT — The grant of a property right
stipulating that the described land will remain in its natural state and
precluding future or additional development.
COURT — An open unoccupied space enclosed or partially enclosed by
three or more intersecting walls of a building or buildings on the same
lot. For the purpose of this chapter, the space included between two
MENTALLY ILL PERSON — A person who is afflicted with a mental
illness as defined in N.J.S.A. 30:4-23,104 but not including a person
who has been committed after having been found not guilty of a
criminal offense by reason of insanity or having been found unfit to
be tried on a criminal charge.
(2)
PERSON WITH HEAD INJURY — A person who has sustained an
injury, illness, or traumatic changes to the skull, the brain contents
or its coverings which results in a temporary or permanent
physiobiological decrease of mental, cognitive, behavioral, social or
physical functioning which causes partial or total disability.
(1)
104. Editor's Note: Repealed by L. 1987, c. 116. See now N.J.S.A. 30:4-27.1 et seq.
§ 268-2 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-2
265:759
walls which intersect at an angle of less than 90º shall be considered a
court.
CREST LINE — A line at the top of a mountain or hill at the edge or
upper limit of a slope of 40% or more.
DENSITY — The permitted number of dwelling units per gross area of
land to be developed.
DISTURBED LOT COVERAGE — That area of a lot expressed as a
percentage, which is graded, filled or otherwise disturbed in the course
of construction.
DWELLING — A building, or portion thereof, which is designed or used
exclusively as the living quarters for one or more families.
DWELLING, DUPLEX — A semidetached building designed for or
occupied by two families living independently of each other with a
common fire wall separating them either vertically or horizontally.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A building designed for or occupied by
three or more families living independently of each other.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — A detached building designed for or
occupied exclusively by one family.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building designed for or occupied by
two families living independently of each other.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms arranged for the use of one
or more individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit with
cooking, living, sanitary and sleeping facilities. In the case of a nursing
home or like facility having dormitory-style rooms, whether or not such
rooms include cooking and/or sanitary facilities, each room shall be
considered a dwelling unit.
ELEEMOSYNARY OR PHILANTHROPIC INSTITUTION — A private or
public organization that is organized and operated for the purpose of
providing a service or carrying on a trade or business without profit.
FAMILY — One or more persons customarily living together as a single
household, whether or not related to each other by birth or marriage, as
distinguished from a group occupying a boarding house, lodging house,
hotel or motel.
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — The private residence of a family day-care
provider which is registered as a family day-care home pursuant to the
Family Day Care Provider Registration Act, P.L. 1987, c. 27 (N.J.S.A.
30:5B-16 et seq.).
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of
the floors of a building or of a structure having floors measured from
the exterior face of exterior walls, or from the center line of a wall
separating two buildings, but excluding any space where the floor-toceiling
height is less than six feet.
§ 268-2 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-2
265:760
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The sum of the gross area of all floors of all
buildings or structures compared to the total area of the site. 105
FLOOR/LOT RATIO — The sum of the gross floor area, as defined above,
of all buildings and structures, compared to the total area of the lot. 106
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An accessory building or part of a main building
principally for the storage of motor vehicles as an accessory use.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — A building or part thereof, other than a private
garage, used for the storage, care or repair of motor vehicles for profit,
including any sale of motor vehicle accessories, or where any such
vehicles are kept for hire.
GARDEN APARTMENTS — Multifamily apartment dwelling units
situated within one or more buildings, each of which contains four or
more such units.
GASOLINE STATION — Any area of land, including structures thereon,
that is used for the sale of gasoline or other motor vehicle fuel and oil
and other lubricating substances, including any sale of motor vehicle
accessories, and which may include facilities used or designed to be
used for polishing, greasing, washing, spraying, dry cleaning or
providing similar services for motor vehicles. Any such use shall be
classified as a motor vehicle service station.
GRADE, EXISTING — The vertical location of the surface of the ground
prior to any disturbance.
GRADE, FINISHED — The final elevation of the surface of the ground
after disturbance or soil moving in conformance with an approved
design.
HEIGHT OF BUILDING — The vertical distance measured from the
average elevation of the finished grade as measured at all the building
corners to the highest elevation of the roof surface or ridgeline on
pitched roofs.
HELIPORT — An area used by helicopters or by other steep-gradient
aircraft, which area includes passenger and cargo facilities,
maintenance and overhaul facilities, fueling service, storage space, tiedown
space, hangars and other accessory buildings or open spaces.
HELISTOP — An area on a roof or on the ground, used by helicopters
or other steep-gradient aircraft for the purpose of picking up or
discharging passengers or cargo.
HOME OCCUPATION — Any activity carried out for gain by a resident
conducted as an accessory use in the resident's dwelling unit as
regulated in this chapter.
HOSPITAL — An institution providing primary health services and
medical or surgical care to persons, primarily inpatients, suffering
105. Editor's Note: See Floor Area Ratio (F.A.R.) diagram included at the end of this chapter.
106. Editor's Note: See Floor/Lot Ratio diagram included at the end of this chapter.
§ 268-2 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-2
265:761
from illness, disease, injury, deformity, and other abnormal physical or
mental conditions and including, as an integral part of the institution,
related facilities, such as laboratories, outpatient facilities, training
facilities, medical offices, and staff residences.
HOUSE OF WORSHIP — A building, structure, or group of buildings
or structures that by design, construction, configuration, and operation
are primarily intended for the conduct of organized religious services
and the customary accessory uses incidental and subordinate to same.
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE — The area of a lot, in relation to the whole,
covered by buildings and other improvements including but not limited
to sidewalks, driveways, parking areas, decks, patios, and tennis courts,
whether such surfaces are paved or unpaved, which may prevent or
impede the natural absorption of stormwater directly into the ground
below. Impervious coverage is the same as lot coverage and specifically
excludes the surface area of that portion of a swimming pool that is
designed for water retention.
INFILL DEVELOPMENT — Development of a vacant site or of scattered
vacant sites situated within an area that is already developed with
established housing or other buildings, including such development as
may involve the subdivision of a lot.
JUNKYARD — The use of more than 200 square feet of the area of any
lot for the buying, selling, exchange, storing, packing, disassembling,
baling or cleaning of discarded or salvage metals, plumbing fixtures,
salvage materials and equipment from house wrecking or automobiles
or parts thereof not in operable condition, but does not include uses
entirely within enclosed buildings.
KENNEL — Any establishment wherein or whereon the business of
boarding or training animals, or breeding animals for sale is carried on.
LANDSCAPED BUFFER — Open spaces and landscaped areas, which
may include fences, walls, berms, or any combination thereof used to
physically separate or screen one use or property from another so as to
visually shield, or block noise, lights, or other nuisances. No buildings
or pavement are permitted within the landscaped buffer area with the
exception of driveways needed for access to an adjacent road in a front
yard.
LONG-TERM CARE FACILITY — A facility such as a nursing home,
that is licensed by the Department of Health of the State of New
Jersey, to provide health care under medical supervision and continuous
nursing care for 24 or more consecutive hours to two or more residents
whose physical or mental condition requires such care, and who are not
related to the governing authority by marriage, blood, or adoption.
LOT — A piece, parcel, or plot of land occupied or designed to be
occupied by a building and its accessory buildings or by a dwelling
group and its accessory buildings, together with such open spaces
as are arranged and designed to be used in connection with such
buildings.
§ 268-2 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-2
265:762
LOT, CORNER — A parcel of land with two or more adjacent sides
abutting upon streets. Each street side shall be considered a front yard.
LOT COVERAGE — The area of a lot, in relation to the whole, covered
by buildings and other improvements including but not limited to
sidewalks, driveways, parking areas, decks, patios, and tennis courts,
whether such surfaces are paved or unpaved, which prevent or impede
the natural absorption of stormwater directly into the ground below.
"Lot coverage" is the same as impervious coverage and specifically
excludes the surface area of that portion of a swimming pool that is
designed for water retention.
LOT DEPTH — A mean distance between the front lot line and rear lot
line measured in the general direction of its side lines. Where the front
lot line does not coincide with the street line, the lot depth shall be
measured from the street line.
LOT FRONTAGE — The distance between side lot lines measured along
the street right-of-way line.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE — A line of record dividing one lot from another.
LOT WIDTH — The distance between side lot lines measured along the
required minimum front yard setback line.
MEDICAL CLINIC — An establishment where patients who are not
lodged overnight are admitted for examination and treatment by two
or more physicians, dentists, psychologists, social workers or similar
professionals practicing together.
MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE STATION — Any land, building or part of
a building used for repairing motor vehicles, such as engine overhaul,
body repairs, replacement of parts, painting of motor vehicles or any
part thereof and other repairs of a major character. Any such land,
building or part of a building where vehicles are also supplied with
gasoline or other motor fuels shall be classified also as a gasoline
station.
MUNICIPAL AGENCY — The Township Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment or the governing body, when acting pursuant to this
chapter, Chapter 38, Land Use Procedures, and the Municipal Land
Use Law and any agency which is created by or responsible to the
Township when acting pursuant to this chapter, Chapter 38, Land Use
Procedures, and the Municipal Land Use Law. The term "reviewing
board" is synonymous with the term "municipal agency" and refers
interchangeably to the Planning Board or the Board of Adjustment,
as either Board acts in its capacity regarding any matter under its
jurisdiction as designated by the Municipal Land Use Law.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING — A structure the size, dimension or
location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or
amendment of this chapter, but which fails to conform to the
§ 268-2 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-2
265:763
requirements of the zone district in which it is located by reason of such
adoption, revision or amendment.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot the area, dimension or location of
which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this
chapter, but which fails to conform to the requirements of the zone
district in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or
amendment.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use or activity which was lawful prior to
the adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter, but which fails to
conform to the requirements of the zone district in which it is located
by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment.
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially
unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public
or private use or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and
occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open space.
OPEN SPACE, PUBLIC — Any open space area conveyed or otherwise
dedicated to the municipality, a municipal agency, the Board of
Education, a state or county agency, or other public body for
recreational or conservation uses.
PARKING SPACE — An off-street paved area available for the parking
of a motor vehicle which shall have a minimum area of nine feet wide
by 18 feet in depth.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area with a minimum
contiguous or noncontiguous acreage of 10 acres or more to be
developed as a single entity according to a plan containing one or
more residential clusters, which may include appropriate commercial,
or public or quasi-public uses, as permitted by this chapter, all primarily
for the benefit of the residential development.
PREVAILING FRONT YARD SETBACK — The approximate front yard
setback at which the majority of buildings fronting on the same side
of the same street within a particular block area or other area, as
may be defined by topographic features, zoning districts, separating
roadways, or divergent uses, are situated, which setback is a defining
characteristic of the block area or neighborhood in which the buildings
are located.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — A building in which is conducted the principal
use of the lot on which it is located.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING COVERAGE — That portion of a lot expressed as
a percentage covered by the principal building.
PRINCIPAL USE — The primary or predominant use of any building or
lot.
QUADRIPLEX — A group of four attached one-family dwelling units,
each having at least two private entrances from the exterior, up to 1 1/
§ 268-2 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-2
265:764
2 stories above grade, and separated from one another by vertical fire
walls.
RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER — A contiguous or noncontiguous area to be
developed as a single entity according to a plan containing residential
housing units which have a common or public open space area as an
appurtenance.
RESTAURANT — An establishment in which specific food and
beverages are ordered, from a menu to a waiter, and prepared for
consumption on the premises by small groups of patrons seated at
tables, booths, or counters, and payment is made before
leaving.[Amended 7-18-2011 by Ord. No. 11-729]
RETAIL SALES STORES, SHOPS, AND MARKETS — Establishments for
the sale of goods for use or consumption on or off the premises, which
goods are intended to meet direct consumer food, clothing, furnishing,
recreational or other needs and are not intended for resale, excluding
motor vehicles.
RETAIL SERVICE SHOPS — Establishments for the provision of retail
services such as personal care, clothing care, small appliance repair,
upholstery, pet grooming, catering and other similar services, excluding
servicing of motor vehicles.
RETAIL SHOPPING CENTER — A facility consisting of one or more
buildings designed for occupancy and use by more than one enterprise
for the conduct of business as an integrated and comprehensively
planned retail installation.
SELF-STORAGE FACILITY — A building, or group of buildings,
containing smaller, self-contained, individually-accessed units that are
leased for the storage of goods and materials.
SETBACK — The minimum required distance measured from the
property lines to the nearest portion of a structure, in the case of a
building, its footings or foundation. The following specific features of
a principal building shall be excluded from the setback requirement,
provided that they extend into the setback area by not more two feet:
bay windows, chimneys, overhangs, steps.
SIGN — Any object, device, display or structure, or part thereof,
situated outdoors or indoors, intended to be in view of the general
public, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or attract
attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business,
product, service, event or location by any means including words,
letters, figures, design, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination or
projected images. For the purposes of this chapter, this definition shall
not include official public notices, the flag or insignia of any
governmental jurisdiction, or any traffic signal or sign maintained by a
governmental entity.
SIGN AREA — The area of a sign shall be the entire display or total
gross advertising area within a single continuous rectangular perimeter
§ 268-2 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-2
265:765
enclosing the extreme limit of such display space exclusive of any
structural or framing elements. The area of a freestanding sign with
two faces shall be the equivalent of the area of one of the faces.
SLOPE — A computation of percentage in which vertical distance is the
numerator and the horizontal distance is the denominator, calculated
at ten-foot intervals (e.g., a ten-foot difference in elevation over a
horizontal position of 25 feet is a slope of 40%).
SOIL MOVING — Any digging, stripping, excavation, removal or
deposition of soil, filling, grading, regrading, leveling, or other activity
that alters the contour of the land or elevation of the surface of the
ground from its condition prior to such activity. 107
STEEP SLOPE — A slope of at least 20%.
STORY — That part of a building comprised between a floor and the
floor or roof next above including a parking level.
STORY, ABOVE GRADE — Any story having its finished floor surface
entirely above grade except that a basement shall be considered as
a story above grade when the finished surface of the floor above the
basement is:
STORY, HALF —
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive
or other way which is an existing state, county, or municipal roadway,
or which is shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law, or
which is approved by official action as provide by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq., or which is shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of
the county recording officer prior to appointment of the Planning Board
More than six feet above the average finished grade along the
foundation;
(1)
More than six feet above the finished grade for more than 50% of
the total building perimeter; or
(2)
(3) More than 12 feet above the finished grade at any point.
A story located wholly or partly within the roof construction and
having a maximum floor area of 60% of the story below, and a clear
height of at least seven feet between the top of the floor beams and
the structural ceiling. Areas within said half story shall be part of,
connected with, and used with the area of the floor below.
(1)
A story located wholly or partly within the roof construction having
a ceiling height not conforming to that prescribed by the Building
Code for livable/habitable areas.
(2)
A mezzanine that exceeds 33% of the area of the floor immediately
below.
(3)
107. Editor's Note: See Ch. 226, Soil Removal.
§ 268-2 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-2
265:766
and the grant to such Board the power to review plats; and includes the
land between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved, and
may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking
areas and other areas within the street lines.
STREET LINE — The edge of an existing or future street right-of-way
line that forms the dividing line between the street and a lot, across
which there is permanent access to the lot.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation, whether installed on, above or below
the surface of a parcel of land.
TOWNHOUSE — A one-family dwelling unit having up to 2 1/2 stories
above grade, having front and rear access to the outside, and
constructed in a row of three but nor more than six such attached units
separated by vertical fire walls.
TOWNHOUSE COMPLEX — A group of buildings containing
townhouses in an integrated and comprehensively planned community.
USE — The specific purpose for which land or a building is designed,
arranged or intended or for which it is or may be occupied or
maintained.
WAREHOUSE — A building used primarily for the storage of goods and
materials.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA — A system of
electrical conductors that transmit or receive radio frequency signals,
digital signals, analog signals, or electromagnetic waves for wireless
communications.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT COMPOUND —
A fenced area which contains any combination of wireless
telecommunications structures, buildings, antennas, equipment, and/or
towers.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS STRUCTURES, ANTENNAS,
EQUIPMENT, AND/OR TOWERS — Buildings and/or other structures
and equipment for the delivery of wireless telecommunications except
for satellite dish antennas. For purposes of this chapter, wireless
telecommunications structures, antennas, equipment, and/or towers
may be collectively referred to as "wireless telecommunications
facilities." This definition shall not include any tower supporting an
antenna or antenna array that is under 70 feet in height and is owned
and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator or
is used exclusively for receive-only antennas.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER — A vertical structure
used to support wireless telecommunications antennas.
YARD, FRONT — An open unoccupied space extending across the full
width of the lot and lying between the street line of the lot and the
nearest line of any building. The depth of the front yard shall be
§ 268-2 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-2
265:767
measured at right angles to the street line. The required front yard
area is that space extending across the full width of the lot and lying
between the street line of the lot and the required front yard setback
line.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending across the full width of the lot and
lying between the rear line of the lot and the nearest line of any
building. The depth of a rear yard shall be measured at right angles
to the rear line of the lot; or, if the lot is not rectangular, then a mean
depth shall be established based on the general direction of the side
lot lines. The required rear yard is that space extending across the
full width of the lot and lying between the rear line of the lot and the
required rear yard setback line.
YARD, SIDE — An open, unoccupied space between the side line of the
lot and the nearest line of any building and extending from the front
yard to the rear yard or, in the absence of either of such yards, to the
street or rear lot lines, as the case may be. The width of a side yard shall
be measured at right angles to the side line of the lot. The required side
yard is that space between the side line of the lot and the required side
yard setback line and extending from the front yard to the rear yard or,
in the absence of either of such yards, to the street or rear lot lines, as
the case may be.
ZONING OFFICER — The municipal official designated by the Township
Manager to enforce the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and to issue
zoning permits.
ZONING PERMIT — A document signed by the Zoning Officer which is
required by ordinance as a condition precedent to the commencement
of a use or the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration,
conversion or installation of a structure or building and which
acknowledges that such use, structure, or building complies with the
provisions of this chapter or variance therefrom duly authorized by
the appropriate municipal agency in accordance with the New Jersey
Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.).
§ 268-2 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-2
265:768
ARTICLE III
Zones Established
§ 268-3. Designation of zones.
The territory of the Township of Cedar Grove is hereby divided into the
following zones:
A. R-5A One-Family Residential Zone (minimum lot size five acres). The
R-5A Zone is the lowest density residential zoning district in the
Township. The district was established to broaden the array of
residential housing options available to Township residents, and to
provide for limited development of properties containing critical
environmental resources or designated by the New Jersey Office of
State Planning as "environmentally sensitive planning areas." It is
anticipated that large portions of the district may be retained for use as
public open space.
B. R-40 One-Family Residential Zone (minimum lot size 40,000 square
feet). The R-40 Zone is established in anticipation of development of
lots on properties located on the steep slopes and the tops of the
Watchung Mountains. The Township began to experience
overdevelopment in these critical and environmentally sensitive areas
when they were regulated by the R-18 Zone. The zone creates greater
open air, light and space, and is designed to preserve a portion of the
lots in their natural state while allowing reasonable use of the land,
thus respecting the environmentally sensitive nature of these areas.
C. R-30 One-Family Residential Zone (minimum lot size 30,000 square
feet). The R-30 Zone is established to provide greater variety in the
availability of low-density housing options in the Township, to create
greater open air, light and space, and to preserve a portion of the lots in
their natural state while allowing reasonable use of the land, thus
respecting the environmentally sensitive nature of these areas. The
R-30 Zone provides less restrictive zoning when the property is not
affected by either crest lines or steep slopes.
D. R-18 One-Family Residential Zone (minimum lot size 18,000 square
feet). The R-18 Zone is established as a district in which the principal
use of the land is for large lot single-family homes. The district is
composed of low-density residential areas, plus certain open areas
where similar residential development appears likely to occur. In
addition to permitting single-family homes and public recreational uses,
religious and educational facilities are permitted conditional uses,
encouraged as the basic elements of a balanced neighborhood.
E. R-15 One-Family Residential Zone (minimum lot size 15,000 square
feet). The R-15 Zone is a low-density residential zone composed chiefly
of single-family homes on lots of approximately 1/3 of an acre, together
with public recreational, religious and educational uses. The intent of
this section is to encourage the construction of and continued use of
§ 268-3 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-3
265:769
single-family homes and the other basic neighborhood uses permitted
by this section.
F. R-10 One-Family Residential Zone (minimum lot size 10,000 square
feet). The R-10 Residential Zone is composed of areas within the
Township which are to a great extent already developed with lots of
approximately 10,000 square feet in area. The intent of this section is to
encourage the continued use of the zone as basically single-family in
character and to discourage and prohibit uses which would
substantially interfere with either the development of vacant land for
single-family homes or the continuation of the predominantly singlefamily
character of the district.
G. R-8 One-Family Residential Zone (minimum lot size 8,000 square feet).
The R-8 Zone is the more densely developed of the single-family zones
and includes older areas in which some nonconforming uses and
buildings are to be found. The intent of this section is to encourage the
continued use of the zone as basically single-family in character and to
discourage and prohibit uses which would substantially interfere with
either the development of vacant land for single-family homes or the
continuation of the predominantly single-family character of the
district.
H. MF Multifamily Residential Zone (minimum lot size three acres). The
intent of the MF Zone is to provide for integrated multifamily
communities of garden apartments and townhouses. It is located in
areas suited to such development by virtue of proximity to major
roadways, availability of utility infrastructures, compatibility with
surrounding land uses, and ability to adequately and safely contain
multifamily communities and their related amenities. Regulations
require comprehensive planning to ensure orderly site configuration,
proper vehicular and pedestrian access, adequate interior traffic
circulation, and attractive architectural design.
I. SL/C Senior Living/Care Residential Zone (minimum lot size three
acres). For planned residential retirement communities, minimum lot
size of 10 acres. The SL/C Zoning District is established in recognition
of the need for senior citizen housing and residential health care.
Permitted uses within the zone include planned residential retirement
communities and long-term care facilities such as nursing homes. SL/C
zoning is located in areas with ready access to major roadways and
public transportation as well as other supporting infrastructure.
J. O Office Building Zone (minimum lot size one acre). The O Office
Building Zone is located where it has been determined that the land
may be used for offices without adversely affecting traffic, available
utilities, the general character of the Township, the neighborhood, or
other zoning districts in the vicinity.
K. B Retail Shopping Zone (no minimum lot size). The B Zone is intended
for the conduct of general business which supplies the basic current
§ 268-3 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-3
265:770
§ 268-4. Zoning map established.
The aforesaid zones are hereby established by the designation, location and
boundaries thereof set forth and indicated on the Zoning Map, dated June
family needs, including but not limited to such retail stores as drug,
food, clothing and hardware and, in addition, such other uses as
theaters and restaurants. In addition, it is the intent of this zone to
promote the development of the central shopping district with ample
off-street parking and to encourage the tendency of retail commercial
development to concentrate, to the mutual advantage of both
consumers and merchants, for the convenience, ease and safety of the
public and thus to strengthen the economic base of the Township.
L. RC Restricted Commercial Zone. The RC Zone is located in several
different areas on both sides of Pompton Avenue. The zone is
designated for nonresidential uses limited in a manner intended not to
adversely affect the development and vitality of the B District as a welldefined
central shopping area. The permitted uses in the RC Zone are
designed to encourage the development of the land in the district
primarily for retail uses, with additional provisions for professional and
business offices, recreational uses, and commercial schools. In addition,
the zoning will permit special commercial-type uses, without area
limitations, that may attract considerable traffic and parking to
locations away from the congestion of the general retail trade area
where such uses can be accommodated in beneficial relation to one
another.
M. M-1 and M-2 Office/Warehouse Zones. It is the intent of these zones to
provide for light manufacturing and warehouse uses while at the same
time permitting development of professional and/or business offices,
whether as accessory or principal uses. District standards for the height
and size of buildings and the area and dimensions of yards and open
spaces are intended to minimize the effect of such sites being adjacent
to residential areas and to minimize noise, glare, air pollution, water
pollution and fire and safety hazards. The basic distinction between the
M-1 and the M-2 Zones is that the M-2 Zones are composed of large
areas of land where campus-style development is encouraged on lots
larger than that required for the M-1 Zones.
N. GF Government Facilities Zone (no minimum lot size). The GF Zone
provides for uses pertinent to the various agencies of federal, state,
county, and/or municipal government including facilities such as offices,
libraries, United States Postal Service, utility installations, public works
garages, and storage buildings.
O. Multifamily Affordable Housing (MF-AH) Zone. [Added 9-17-2018 by
Ord. No. 18-829]
P. Multifamily Affordable Housing Inclusionary Overlay (MF-AH-IO) Zone.
[Added 9-17-2018 by Ord. No. 18-830]
§ 268-3 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-4
265:771
2001, as may be revised by ordinance. Said map shall be known as the
"Zoning Map of Cedar Grove Township" and is hereby declared to be a part
of this chapter.108
§ 268-4.1. Interpretation of boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists as to any of said boundaries as shown on the
Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
§ 268-5. Schedule of regulations established.
The schedule of regulations entitled "Schedule of Requirements, Cedar
Grove Township Zoning Ordinance" and attached hereto, applying to the
land, buildings, yards and other open spaces to be provided contiguous
thereto, and all other matters contained therein, as indicated for the various
zones established by this chapter, is hereby declared to be a part of this
chapter. The regulations listed for each zone as designated, reading from
left to right across the schedule, are hereby prescribed for such zones,
subject to the other provisions in this chapter.109
A. Zone boundary lines are intended to follow the center line of streets,
railroad rights-of-way, streams and lot or property lines as they exist on
plats of record at the time of the passage of this chapter, unless such
zone boundary lines are fixed by dimensions as shown on the Zoning
Map.
B. Where such boundaries are not fixed by dimensions and where they
approximately follow lot lines and where they do not scale more than 10
feet distant therefrom, such lot lines shall be construed to be such
boundaries unless specifically shown otherwise.
C. In unsubdivided land and where a zone boundary divides a lot, the
location of such boundary, unless the same is indicated by dimensions
shown on the map, shall be determined by the use of the scale
appearing thereon.
108. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the office of the Township Clerk.
109. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Requirements is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 268-4 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-5
265:772
ARTICLE IV
General Regulations
§ 268-6. Compliance required.
No building shall hereafter be erected and no existing building shall be
moved, structurally altered, added to, enlarged or rebuilt nor shall any land
be designed, used or intended to be used for any purpose other than those
included among the permitted uses listed in this chapter for each zoning
district; nor shall any open space contiguous to any building be encroached
upon or reduced in any manner except in conformity to the yard, lot area,
building location, percentage of lot coverage, off-street parking and other
such requirements of this chapter pertinent to the property in question. In
the event of any such unlawful encroachment or reduction, such building
shall be deemed to be in violation of provisions of this chapter; and the
certificate of occupancy for such building shall become null and void.
§ 268-6.1. Frontage on public streets required.
Every principal building shall be built upon a lot which has frontage upon a
public street.
§ 268-6.2. Special provisions for corner lots.
When a corner lot is created by a subdivision the required lot width for such
a corner lot shall be the width of the lot as required by the Schedule of
Requirements for the zone in which said lot is located, plus an additional
width and area equal to at least 10% of said required lot width and area. The
front yard on a corner lot shall be one of the yards between the principal
structure and the street line. The rear yard shall be the yard opposite the
front yard. The side yard between the principal structure and the street line
shall be regulated in all respects as if it were a front yard, and the remaining
yard shall be treated as a side yard.
§ 268-6.3. Special provisions for infill development and
redevelopment.
In cases of infill development or redevelopment in any one-family residential
zoning district, where a prevailing front yard setback exceeding the
minimum requirement has been established by other existing homes
fronting on the same side of the same street, and where such development
or redevelopment affects property situated adjacent to or between such
existing homes, the prevailing front yard setback shall be the minimum
applicable to new home construction, as well. If application of the prevailing
front yard setback to the proposed new construction would result in a
deviation from any other aspect of the Schedule of Requirements table,
or would reduce a building footprint so as to preclude construction of a
home having proportionate width/depth dimensions or having the maximum
allowable principal building coverage for the zoning district in which the
property is located, or would be physically impossible due to the
§ 268-6 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-6.3
265:773
dimensions, location, or other characteristics of the lot on which it would be
located, the applicable front yard setback minimum shall be reduced from
the prevailing setback dimension to the maximum dimension at which such
deviations and/or practical difficulties will be averted, but in no case to a
dimension less than that set forth by the Schedule of Requirements table.
§ 268-6.4. Formation of lots from existing lots containing buildings.
Where a lot is formed from part of a lot already occupied by a building, such
shall be effected in such a manner as not to impair any of the requirements
of this chapter with respect to the existing building and all yards and other
open spaces in connection therewith. No permit shall be issued for the
erection of a new building on the new lot thus created unless it complies
with all the provisions of this chapter.
§ 268-6.5. Architectural design standards.
Buildings with expansive blank walls are prohibited. Bare concrete block, or
painted concrete block as the predominant finish of a facade is prohibited.
Expansive facades are to be broken up with vertical or horizontal elements
of different textures or colors. In the case of development projects
consisting of more than one building, all such buildings and other structures
whether principal or accessory, shall be designed with a unified
architectural theme that is visually compatible with the surrounding area.
Said design shall consider such elements as building materials and colors,
facade treatments, rooflines, light fixtures, and site amenities such as street
furniture. Multifamily residential structures shall have pitched roofs as
an integral component of their design. Any development project entailing
construction of more than four principal buildings (inclusive of subdivisions
for detached single-family dwelling units) shall be designed to provide
architectural variation in the configuration and appearance of such
structures. It is the intent of this provision to encourage a unified
architectural design scheme with compatibility of adjacent structures, but
to prohibit monotonous repetition of identical buildings.
§ 268-7. Lighting and glare.
Exterior lighting shall be provided to adequately illuminate all pedestrian,
parking, and vehicular surfaces for purposes of safety and security. The
following standards shall apply:
A. Unless specifically otherwise provided, light intensity at pavement level
shall be a minimum of 0.5 footcandle and a maximum of five
footcandles. Light intensity at a property line shall not exceed 0.2
footcandle.
B. All fixtures shall be fully shielded to reflect light downward and to
reduce light spillage to unintended areas, whether on-site or an
adjoining property, and to prevent skyglow. Wall-mounted flood- or
spotlights shall be aimed no higher than 45º from vertical.
§ 268-6.3 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-7
265:774
§ 268-8. Prohibited buildings, structures, and uses.
The following buildings, structures, and uses are prohibited:
§ 268-9. Nonconforming buildings, structures and uses.
The following provisions shall apply to nonconforming buildings, structures
and uses in any zone district of the Township.
§ 268-9.1. Continuance permitted; conditions.
Except as otherwise provided in this article or permitted by judicial
interpretation of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-68, the lawful use of land or structures
existing at the date of the adoption of this chapter may be continued upon
the land or within the structure so occupied, although such use or structure
does not conform to the regulations specified by this chapter for the zone
in which such land or structure is located; provided, however, that no such
nonconforming use or structure shall be enlarged or extended to occupy a
greater area of land or structure than that occupied by such use or structure
at the date of the adoption of this chapter. Nor shall the use be expanded or
increased in intensity if the result of such expansion or increase in intensity
impacts the quality or character of the neighborhood in which such use is
located.
C. Light fixtures and poles shall be of a consistent architectural style
throughout a project site and shall complement the style of the
building(s) situated thereon.
D. Light fixtures shall be mounted at the lowest appropriate height for the
intended use, but in no case shall exceed a height of 20 feet.
E. Walkway lighting shall be provided via low or mushroom-type standards
whenever separate fixtures are required apart from those used on
building exteriors, in parking lots, or along driveways.
A. Uses not specifically permitted. Uses not expressly permitted by this
chapter are prohibited.
B. More than one principal use or building. There shall be only one
principal use and one principal building permitted on each lot, except
as specifically provided in this chapter. Each numbered principal use
appearing on the list of principal permitted uses shall be considered a
separate and distinct principal use.
C. Mixed uses. No residential use shall be permitted on the same lot with a
nonresidential use except as specifically provided in this chapter.
D. Heliports and helistops. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to
permit the establishment or maintenance of a heliport or helistop as a
principal or accessory use in any zone district in the Township.
[Amended 4-21-2003 by Ord. No. 03-589]
§ 268-7 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-9.2
265:775
§ 268-9.2. Restoration.
If any lawfully existing nonconforming structure shall be partially destroyed
by reason of windstorm, fire, explosion, act of God or a public enemy
or any cause whatsoever, such structure may be restored or repaired,
within one year from the date of partial destruction, as a nonconforming
structure. After the period of one year, it may be restored or repaired,
but only in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. Nothing in this
chapter shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of
any portion of the structure declared unsafe by the Construction Official.
No nonconforming use shall, if once changed into a conforming use, be
changed back again into a nonconforming use.
§ 268-9.3. Abandonment.
In the event that a nonconforming use of land or structure shall be
abandoned, the same shall not again be used for a nonconforming use or
purpose.
§ 268-10. Accessory buildings, structures, and uses.
§ 268-10.1. Fences and walls.
A. Any accessory building having a common wall, roof, or foundation with
the principal building shall be considered part of the principal building
and shall adhere in all respects to the requirements of this chapter
applicable to the principal building.
B. Except as specifically provided in this chapter, an accessory structure
constructed more than six inches above the ground at any point which
is attached to the principal building, shall comply in all respects to the
requirements of this chapter applicable to the principal building.
C. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no accessory building or
accessory structure shall exceed 15 feet in height.
D. There shall be a minimum of 10 feet between an accessory building and
any other building(s) on the same lot. No accessory buildings are
permitted in the front yard.
E. Except as specifically provided in this chapter, and with the specific
exception of a sidewalk which crosses a property line to intersect with
the adjacent public right-of-way line, no accessory structure shall be
located closer than five feet to any property line.
F. Accessory buildings shall be set back from property lines in accordance
with the minimum distances set forth in the Schedule of Requirements
table that accompanies this chapter.
A. Fences and walls may be located in any front, side, and/or rear yard of
any property in any district in the Township.
§ 268-9.2 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-10.1
265:776
§ 268-10.2. Private swimming pools in residential zones.
The establishment or construction of a private swimming pool in the
Township of Cedar Grove shall be in conformance with Chapter 237, and the
following conditions:
§ 268-10.3. Private tennis courts.
Private tennis courts shall be subject to the following provisions:
B. With the exception of fences and walls erected for screening of outdoor
storage or refuse disposal units, fences and walls, whether attached to
the principal building or not, are exempt from setback requirements as
otherwise stipulated for accessory structures.
C. Except as specifically provided otherwise in this chapter, any fence,
wall, or combination fence/wall built within the front yard shall not
exceed four feet in height, and any fence, wall, or combination thereof
built upon the remainder of any lot shall not exceed six feet in height.
These limitations shall not apply to retaining walls and shall be subject
to change at the discretion of the municipal agency in any matter
requiring site plan review.
D. Walls erected for structural purposes of retaining soil pertinent to an
approved lot grading plan, shall not exceed eight feet in height, as
measured from the lowest finished grade at any point to the topmost
portion of the structure at that point.
E. All fences shall be constructed with the finished side facing out and
away from the property on which the fence is located.
F. No fence or wall shall be erected which will encroach upon a public
right-of-way or sight triangle easement established pursuant to this
chapter.
A. The pool and all appurtenances including perimeter walkways, patios,
decks, filters and any other mechanical equipment shall be located in
the rear or side yard and shall be a minimum of 15 feet from all
property lines, but not less than the required accessory building
setback distance. All appurtenances shall be located within the
required fencing, which fencing shall be designed and installed in
compliance with all applicable provisions of the Building Code.
B. Grading plans shall be submitted for review by the Engineering
Department where any changes to the existing topography are required
in conjunction with the construction of a pool which is proposed to be
below ground.
C. That portion of a swimming pool which is specifically designed for
water retention shall not be included in any calculation of lot coverage.
This provision shall not apply to swimming pool appurtenances such as
perimeter walkways, patios, decks, or equipment platforms.
§ 268-10.1 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-10.3
265:777
§ 268-10.4. Awnings.
No awning or canopy, hereinafter referred to as awnings, shall be erected
or installed in any office, business, commercial, or office/warehouse zone,
or in connection with any such use, except in accordance with the standards
herein. The installation of an awning which conforms to these standards
shall be exempt from the requirement for site plan approval and may be
approved by issuance of a zoning permit. Any awning requiring a variance
shall be required to obtain minor site plan approval.
A. Private tennis courts, together with any fencing and other
appurtenances, shall be located:
(1) In the rear or side yard.
(2) At least 25 feet from any property line.
(3) At least 10 feet from any building.
B. Any fencing, including any barrier restricting play around the tennis
court, shall be no more than 10 feet in height measured at its highest
point, and shall be a transparent structure.
C. The installation or use of artificial lighting for the purpose of
illuminating the tennis court for play during nondaylight hours is
prohibited.
D. Drainage from the court shall be disposed of by discharge directly to
the Township's storm sewer system or managed on site in a manner
acceptable to the Township Engineer.
A. Extension and height of fixed awnings. Fixed awnings shall not extend
from the building to which they are attached by more than 48 inches,
nor be greater than six feet in height from the lowest to highest point,
including any fringe or other attachment.
B. Extension of drop awnings. Drop or retractable awnings shall not
extend from the building to which they are attached by more than five
feet.
C. Setback. An awning shall be permitted to protrude into the required
front yard area of the building and to extend into the right-of-way, so
long as it complies in all other respects with the requirements of this
section.
D. Minimum elevation. The lower edge of any awning, including any fringe
or attachment, shall be no closer to the ground or sidewalk than six feet
nine inches, and no part of the iron or other supporting framework shall
be closer than seven feet to the ground or sidewalk.
E. Signs. The following provisions shall apply to placement of signs on an
awning:
§ 268-10.3 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-10.4
265:778
§ 268-10.5. Outdoor display of merchandise.
Outdoor display of products and merchandise for retail sale is a permitted
accessory use to retail stores and shops in the B, and RC Zones, subject to
the following restrictions:
(1) Letters, numbers, and symbols on any awning shall be limited to
the name of the establishment, street number, and/or logo.
(2) In the event there are multiple occupants covered by a single
awning, the portion of the awning covering each occupancy with a
separately defined space under the awning shall be treated as a
separate awning for purposes of placement of letters, numbers and
symbols.
(3) On buildings on corner lots, an awning that meets all other
requirements of this article may wrap around the corner of the
building facing on the intersecting streets, but for purposes of
placement of letters, numbers, or symbols, the awning on each
facade shall be treated as a separate awning.
F. Colors. Awnings may be a solid color or striped. An awning may contain
letters, numbers, and/or symbols as set forth above, provided no more
than two colors shall appear on the awning. A striped awning may
contain various shades of the two permitted colors, but in such event
shall not include letter and/or symbols displaying the name of the
establishment, but may display the street number in numerical form.
G. Location. Awnings may be located on buildings immediately above
doors and windows, and may extend on walls for a distance of two feet
beyond such doors and windows. Awnings shall not be permitted in any
other location.
H. Lighting. There shall be no internal or back lighting of any awning. Any
lighting under the canopy shall be cast downward toward the building
facade and/or sidewalk. All lighting shall be shielded so as not to reflect
up or out from behind or through the awning.
A. Products and merchandise shall include only such items as are
regularly offered for sale by the retailer on the same premises
therewith.
B. The maximum area of the site which may be devoted to outdoor display
shall not exceed 10% of the interior retail floor area, or 1,000 square
feet, whichever is the lesser.
C. Outdoor display shall be permitted during business hours, only;
products, materials, and display racks or other equipment shall be
removed at the close of business each day.
§ 268-10.4 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-10.5
265:779
§ 268-10.6. Outdoor storage.
All outdoor storage of materials permitted by this chapter shall be screened
by either a wall or fence, together with plant material located on the
outside of the wall or fence so that said storage is not visible from any
adjacent property or public street. Any such wall or fence shall not be
closer than five feet from any property line. Anything contained herein to
the contrary notwithstanding, outdoor storage of any hazardous, toxic or
corrosive substances as defined in regulations promulgated by the United
States Environmental Protection Agency or the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection is prohibited.
§ 268-10.7. Refuse disposal units.
Outdoor refuse disposal units ("dumpsters") on sites devoted to
nonresidential or multifamily residential uses shall be completely screened
from public view by means of a fence or wall enclosure having a maximum
height of seven feet and shall be landscaped as required by the Board. Such
enclosures are prohibited from the required front yard area and shall be
located a minimum of five feet from any side or rear yard property line.110
§ 268-10.8. Mechanical equipment.
Service equipment, such as air-conditioning equipment, elevator bulkheads,
heating equipment and the like, whether located on the rooftop or on the
ground, located on sites devoted to nonresidential or multifamily buildings
shall be so situated and screened that it shall not be visible from a point six
feet above ground level at the property line or the center line of any street.
Screening of rooftop structures shall be of the same material as the front
facade of the building, unless some other screening material is permitted by
the Board.
§ 268-10.9. Home occupations. [Amended 11-2-2015 by Ord. No.
15-787]
Home occupations shall be compatible with the underlying residential use
of the properties and the neighborhoods in which they are located. No
home occupation shall impair the residential character of the dwelling or
neighborhood in which it is located. The allowable space for the home
D. Any area devoted to outdoor display of merchandise shall be set back a
minimum of 25 feet from any property line adjacent to a residential
zone.
E. No outdoor display shall be located within any public right-of-way or so
situated as to interfere with a required site triangle area. All display
materials, equipment, and appurtenances must be located and securely
placed so as not to impede the safe flow of pedestrian and/or vehicular
traffic.
110. Editor's Note: See Ch. 197, Property Maintenance, Art. II, Dumpsters.
§ 268-10.5 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-10.9
265:780
professional office shall be such of a resident professional person such as
a physician, dentist, lawyer, minister, architect, optometrist, professional
engineer, chiropractor, conducting the licensed professional practice of
their occupations. Each application will be reviewed by the Township. Home
occupations shall be permitted as an accessory use in all one-family
residential zones in accordance with the following standards:
A. The home occupation shall be clearly subordinate to the residential use.
B. The home occupation shall be conducted by the owner or tenant
residing on the premises.
C. No employees other than residents are permitted.
D. The home occupation shall be conducted completely within the interior
spaces of a residential building and shall occupy no more than 25% of
the total livable floor area.
E. No outdoor storage is allowed.
F. There shall be no more than five client/customer visits to the property
per week and such visitation shall take place only between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
G. No retail sales of merchandise held for resale and no rentals are
permitted on the premises. Automotive or vehicular repair of any kind is
specifically forbidden as a home occupation.
H. Site plan approval is not required. However, a plan, to scale, shall be
submitted with the application showing the area dedicated for the home
professional use within the residential dwelling space.
I. Home occupations shall not cause any off-site noise, odors, radiation,
glare, radio or television interference, or other similar negative
impacts.
J. No toxic or hazardous materials that would constitute a danger to the
environment or neighboring properties shall be stored on the premises.
This provision shall not apply to the storage or use of chemicals or other
materials customarily retained for household use.
K. Home occupations shall be allowed no more than two nonpassenger car
deliveries per day, excluding United States mail delivery. Such
deliveries shall be provided by means of vehicles no larger than a stepvan.
L. No signs shall be permitted.
M. No additional parking, other than that required for the residential use,
shall be permitted.
N. Any alteration to the dwelling for the home occupation shall maintain
the residential character and appearance of the building.
§ 268-10.9 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-11
265:781
§ 268-11. Steep slopes and crest lines.
No permit shall be issued in connection with the development of a property
determined to contain steep slope areas and/or crest lines except in
accordance with the requirements of this section. It is the intent of these
provisions to protect the character and integrity of the mountainous
portions of the Township, to minimize the disturbance of steep slope areas
in order to curtail erosion, siltation, surface water runoff, and soil slippage,
to respect the natural terrain of the area and its links with and impacts upon
adjoining municipalities, and to protect the unique and predominant views
that such areas both afford and are a part of.
§ 268-11.1. Steep slope requirements.
§ 268-11.2. Crest line requirements.
A lot or lots upon which is located a crest line, as defined in this chapter,
shall be subject to the following provisions:
A. The schedule of regulations entitled "Schedule of Steep Slope
Requirements, Cedar Grove Township Zoning Ordinance" and attached
hereto, applying to the land buildings, yards, and other open spaces to
be provided for steep slope properties in the R-18, R-30, and R-40
zones, is hereby declared to be a part of this chapter.111
B. Whenever a lot is proposed to be created or an existing lot is proposed
to be developed or constructed upon which contains steep slopes, the
Schedule of Steep Slope Requirements shall apply and supersede the
requirements contained in the Schedule of Requirements of the Code of
the Township of Cedar Grove wherever the schedules are inconsistent
with one another.
A. In connection with each application for development or at the time of
issuance of a building permit, if no crest line has been established
pursuant to this section, a crest line, as defined in this chapter, shall be
established on each lot included in a development application or upon
which construction is proposed. The applicant shall establish the
proposed crest line on a map or plan sufficient for review by the agency
from which approval is sought. The agency to which an application for
development or application for a building permit is made shall establish
the crest line, subsequent to review and report by the Township
Engineer in connection with the applicant's plan.
B. Along the crest line, and within a distance of 30 feet of the crest line,
there shall be no structures; no fill, excavation or other alteration of the
natural grade; and no cutting, removal, damage or destruction of living
trees over six inches in diameter, measured at two feet above the
ground.
111. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Steep Slope Requirements is included as an attachment to
this chapter.
§ 268-11 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-11.2
265:782
§ 268-12. Special modifications and exceptions.
C. No building which exceeds 1 1/2 stories above grade or 24 feet in
height, and no portion of any such building, shall be constructed within
60 feet of a crest line.
D. In connection with any development application or any application for a
building permit to which this section applies, the developer or applicant
for a building permit shall submit a plan which identifies the location of
each tree protected by Subsection B of this section, together with a plan
in sufficient detail to show how the trees will be protected from damage
during the course of construction. Such plans shall be reviewed by the
Environmental Commission of the Township of Cedar Grove for their
accuracy in the location of trees before being approved in connection
with a development application or application for a building permit
unless such Commission fails to render a report within 30 days of the
submission of the plans to it, in which case, the plan may be approved
without such report.
E. In addition to the remedies and penalties provided in this chapter, no
temporary or permanent certificate of occupancy shall be issued in
connection with any construction on any lot on which occurs a violation
of this section of the Code of the Township of Cedar Grove. In the event
of a violation, the Planning Board of the Township of Cedar Grove shall
review any proposed plan of mitigation or correction of the violation.
Approval of such a plan shall remove the impediment to the issuance of
a certificate of occupancy, provided that a cash escrow, in a sufficient
amount to effectuate such plan of mitigation, is deposited with the
Township of Cedar Grove, together with a written agreement from the
owner of the property in question authorizing the Township of Cedar
Grove to enter the property to effectuate the plan in the event of
default.
A. The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to chimneys,
church spires, cupolas, standpipes, flagpoles, transmission towers,
radio or television antennas or towers, cables, scenery lofts or water
tanks and similar structures and necessary mechanical appurtenances,
for the zone in which the structure is located, provided that:
(1) In the case of a spire, cupola or other similar building feature, or of
a roof-mounted structure such as an antenna, no such feature or
structure shall cover at any level more than 10% of the area of the
roof of the building it is a part of or on which it is located, nor shall
exceed the prescribed building height limitation by more than 10
feet.
(2) In the case of a chimney, flue, or other similar exhaust vent, no such
feature shall exceed the prescribed building height limitation by
more than three feet. In the event the building construction code in
effect at the time such structure is proposed requires a higher
§ 268-11.2 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-12
265:783
§ 268-13. (Reserved)
clearance, such structure shall extend no higher than the minimum
height necessary to meet such standard.
(3) In the case of a freestanding flagpole, transmission tower, radio or
television tower, water tank, or similar structure and its necessary
mechanical appurtenances, no such structure shall exceed the
prescribed principal building height limitation by more than 10
feet. Where such structures exceed 15 feet in height, same shall be
set back from all property lines a distance equal to at least their
height.
B. No tower shall be used as a place of habitation or for tenant purposes.
No sign, nameplate, display or advertising device of any kind
whatsoever shall be inscribed upon or fastened to any structure which
extends above the zone height limitations. Parapet walls and false
mansards may extend not more than four feet above the height limit.
C. Any lawfully existing one-family dwelling in a residential zone which
does not meet a yard setback requirement for the zone in which it is
located may be expanded vertically along the line of the encroachment,
up to the maximum height limitations of this chapter, provided that:
(1) The use of the lot conforms fully to the requirements of this
chapter;
(2) No additional violation(s) or extension or enlargement of any
existing violation(s) such as yard setbacks or lot coverage is
proposed;
(3) The foundation and/or first story over which the addition will be
constructed, lawfully preexists.
§ 268-12 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-13
265:784
ARTICLE V
Signs
§ 268-14. General regulations.
No signs shall be erected, altered, or replaced which are not in accordance
with the standards of this article.
A. Zoning permits shall be required for all signs greater than two square
feet in area unless specifically exempted herein. Relief from the
requirements of this article shall be requested in the form of a variance
from the appropriate Board pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-l et seq.
B. No signs shall be placed on or attached to a building or erected
independently for any purpose other than to advertise a permitted
business or use conducted on the same premises unless specifically
permitted herein.
C. No sign shall be placed in a public right-of-way nor otherwise obstruct
driving vision, traffic signals, traffic directional or identification signs.
All signs shall comply with the requirements of this chapter pursuant to
sight triangles and required sight distances.
D. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, no part of any
sign shall extend above the top or beyond the ends of the wall surface
on which it is placed; no sign, except such directional devices as may be
required by federal aeronautical authorities, shall be placed, inscribed
or supported upon the roof or upon any building which extends above
the roof of any building; and no sign shall be placed so as to interfere
with the opening of an exit door or to obstruct any window opening to a
room to be used for dwelling purposes.
E. Freestanding signs shall be supported by one or more columns or
uprights which are firmly embedded in the ground. Exposed guy wires,
chains or other connections shall not be permitted except that the sign
itself may hang from its supporting frame by flexible links. Two-faced
freestanding signs shall have no angle between the two sides.
F. Interior window signs shall not be considered in computing total
allowable signage, provided that such signs shall not exceed 50% of the
total window area, shall be used only for advertising of special sales,
products, or services sold on the premises, and shall not be used for
business identification purposes.
G. Informational signs such as street number designations, postal boxes,
parking signs, "private property" signs, on-site directional signs, and
warning signs are permitted in all zones. Such signs shall not exceed
one square foot in area and shall not be considered in calculating total
permitted signage.
H. Illuminated signs shall be designed to minimize light spillage and/or
glare beyond the border of the sign, itself. Such signs shall be either
§ 268-14 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-14
265:785
§ 268-14.1. Prohibited signs.
The following signs are expressly prohibited in all zones:
§ 268-14.2. Temporary signs.
indirectly lighted or of the diffused lighting type. Illumination shall
be designed to direct light and glare away from adjoining streets and
properties. Floodlights used for sign illumination shall not project light
above the highest elevation of the illuminated wall of the building.
I. A single decorative flag of 25 square feet or less may be affixed to any
building in any zone without necessity for a zoning permit. Such flags
may contain generic words such as "open," but shall not advertise any
product or event. Such a decorative flag shall not be included in any
calculation of total permitted signage.
A. Billboards are not permitted in any zone of Cedar Grove Township.
B. Flashing, intermittent intensity or revolving signs shall not be
permitted, nor shall any illuminated sign of red, green, yellow, or any
light placed in a location or manner which could be mistaken for a
traffic signal or emergency vehicle.
C. No person may erect a sign which is affixed to a fence, utility pole, tree
or natural object. No sign may be painted directly on the exterior
surface of a building or an accessory structure such as a storage tank.
D. All other attention attracting devices such as streamers, strings of
pennants, spinners, pin wheels, beacons, inflatables, flashing signs or
similar devices are prohibited. Banners shall be permitted as temporary
signs in accordance with the requirements of this section.
E. No movable signs shall be permitted, except in conjunction with
Christmas tree sales, which may be permitted for no more than 45
days.112
F. It shall be unlawful to utilize a vehicle or trailer as a structure to which
a sign is attached or placed. Vehicles on which signs are placed,
painted, or erected and which are regularly parked in a conspicuous
location for the purpose of advertising are prohibited.
A. Real estate "for sale/for lease/sold" signs. One sign is permitted per lot
to advertise the sale or rental of the premises upon which the sign is
located by the owner or a real estate agent or broker. The sign is not to
exceed an area of six square feet in residential districts or 16 square
feet in all other districts and shall be set back a minimum of five feet
from all street right-of-way lines. The sign shall be removed within
seven days of the consummation of a sale or lease transaction. No
permit is required for such signs.
112. Editor's Note: See Ch. 116, Christmas Trees, Sale and Storage of.
§ 268-14 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-14.2
265:786
§ 268-15. Permitted signs in residential zones.
In residential zones the following signs may be permitted:
B. Real estate "open house" sign. One sign in addition to the "for sale"
sign, may be placed on the subject property. The sign shall not exceed
six square feet in area, shall be set back a minimum of five feet from all
street right-of-way lines, and may be erected from 72 hours before the
open house until no more than 24 hours after it. No permit is required
for such signs.
C. Land development signs. Signs advertising the sale of property or
structures in developments of two or more lots and signs advertising
the opening or construction of a new business shall be permitted for a
period of up to six months, or until the signing of the contract or
transaction of sale or lease of the last lot or structure in the
development, or until a certificate of occupancy is issued for a new
business, whichever event occurs last. The applicant shall be permitted
to request a renewal at the end of the six-month period, if necessary. No
such sign shall exceed 24 square feet in area, and shall otherwise
conform to the sign regulation of the district in which it is located. No
permit shall be issued for such sign until the subdivision and/or site
plan has been granted approval by the appropriate municipal board.
D. Nonprofit organization event signs. Temporary signs advertising a
specific event sponsored by a bona fide nonprofit organization may be
located on or off the premises of the organization's operating location.
Such signs shall be unlighted, shall be set back a minimum of five feet
from all street right-of-way lines and shall not exceed 32 square feet in
area. Such signs may be displayed for a period of time not to exceed 30
days and shall be removed within 24 hours after the event. No permit
shall be required for nonprofit organization event signs, but the back of
each such sign shall be clearly marked with the name, address and
phone number of the person empowered to remove the sign.
E. Political signs. Temporary signs advertising a political campaign may be
located on or off the premises of the organization's operating location.
Such signs shall be unlighted, shall be set back a minimum of five feet
from all street right-of-way lines, and shall not exceed 32 square feet in
area. Political signs relating to any municipal, county, state, or national
election shall be permitted for 30 days prior to the election and shall be
removed within seven days after it. No permit shall be required for
political signs.
F. Business promotional signs. A temporary sign or banner advertising a
special sale or business promotion on the premises of a commercial
enterprise may be authorized by zoning permit up to four times per
year, provided the sign or banner is not displayed for more than 21 days
at a time; does not exceed 32 square feet in area; and is set back a
minimum of five feet from all street right-of-way lines. Such signs shall
not be considered in determining total permitted signage.
§ 268-14.2 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-15
265:787
§ 268-16. Permitted signs in nonresidential districts.
A. A nonilluminated nameplate sign, situated within the property lines and
bearing only a place name, the name of the principal occupant, and/or
the address of a private dwelling, and not exceeding 96 square inches in
total area.
B. Signs advertising a use in a residential zone such as a nonprofit
organization or fraternal group, identification for a multifamily
development, public or quasi-public building or building used solely for
a nonprofit church, school, hospital or other like purpose, but not
including any activity of a retail nature, provided that it is located on
the same premises which it advertises. Such sign shall not exceed 32
square feet in area. Where such signs are freestanding they shall be a
minimum of 10 feet from any property line and no higher than six feet.
C. Not more than one sign shall be posted for each use or activity
permitted within the provisions of this section.
A. Business and commercial establishments. Business and other
commercial establishments including industrial uses and offices may
display any one or combination of the following signs, provided that no
individual business shall be permitted more than three exterior signs.
New and replacement signs on properties containing more than one use
or business establishment shall be part of a comprehensive signing plan
for the property, which is subject to Board approval at the time of site
plan review.
(1) Wall signs. Wall signs are permitted on each facade of a commercial
building that faces on a public street or on-site parking lot, subject
to the following requirements:
(a) Not more than one wall sign on each such wall shall be
permitted for each business establishment or use located
within the building and having a public entrance from that
wall.
(b) The bottom of said sign shall be at least seven feet above the
ground or sidewalk below it if the sign extends more than three
inches from the face of the building wall.
(c) The total area of all such signs shall not exceed 10% of the area
of the building wall, including window area, to which they are
attached.
(d) A cantilevered sign may be substituted for a permitted wall
sign, or may be placed in addition to a wall sign where the total
area of both does not exceed the area permitted for the wall
sign, by itself. The bottom of a cantilevered sign shall be at
least seven feet above the ground or sidewalk below it, and its
extension from the building wall shall not exceed 48 inches.
§ 268-15 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-16
265:788
Cantilevered signs may extend into the required yard area of
the building, but may not extend beyond the property line.
(2) Ground or freestanding signs. One ground or freestanding sign
shall be permitted for each street frontage of a commercial
property, subject to the following requirements:
(a) Such signs shall not exceed 50 square feet in area nor 15 feet
in height above the ground.
(b) Such signs and all supports shall be situated at least 10 feet
from any building and 10 feet from any property line.
(c) Shopping centers consisting of a building or buildings having a
total gross floor area of 20,000 square feet or more, shall be
permitted one freestanding sign of up to 100 square feet in
area with a maximum 24 feet in height above the ground. Such
signs shall be set back from all property lines a distance equal
to not less than their height.
B. Motor vehicle service stations.
(1) The following types of signs are permitted at gas stations:
freestanding signs, attached or canopy signs, signs over garage bay
doors, customary lettering or other insignia which are a structural
part of the gasoline pump, and a sign indicating the location of a
waste oil recycling facility. The waste oil recycling sign shall be
attached to the building.
(2) The number of signs shall be limited as follows: one freestanding
sign, three attached signs, provided that two of these are permitted
only if attached to a canopy, one sign over each garage bay door,
one credit card sign, one oil recycling facility sign and pump price
signs as required by law.
(3) The maximum size of signs permitted shall be limited as follows:
Sign Type
Maximum Size
(Square Feet)
Freestanding 50
Attached 20
Over bay doors 4
Oil recycling sign 4
Pump price sign As required by law
Pump structural signs Limited by size of pump
(4) No freestanding sign shall be closer than 10 feet to a street right-ofway
line or to a property line not coincident with a street line and
no freestanding sign shall exceed 24 feet in height or have the
§ 268-16 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-16
265:789
lowest edge of the display area closer than eight feet from the
ground.
C. Public and institutional uses. One wall or ground sign shall be
permitted on properties dedicated to public or quasi-public uses such as
hospitals, eleemosynary institutions, churches, schools, government
buildings, libraries, or other like purposes. Such signs shall not exceed
32 square feet in area. Where such signs are freestanding they shall be
a minimum of 10 feet from any property line and no higher than six feet.
§ 268-16 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-16
265:790
ARTICLE VI
Off-Street Parking and Loading
§ 268-17. Off-street parking requirements.
§ 268-17.1. Single-family residential parking standards.
A. Off-street parking space shall be provided as specified herein and in
Article VII, District Regulations. All such space shall be deemed to be
required space on the lot on which it is situated and shall not thereafter
be encroached upon or reduced in any manner.
B. Off-street parking areas shall be oriented to and within a reasonable
walking distance of the buildings they are intended to serve. Parking
spaces shall be provided with necessary passageways and driveways
and full, unencumbered vehicular turnaround space must be provided
on each site.
C. Except as specifically permitted by this chapter, no commercial repair
work or service of any kind shall be conducted in any parking area, and
no lot or driveway shall be used for parking of dismantled or
unregistered vehicles.
D. The term "parking," as used in this chapter, does not include parking for
an aircraft of any nature or design.
A. No person shall park any motor vehicle on a front yard in any
residential district or on a side yard where the property is bounded by
two streets, except on an established driveway surface. An "established
driveway surface" shall mean that area which has been paved, or
otherwise prepared for the acceptance of motor vehicles and which is
not utilized or maintained as grass lawn, or a shrubbed or otherwise
vegetated area customarily associated with lawns or gardens.
B. Driveways and parking areas in single-family residential zones shall be
set back from property lines, as follows:
Zoning District
Minimum Setback
(feet)
R-8 2
R-10 2
R-15 4
R-18 4
R-30 6
R-40 6
R-5A 6
§ 268-17 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-17.1
265:791
C. The number of parking spaces required is pursuant to the New Jersey
Residential Site Improvement Standards, N.J.A.C. 5:21-1 et seq. (See
chart at the end of this chapter.) A portion of this requirement shall be
provided by garage parking spaces of a minimum of nine feet by 18 feet,
as follows:
Zoning
Minimum Number of Garage
Parking Spaces
R-8 1
R-10 1
R-15 1
R-18 2
R-30 2
R-40 2
R-5A 2
D. Driveway backup space for garages for noncommercial vehicles must
equal or exceed 24 feet of clear and unencumbered space.
E. No commercial vehicle, commercial trailer or storage vehicle shall be
parked outdoors on private property overnight in any residential zone.
Only commercially licensed passenger automobiles, station wagons,
vans, and pickup trucks which satisfy all of the following conditions are
permitted to park overnight in a residential zone:
(1) Automobiles and vans shall have a fully enclosed single chassis,
nonsegmented body with driver's seating area not physically
separated from other passenger or cargo area (except trunk), four
wheels, not more than 20 feet long and seven feet high and not
exceeding 6,000 pounds registered gross vehicle weight.
(2) Pickup trucks shall have a gross vehicle weight of less than 18,000
pounds and not more than six wheels. Any truck featuring an
enclosed box compartment is specifically excluded.
(3) Lettering or advertising with not more than three-inch characters
shall be limited to the front door space.
(4) No equipment, ladders or other accessories which are not an
integral part of the vehicle shall be permitted on the vehicle when
parked overnight in a residential area.
(5) Only one commercially licensed vehicle, meeting all of the above
criteria, shall be permitted to park overnight on a residential lot.
(6) This subsection may be enforced by either the Zoning Officer or the
Cedar Grove Police Department. The Cedar Grove Police
Department and Zoning Officer shall have the authority to adopt
administrative procedures for the enforcement of this subsection.
§ 268-17.1 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-17.1
265:792
§ 268-17.2. Nonresidential and multifamily parking standards.
F. Outdoor parking and storage of recreational vehicles, travel trailers,
and boats shall be permitted in single-family residential zones in
accordance with the following limitations:
(1) Such vehicles shall not exceed a length of 24 feet and shall be
parked only on established driveways or similarly prepared
surfaces. Vehicles such as boats, jet skis, or campers, which are
situated upon trailers, shall be exempt from this requirement, and
such trailers shall be excluded from the measurement of length.
(2) Only one such vehicle, inclusive of a supporting trailer, may be so
stored or parked at any given time.
(3) The parking/storage area shall be screened from view on any side
which adjoins or faces premises used or zoned for residential
purposes. Such screening shall be by fence or wall, by existing
intervening building or other on-site structure, by landscaping, or
by any combination of such components adequate to generally
obscure the view of the vehicle and minimize the visual impact to
the neighboring residential property.
(4) No such vehicular parking/storage shall be permitted in a front
yard, or in the case of a corner lot, in the front yard or side yard
facing on the adjoining street.
(5) Such vehicles shall not be used for temporary or permanent living
quarters while situated on the lot.
A. The owners of parking lots for nonresidential and multifamily
residential uses shall grant the municipality enforcement powers under
Title 39 of New Jersey Statutes.
B. The Planning Board may permit the developer to bank or reserve
parking spaces for future development if the need arises. The developer
must provide documentation that the spaces to be banked are not
immediately needed. It shall be the Zoning Officer's determination
when the banked spaces are needed. The area proposed for the banked
spaces shall be fully engineered at the time of the application, and shall
remain undisturbed or landscaped at the discretion of the reviewing
board.
C. Outdoor overnight parking restrictions apply to commercial vehicles as
defined in Article II and any additional vehicle types as limited by the
Planning Board.
(1) No outdoor overnight parking of commercial vehicles or trailers is
permitted in conjunction with any use permitted in the Multifamily
Residential or Senior Living/Care Zoning Districts.
§ 268-17.1 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-17.2
265:793
(2) Outdoor overnight parking of commercial vehicles is permitted in
the Office, Restricted Commercial and Retail Shopping Districts as
follows: one commercial vehicle less than 20 feet in length (not
including trailers, tanker trucks, dump trucks or other construction
equipment) shall be permitted for each 10,000 square feet of lot
area, or part thereof, provided that such parking shall be situated a
minimum of 50 feet from any property used or zoned for residential
purposes and shall be screened from view via fence or wall, and
landscaping as required by the Board. Any such commercial
parking shall be restricted to vehicles used in connection with the
business or office use that occupies the site.
(3) Outdoor overnight parking of commercial vehicles (excluding
tanker trucks) is permitted in the Office/Warehouse Zones as
follows: one commercial vehicle less than 26 feet in length shall be
permitted for each 10,000 square feet of lot area, or part thereof,
provided that such parking shall be situated a minimum of 50 feet
from any property used or zoned for residential purposes and shall
be screened from public view via fence or wall, and landscaping as
required by the Board. Except as specifically provided, any such
commercial parking shall be restricted to vehicles used in
connection with the use that occupies the site.
(a) In addition to the outdoor overnight parking permitted in
Office/Warehouse Zones, as set forth above, outdoor overnight
parking of commercial vehicles unrelated to the principal use
is permitted in the M-1 Office/Warehouse Zone, provided that
such vehicles (excluding tractor trailers, semi-trailers, tanker
trucks, earth-moving vehicles, and construction equipment)
shall not exceed 20 feet in length, shall be situated a minimum
of 50 feet from any property used or zoned for residential
purposes and shall be screened from view via fence or wall,
and landscaping as required by the Board. Open trailers
attached to such commercial vehicles for purposes of carrying
equipment, materials, or supplies related to the commercial
use shall be excluded from the measurement of length of such
vehicles. No such parking shall be permitted during the hours
of operation of the permitted principal use.
(4) The Planning Board, at its option, may additionally limit and
restrict outdoor overnight parking or vehicle storage on any site, at
its discretion.
D. The design of parking facilities shall conform to the following criteria:
(1) No parking facilities shall be permitted in any required front yard.
(2) Driveway clearance in parking lots for noncommercial vehicles
must equal or exceed:
§ 268-17.2 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-17.2
265:794
Parking Angle
Clear Aisle Space
(feet)
90º 24
60º 18
45º 13
30º 12
(3) Driveway backup space for garages for noncommercial vehicles
must equal or exceed 24 feet of clear and unencumbered space.
(4) Commercial vehicle parking shall require a minimum 12 foot by 35
foot long rectangular area, or larger, as may be required at the
discretion of the Planning Board.
(5) Paving. All parking lots and driveways shall be curbed and surfaced
with asphaltic concrete, portland cement concrete, brick pavers or
approved equivalent. Curbs shall be Belgian block, or poured
concrete, at the discretion of the reviewing board. Each space shall
be identified by painted lines on the pavement. All parking lots shall
be provided with an interior network of drains as required upon
site plan review. Construction and design shall be subject to Board
approval.
(6) Illumination. All parking lots and pedestrian surfaces shall be
lighted during nondaylight hours. Such lighting shall not exceed an
intensity of five footcandles, nor shall it be less than 0.5 footcandle
at pavement level, nor shall it be more than 0.2 footcandle at the
property line. Such lighting shall be so arranged and shielded as to
reflect the light downward and away from adjoining streets,
residential zones or residential uses. Light poles shall be no higher
than 20 feet. It is the intention of the above standards that minimal
lighting be provided sufficient to provide for safety and security. In
the event that the lighting as constructed proves to be more
intensive than necessary, or creates any detrimental effect upon
neighboring properties, the owner may be required by the
Township to reduce the intensity below the approved intensity and/
or provide additional shielding. In the event that a problem of the
nature described arises, and it cannot be resolved between
municipal officials and the property owner, the matter shall be
referred to the Board that approved the site plan application for a
decision as to the intensity and shielding issues.
(7) Parking setback. No parking shall be permitted within any required
landscaped buffer area. Unless a greater distance is required by
this chapter, all parking areas and drives shall be located at least
five feet from any property line except where joint, contiguous
parking facilities are permitted by this chapter.
§ 268-17.2 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-17.2
265:795
§ 268-17.3. Parking plazas and contiguous thoroughfare areas.
It is the intent of this section to encourage parking plazas and contiguous
rear thoroughfares to minimize access to parking areas through main public
streets.
(8) Setback from buildings. In any multifamily, commercial, industrial,
or multi-use development, no parking shall be permitted within 10
feet of any building. If open-air parking is required and interior
roads or access drives in the development are used for curb
parking, the width of such parking spaces shall be added to the
widths of the required right-of-way and paving for such roads and
drives.
(9) Landscaped islands. Any parking area containing more than 15,000
square feet shall provide landscaped islands between parking bays
placed end to end. Such islands shall have a minimum overall width
of six feet.
(10)Water quality protection. All parking areas shall be installed with
such water quality protection devices as recommended by the
Township Engineer and/or required by the reviewing board to
prevent oil, grease and other undesirable materials from being
washed or deposited off of the parking area into the street, sewer
system, watercourses, landscaped areas or any other place. Such
devices shall be properly maintained by the owner of the property.
(11) Parking lot screening. All off-street parking areas, with the
exception of points of physical ingress/egress, shall be screened on
any side which adjoins or faces premises used or zoned for
residential purposes. Such screening shall be by fence, wall or a
berm and landscaping. Any fence or wall used for screening shall
not be less than four feet nor more than six feet in height and shall
be maintained in good condition. In addition to, or in substitution
of, any wall or fence proposed by the applicant, the Board may
require landscaped screening.
A. The minimum fixed parking space requirements (not related to areas)
for any listed and approved (nonresidential) site use may be reduced by
half at the discretion of the Planning Board if, in its judgment, the
availability of contiguous rear yard thoroughfares or contiguous
parking plazas make adequate parking available on adjacent sites.
Contiguous rear yard thoroughfares and parking plazas must have legal
deed restrictions applicable to all the property in question to assure
unlimited direct access now and in the future to each and all of the
available outdoor parking spaces of all the properties in question which
benefited in or approved of reduced parking space requirements.
Copies of all the deeds showing the referenced site plans must be on file
with the Planning Board before parking space limitations may be
reduced.
§ 268-17.2 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-17.3
265:796
§ 268-17.4. Required parking spaces.
B. Each parking area on a site must still have access to the main street,
and parking must still comply with the area parking requirements
applicable to each approved use. Contiguous parking areas must
provide for direct, safe and unencumbered access through the adjacent
properties. A minimum unencumbered transit width of 20 feet is
required between properties.
C. Wherever feasible, contiguous parking plazas and thoroughfares in the
B and RC Zoning Districts shall be provided with safe, unencumbered
pedestrian access (situated between buildings, if necessary) to the main
street that the subject buildings front upon. Such access shall
incorporate appropriate surface materials suitable for pedestrian usage
and shall be lighted in accordance with the standards of this chapter. At
the discretion of the reviewing board, pedestrian accessways may
encroach upon accessory structure setback requirements, and/or, with
establishment of appropriate access easements, may straddle shared
property lines (in which case, property line light intensity limitations
may also be waived).
A. Parking spaces shall be provided for each approved use, regardless of
the zone in which it is located, in accordance with the standards herein.
Where a lot contains more than one use, the required number of spaces
shall be the aggregate of that for each individual use.
(1) Apartments, garden apartments and townhouses. The number of
parking spaces required is pursuant to the New Jersey Residential
Site Improvement Standards, N.J.A.C. 5:21-1 et seq. (See chart at
the end of this chapter.)
(2) Banks. One space per 300 square feet of gross floor area.
(3) Boardinghouses. The number of parking spaces required is
pursuant to the New Jersey Residential Site Improvement
Standards, N.J.A.C. 5:21-1 et seq.
(4) Bowling alleys. Four parking spaces per each lane.
(5) Catering/banquet facilities. One space for every three seats in the
dining area and one space for every 300 square feet of food
preparation area. Additionally, one parking space will be required
for every two members of the maximum number of serving staff
based on the maximum capacity of the facility. At least 25% of the
required parking for the facility must be designated as self-parking
area. [Added 7-18-2011 by Ord. No. 11-729113]
(6) Child-care centers. One parking space per employee plus one
additional parking space for every eight children. In addition,
113. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection
A(5) through (37) as Subsection A(6) through (38).
§ 268-17.3 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-17.4
265:797
adequate space shall be provided for safe, on-site pickup and
discharge of children from vehicles accessing the center.
(7) Churches, synagogues, and like places of worship. See "houses of
worship."
(8) Clubs and lodges. One outdoor space for each 200 square feet of
total floor area or part thereof.
(9) Convalescent homes. See "long-term care facilities."
(10) Eleemosynary institutions. See "hospitals."
(11) Florist. One parking space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor
area, or part thereof.
(12) Funeral homes. See "mortuary."
(13) Garden apartments. See "apartments."
(14) Gymnasiums, health clubs, and recreational facilities. One parking
space for every 100 square feet of gross floor area.
(15) Hospitals and eleemosynary institutions. Twenty-five parking
spaces minimum plus one space for every 500 square feet of gross
floor area, plus one garage for commercial vehicles for each use
and 2,500 square feet of total building area. One commercial road
vehicle less than 26 feet in length (not including trailers, storage
vans or construction equipment) may be parked outdoors overnight
for each 10,000 square feet of lot size. It must be more than 50 feet
from the nearest residential (including apartment and mixed use)
lot line. No overnight outdoor parking is permitted for any vehicle
over 26 feet in overall length or having more than four tires.
(16) Houses of worship. One parking space for each three seats of
maximum capacity. Seating with benches or pews shall be deemed
to have a capacity of one person for each 24 inches in length.
(17) Industrial buildings. See "manufacturing, warehouses."
(18) Institutions. See "hospitals."
(19) Lodges. See "clubs."
(20) Long-term care facilities. One parking space for every two beds.
(21) Manufacturing facilities. One parking space per 2,000 square feet
of gross floor area.
(22) Medical clinics and medical offices. One parking space per 200
square feet of gross floor area.
(23) Mortuaries and funeral homes. Twenty-five outdoor parking spaces
minimum, plus one outdoor space for each 100 square feet of total
floor area, plus one commercial vehicle garage space for each
§ 268-17.4 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-17.4
265:798
1,500 square feet of total building area. One commercial road
vehicle less than 26 feet in length (not including trailers, storage
vans or construction equipment) may be parked outdoors overnight
for each 10,000 square feet of lot size. It must be more than 50 feet
from the nearest residential (including apartment and mixed use)
lot line. No overnight outdoor parking is permitted for any vehicle
over 26 feet in overall length or having more than four tires.
(24) Motor vehicle service station parking.
(a) There shall be a minimum of five parking spaces, plus one
space for each 250 square feet of total building area, plus one
space for each service bay. Except as otherwise permitted in
this subsection, overnight parking in such parking spaces shall
be limited to vehicles with no more than four tires and which
are no more than 26 feet in length. Such vehicles must be
vehicles which are being repaired at the station, and no such
vehicles shall be permitted to park overnight for more than
three consecutive nights.
(b) One commercial road vehicle less than 26 feet in length (but
excluding trailers, tankers, storage vans, dump trucks,
construction or earthmoving vehicles or equipment) may be
parked outdoors overnight for each 10,000 square feet of lot
size. Any such vehicle must be one used in connection with the
operation of the station and shall be limited to no more than six
tires. Outdoor parking for any such vehicle shall be in one of
the parking spaces required in Subsection A(23)(a) above.
(c) Additionally, a maximum of seven recreational or commercial
road vehicles shall be permitted to be parked overnight on the
property subject to the following conditions:
[1] No vehicle shall exceed 35 feet in length or have more
than six tires.
[2] No trailers, tankers, dump trucks, construction or
earthmoving vehicles or equipment shall be permitted.
[3] All such vehicles shall be fully operable at all times.
[4] Such parking is in designated spaces which shall be in
addition to the spaces required in Subsection A(23)(a)
above.
[5] The parking shall be fully screened from adjacent
residential use by fences, walls, and/or evergreen
plantings, which shall be at least the height of the parked
vehicles.
(d) All parking shall be set back a minimum of five feet from any
property line and 50 feet from any street right-of-way.
§ 268-17.4 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-17.4
265:799
(e) No overnight parking shall be permitted except as specifically
set forth in this subsection.
(25) Nursing homes. See "long-term care facilities."
(26) Offices.
Gross Floor Area
(square feet)
Number of Spaces per 1,000
Square Feet Gross Floor Area
Under 49,999 4.5
50,000 - 99,999 4.0
100,000 or more 3.5
(27) Public buildings. See "hospitals."
(28) Research buildings. See "offices."
(29) Restaurants. One space for every three seats in the dining area and
one space for every 300 square feet of food preparation area of
which a minimum of no less than three additional parking spaces
be required for staff. Additionally, one parking space will be
required for every two members of the maximum number of
serving staff based on the maximum capacity of the facility.
[Amended 7-18-2011 by Ord. No. 11-729]
(30) Retail sales and retail service shops. As required for those
specifically designated herein (i.e., florist, restaurant); all others
one parking space per 250 square feet of gross floor area.
(31) Retail shopping center. The minimum number of parking spaces
shall be the aggregate of that required for each of the individual
uses that occupy the shopping center.
(32) Rooming houses. See "boardinghouses."
(33) Schools. One space per teacher and staff member, or as listed
below, whichever is the greater:
School Level Spaces per Classroom
Elementary 2
Intermediate 1.5
Secondary 2.5
(34) Semipublic buildings. See "hospitals."
(35) Shops: antique, art, and gift. See "retail sale and retail service
shops."
(36) Theaters. One parking space per each three seats devoted to
patrons.
§ 268-17.4 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-17.4
265:800
§ 268-17.5. Off-street loading.
§ 268-17.6. Sight triangles.
Sight triangle easements shall be required at the intersection of a street
with another street and at the intersection of a street with a driveway
providing ingress and/or egress to a nonresidential or multifamily
residential development. Within the triangular area determined as provided
in this section, no wall, fence, structure or other object shall be erected to
a height in excess of 30 inches; no vehicle, object or other obstruction of a
height in excess of 30 inches shall be permitted within the corner clearance
area; and no hedge, shrub or other growth shall be maintained at a height
in excess of 30 inches, except trees whose branches are trimmed to a height
of at least seven feet above the curb level shall be permitted.
(37) Townhouses. See "apartments."
(38)Warehouse. One parking space per 5,000 square feet of gross floor
area.
A. All nonresidential land uses which have a building gross floor area of
7,500 square feet or more shall be required to provide off-street truck
loading spaces at the rear of the building in accordance with the
following schedule. Corner lots shall have the loading area in either or
both of the two yards not facing a street.
Gross Floor Area
(square feet)
Minimum Number Loading
Spaces
7,500 to 25,000 1
25,000 to 40,000 2
40,000 to 100,000 3
Each additional 60,000 1 additional space
B. Each loading space shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width, 35 feet in
length, and 14 feet in clearance height. It shall also be accessible for
the size vehicles anticipated and designed in accordance with generally
accepted engineering principles.
C. Loading areas shall be screened and buffered to the same extent as
required for parking lots. Loading may be provided within a building.
D. No loading space for vehicles over 10 tons capacity shall be closer than
100 feet to any residential district.
A. Such triangular area or sight triangle is defined as that area bounded
by the intersecting street lines or driveway cartway lines and the
straight line connecting sight points, one each located on the two
intersecting street and/or driveway center lines.
§ 268-17.4 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-17.6
265:801
(1) Sight points on driveways shall be 15 feet from the edge of
pavement of the intersecting roadway.
(2) At the intersection of streets with no stop controls, the sight point
for each street shall be 90 feet from the intersection of the center
lines.
(3) In the instance of street intersections with stop controls for each
street, the sight points shall be 75 feet from the intersection of the
center lines.
(4) For partially stop-controlled intersections and for intersections of
driveways with streets, the required dimension of the sight triangle
shall depend upon the established speed limit of the uncontrolled
street (or for future streets, the proposed design speed) in
accordance with guidelines promulgated by the Institute of Traffic
Engineers (ITE). Clear sight lines shall be provided, as follows, for
a driver situated at 15 feet from the edge of pavement of the
uncontrolled street or driveway:
Speed Limit of Uncontrolled
Street
(miles per hour)
Minimum Required Sight
Distance
(feet)
25 250
30 300
35 350
40 400
45 450
50 500
B. No object or other obstruction shall be so located along any straight or
curved roadway as to reduce the line of sight along said road to less
than 400 feet.
§ 268-17.6 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-17.6
265:802
ARTICLE VII
District Regulations
§ 268-18. R-5A One-Family Residential Zone.
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) One-family dwellings.
(2) Residential cluster developments in accordance with the provisions
of Article IX.
(3) Public recreation, open space, and park properties and buildings.
(4) Community residences for the developmentally disabled,
community shelters for victims of domestic violence, community
residences for the terminally ill, and community residences for
persons with head injuries, each in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-66.1.
(5) Family day-care homes as regulated in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.5b.
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Customary accessory structures, buildings and uses, provided that
such are incidental to that of the principal building and use, subject
to the provisions of § 268-10.
(2) Signs as permitted in Article V.
(3) Driveways and off-street parking as provided in Article VI.
(4) Private tennis courts, subject to the regulations contained in
§ 268-10.
(5) Private swimming pools, subject to the requirements of § 268-10
and Chapter 237.
C. Other provisions and requirements.
(1) Area and yard requirements as specified in the Schedule of
Requirements table (§ 268-5), appended to this chapter. In
addition:
(a) Maximum percentage of disturbed area coverage: 15.
(2) Required off-street parking spaces located on the same lot as the
building it is intended to serve pursuant to the requirements of
Article VI.
(3) Notwithstanding the requirements contained in this schedule, a lot
or lots with a crest line shall be subject to the provisions of
§ 268-11.
§ 268-18 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-19
265:803
§ 268-19. R-40 One-Family Residential Zone.
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) One-family dwellings.
(2) Residential cluster developments in accordance with the provisions
of Article IX.
(3) Public recreation, open space, and park properties and buildings.
(4) Community residences for the developmentally disabled,
community shelters for victims of domestic violence, community
residences for the terminally ill, and community residences for
persons with head injuries, each in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-66.1.
(5) Family day-care homes as regulated in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.5b.
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Customary accessory structures, buildings and uses, provided that
such are incidental to that of the principal building and use, subject
to the provisions of § 268-10.
(2) Signs as permitted in Article V.
(3) Driveways and off-street parking as provided in Article VI.
(4) Private tennis courts, subject to the regulations contained in
§ 268-10.
(5) Private swimming pools, subject to the requirements of § 268-10
and Chapter 237.
C. Other provisions and requirements.
(1) Area and yard requirements as specified in the Schedule of
Requirements table (§ 268-5), appended to this chapter. In
addition:
(a) Maximum percentage of disturbed area coverage: 50.
(2) The Schedule of Requirements shall not apply to any lot in the R-40
District which had been created prior to the inception of the R-40
District which was rendered substandard in area by the adoption of
the R-40 Schedule. In the event the Schedule does not apply to any
particular lot the lot shall be regulated pursuant to the R-18 Zone.
(3) Required off-street parking spaces located on the same lot as the
building it is intended to serve pursuant to the requirements of
Article VI.
§ 268-19 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-19
265:804
§ 268-20. R-30 One-Family Residential Zone.
(4) Notwithstanding the requirements contained in this section, a lot
or lots with steep slopes and/or a crest line shall be subject to the
provisions of § 268-11.
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) One-family dwellings.
(2) Residential cluster developments in accordance with the provisions
of Article IX.
(3) Public recreation, open space, and park properties and buildings.
(4) Community residences for the developmentally disabled,
community shelters for victims of domestic violence, community
residences for the terminally ill, and community residences for
persons with head injuries, each in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-66.1.
(5) Family day-care homes as regulated in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.5b.
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Customary accessory structures, buildings and uses, provided that
such are incidental to that of the principal building and use, subject
to the provisions of § 268-10.
(2) Signs as permitted in Article V.
(3) Driveways and off-street parking as provided in Article VI.
(4) Private tennis courts, subject to the regulations contained in
§ 268-10.
(5) Private swimming pools, subject to the requirements of § 268-10
and Chapter 237.
C. Other provisions and requirements.
(1) Area and yard requirements as specified in the Schedule of
Requirements table (§ 268-5), appended to this chapter. In
addition:
(a) Maximum percentage of disturbed area coverage: 50.
(2) Required off-street parking spaces located on the same lot as the
building it is intended to serve pursuant to the requirements of
Article VI.
(3) Notwithstanding the requirements contained in this section, a lot
or lots with steep slopes and/or a crest line shall be subject to the
provisions of § 268-11.
§ 268-19 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-21
265:805
§ 268-21. R-18 One-Family Residential Zone.
§ 268-22. R-15 One-Family Residential Zone.
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) One-family dwellings.
(2) Residential cluster developments in accordance with the provisions
of Article IX.
(3) Community residences for the developmentally disabled,
community shelters for victims of domestic violence, community
residences for the terminally ill, and community residences for
persons with head injuries, each in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-66.1.
(4) Family day-care homes as regulated in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.5b.
(5) Public parks and playgrounds.
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Customary accessory structures, buildings and uses, provided that
such are incidental to that of the principal building and use, subject
to the provisions of § 268-10.
(2) Signs as permitted in Article V.
(3) Driveways and off-street parking as provided in Article VI.
(4) Private tennis courts, subject to the regulations contained in
§ 268-10.
(5) Private swimming pools, subject to the requirements of § 268-10
and Chapter 237.
C. Conditional uses.
(1) Houses of worship.
(2) Public and private schools.
D. Other provisions and requirements.
(1) Area and yard requirements as specified in the Schedule of
Requirements table (§ 268-5), appended to this chapter.
(2) Required off-street parking spaces located on the same lot as the
building it is intended to serve pursuant to the requirements of
Article VI.
(3) Notwithstanding the requirements contained in this section, a lot
or lots with steep slopes and/or a crest line shall be subject to the
provisions of § 268-11.
§ 268-21 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-22
265:806
§ 268-23. R-10 One-Family Residential Zone.
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) One-family dwellings.
(2) Community residences for the developmentally disabled,
community shelters for victims of domestic violence, community
residences for the terminally ill, and community residences for
persons with head injuries, each in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-66.1.
(3) Family day-care homes as regulated in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.5b.
(4) Public parks and playgrounds.
(5) Governmental buildings and uses; public libraries.
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Customary accessory structures, buildings and uses, provided that
such are incidental to that of the principal building and use, subject
to the provisions of § 268-10.
(2) Signs as permitted in Article V.
(3) Driveways and off-street parking as provided in Article VI.
(4) Private tennis courts, subject to the regulations contained in
§ 268-10.
(5) Private swimming pools, subject to the requirements of § 268-10
and Chapter 237.
C. Conditional uses.
(1) Houses of worship.
(2) Public and private schools.
D. Other provisions and requirements.
(1) Area and yard requirements as specified in the Schedule of
Requirements table (§ 268-5), appended to this chapter.
(2) Required off-street parking spaces located on the same lot as the
building it is intended to serve pursuant to the requirements of
Article VI.
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) One-family dwellings.
(2) Two-family dwellings, subject to the requirements of this section.
§ 268-22 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-23
265:807
§ 268-24. R-8 One-Family Residential Zone.
(3) Community residences for the developmentally disabled,
community shelters for victims of domestic violence, community
residences for the terminally ill, and community residences for
persons with head injuries, each in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-66.1.
(4) Family day-care homes as regulated in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.5b.
(5) Public parks and playgrounds.
(6) Governmental buildings and uses; public libraries.
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Customary accessory structures, buildings and uses, provided that
such are incidental to that of the principal building and use, subject
to the provisions of § 268-10.
(2) Signs as permitted in Article V.
(3) Driveways and off-street parking as provided in Article VI.
(4) Private tennis courts, subject to the regulations contained in
§ 268-10.
(5) Private swimming pools, subject to the requirements of § 268-10
and Chapter 237.
C. Conditional uses.
(1) Houses of worship.
(2) Public and private schools.
D. Other provisions and requirements.
(1) Area and yard requirements as specified in the Schedule of
Requirements table (§ 268-5), appended to this chapter.
(2) Required off-street parking spaces located on the same lot as the
building it is intended to serve pursuant to the requirements of
Article VI.
(3) Two-family dwellings are permitted only wherein: the subject
property fronts on and has ingress/egress only via Pompton
Avenue; the lot contains a minimum area of 20,000 square feet; at
least one private garage space is provided for each dwelling unit;
and the dwelling and its accessory buildings, accessory structures,
and accessory uses comply with all other requirements specified
for the R-10 Zone.
A. Permitted principal uses.
§ 268-23 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-24
265:808
(1) One-family dwellings.
(2) Two-family dwellings, subject to the requirements of this section.
(3) Community residences for the developmentally disabled,
community shelters for victims of domestic violence, community
residences for the terminally ill, and community residences for
persons with head injuries, each in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-66.1.
(4) Family day-care homes as regulated in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.5b.
(5) Public parks and playgrounds.
(6) Governmental buildings and uses; public libraries.
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Customary accessory structures, buildings and uses, provided that
such are incidental to that of the principal building and use, subject
to the provisions of § 268-10.
(2) Signs as permitted in Article V.
(3) Driveways and off-street parking as provided in Article VI.
(4) Private tennis courts shall be permitted accessory structures,
subject to the regulations contained in § 268-10.
(5) Private swimming pools, subject to the requirements of § 268-10
and Chapter 237.
C. Conditional uses.
(1) Houses of worship.
(2) Public and private schools.
D. Other provisions and requirements.
(1) Area and yard requirements as specified in the Schedule of
Requirements table (§ 268-5), appended to this chapter.
(2) Required off-street parking spaces located on the same lot as the
building it is intended to serve pursuant to the requirements of
Article VI.
(3) Two-family dwellings are permitted only wherein: the subject
property fronts on and has ingress/egress only via Pompton
Avenue; the lot contains a minimum area of 16,000 square feet; at
least one private garage space is provided for each dwelling unit;
and the dwelling and its accessory buildings, accessory structures,
and accessory uses comply with all other requirements specified
for the R-8 Zone.
§ 268-24 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-25
265:809
§ 268-25. MF Multifamily Zone.
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Garden apartments.
(2) Townhouses and townhouse complexes.
(3) Quadriplexes.
(4) Community residences for the developmentally disabled,
community shelters for victims of domestic violence, community
residences for the terminally ill, and community residences for
persons with head injuries, each in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-66.1.
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Customary accessory structures, buildings and uses, provided that
such are incidental to that of the principal building and use, subject
to the provisions of § 268-10 and applicable requirements of this
section.
(2) Customary accessory structures for garden apartments, townhouse
complexes, and quadriplexes shall include private recreational
facilities for the exclusive use of residents, such as swimming
pools, tennis courts, and playgrounds, and customary accessory
buildings shall include such buildings as clubhouses, storage
buildings, or garages, subject to the provisions of § 268-10 and
applicable requirements of this section.
(3) Signs as permitted in Article V.
(4) Driveways and off-street parking as provided in Article VI.
(5) Family day-care homes as regulated in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.5b.
C. Other provisions and requirements.
(1) Area and yard requirements as specified in the Schedule of
Requirements table (§ 268-5), appended to this chapter. In
addition:
(a) Density shall not exceed 10 dwelling units per acre for garden
apartments, nor (6) dwelling units per acre for quadriplexes or
townhouses.
(b) The minimum distance between permitted multifamily
structures shall be 25 feet for side to front, side to back, or side
to side separations; 40 feet for front to front, back to back, or
front to back separations; and 50 feet for any separation in
which an access drive is located between the buildings. The
minimum distance between any building and an accessory
building shall be 15 feet.
§ 268-25 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-25
265:810
(c) No building shall be situated closer than 15 feet to the curbline
of an interior access roadway.
(d) Not less than 40% of the tract area of a permitted multifamily
development shall be dedicated to common open space and
recreation facilities for the use of residents of the
development. Such space may include required buffers,
setback areas, stormwater management facilities, active
recreational areas, as well as natural, undeveloped areas, and
shall be maintained by the owner or a homeowners'
association.
(e) Of the tract area dedicated to common open space and
recreation facilities, at least 1/2 (or 20% of the tract area) shall
consist of natural, undeveloped open space.
(2) Required off-street parking spaces pursuant to the requirements of
Article VI, and specifically restricted as follows:
(a) No parking area shall be located within 25 feet of a property
line nor within the front yard.
(b) No parking shall be permitted on any access driveway.
(c) Dwelling units shall each be provided with a minimum of one
garage parking space of at least nine feet by 18 feet.
(3) Site plan review required as set forth under Article X.
(4) A landscaped buffer shall be required on any side or rear yard
adjacent to any property used or zoned residential purposes. The
buffer shall be a minimum of 25 feet in width and shall be
landscaped via massed evergreen trees and/or shrubs having a
minimum height of six feet at the time of planting. Such buffer
areas may also be required upon site plan review to have walls and/
or fences in order to screen the multifamily use from the singlefamily
zone. No building or other structure, parking area, driveway
or storage area shall encroach upon such buffer area.
(5) Garden apartments, quadriplexes, and townhouses shall adhere to
the following additional limitations and requirements:
(a) All buildings and accessory structures shall be designed with a
unified architectural theme that is visually compatible with the
surrounding area. Said design shall consider such elements as
building materials and colors, facade treatments, rooflines,
light fixtures, and site amenities such as street furniture. All
buildings shall have pitched roofs as an integral component of
their design.
(b) Limitations on size.
§ 268-25 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-25
265:811
[1] No apartment building shall contain more than 20
dwelling units, no townhouse structure shall contain more
than six dwelling units, and no quadriplex shall contain
more than four dwelling units. There shall be permitted no
more than 12 dwelling units in any unbroken building line
and a setback of not less than four feet shall be deemed a
satisfactory break in the building line.
[2] No principal building shall exceed 2 1/2 stories above
grade except that a quadriplex shall not exceed 1 1/2
stories above grade.
[3] No principal building shall exceed 35 feet in height except
that a quadriplex shall not exceed 25 feet in height.
[4] No principal building shall exceed 160 feet in length in its
longest dimension.
[5] No wall of a principal building fronting on a street shall
exceed 100 in length.
[6] The maximum height of any accessory building shall not
exceed 15 feet, except that one accessory building devoted
exclusively to use as a clubhouse shall be permitted to
consist of a maximum 2 1/2 stories above grade and not
more than 35 feet in height.
(c) Exposures to provide light and air. All multifamily buildings
shall provide not less than two exterior exposures for each
family unit, the same properly pierced by windows or other
openings so as to provide through ventilation or cross
ventilation for the unit.
(d) Telephone and electric lines. There shall not be permitted
overhead telephone and electric transmission lines traversing
a lot. Telephone and electric transmission lines shall be placed
at the rear of the lot. Where this is not practical or possible,
overhead transmission lines may be place alongside the lot
line, and service to a building or group of buildings on a lot
from the transmission line shall be by underground conduit.
(e) Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be installed in number and
location as directed by the Township Engineer acting upon the
advice of the Chief of the Township Fire Department and the
Office of Fire Prevention, or as required by the New Jersey
Residential Site Improvement Standards.
(f) Interior roads, access drives, and sidewalks. All road and
sidewalk construction shall be pursuant to the New Jersey
Residential Site Improvement Standards. A grass area of a
minimum width of two feet shall be provided between the
§ 268-25 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-25
265:812
sidewalks and interior roads and between the sidewalks and
access drives.
(g) Recycling. There shall be included in any new multifamily
housing development an indoor or outdoor recycling area for
the collection and storage of residentially generated recyclable
materials.
[1] The recycling area shall be of sufficient size to
accommodate bins or containers of adequate size and
number consistent with anticipated usage and current
collection methods in the area in which the project is
located.
[2] The recycling area shall be conveniently located for
residential disposition of source separated recyclable
materials, preferably near, but clearly separated from, a
refuse dumpster. No recycling area shall be located within
a front yard nor shall be situated less than five feet from
any side or rear yard property line.
[3] The recycling area shall be well lit, and shall be safely and
easily accessible to recycling vehicles and personnel.
[4] Recycling bins shall be provided with lids or covers, and
any outdoor recycling area shall be screened from view by
means of a fence or wall enclosure that is compatible with
the architectural style of the building. Such fence or wall
shall be a maximum of seven feet in height and shall be
landscaped as required by the reviewing board.
(h) Solid waste. Solid waste collection and storage areas shall be
similarly provided for the facility, and may be indoors or
outdoors. Outdoor areas shall be enclosed by a maximum
seven foot high fence or wall enclosure compatible with the
architectural style of the building, and landscaped as required
by the reviewing board.
(i) Lighting. Exterior lighting in accordance with § 268-7, with the
exception that the maximum height of a fixture shall not
exceed 20 feet or the height of the soffit line of the principal
building, whichever is the lesser, measured from the ground
level to the top of the light source.
(j) Landscaping. The overall site design shall include a
comprehensive landscaping plan providing a variety of trees,
shrubs, and ground cover(s) designed to shade parking and
recreation areas, reduce stormwater runoff and soil erosion,
offer visual screening of trash/recycling areas and utility
installations, accent and complement buildings, and soften the
lines of paved roadways on the interior and exterior of the site.
The preservation of existing natural features such as rock
§ 268-25 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-25
265:813
§ 268-26. SL/C Senior Living/Care Zone.
outcroppings, woodlands, and topographic elements shall be
an integral part of the site planning process, and at its
discretion, the reviewing board may waive additional
screening requirements where such features are present
within a required buffer area.
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Long-term care facilities such as nursing homes.
(2) Planned retirement communities in accordance with the provisions
of Article IX.
(3) Community residences for the developmentally disabled,
community shelters for victims of domestic violence, community
residences for the terminally ill, and community residences for
persons with head injuries, each in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-66.1.
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Customary accessory structures, buildings and uses, provided that
such are incidental to that of the principal building and use, subject
to the provisions of § 268-10 and applicable requirements of this
section.
(2) Permitted accessory uses to long-term care facilities shall include
recreational, social, and general support facilities for the use of
residents and their guests, such as kitchens and dining areas,
community rooms, chapels, gift shops, beauty salons, barbershops,
game and television rooms, physical therapy units, fitness centers
and outdoor amenities such as walking trails.
(3) Signs as permitted in Article V.
(4) Driveways and off-street parking as provided in Article VI.
(5) Family day-care homes as regulated in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.5b.
C. Conditional uses.
(1) Hospitals or eleemosynary institutions as specified in Article VIII.
D. Other provisions and requirements. The provisions of this subsection
apply to all development within the SL/C Zone except for planned
retirement communities, which are subject to the requirements of
Article IX.
(1) Area and yard requirements as specified in the Schedule of
Requirements table (§ 268-5), appended to this chapter. In
addition:
§ 268-25 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-26
265:814
(a) Density shall not exceed 12 dwelling units per acre for longterm
care facilities.
(b) A minimum of 25% of the gross tract area of a permitted
residential facility, exclusive of required setback and/or buffer
areas, shall be devoted to common open space for use by
residents of the development and shall be maintained by the
owner.
(2) Building separations and size limitations.
(a) The minimum distance between buildings shall be 25 feet for
side to front, side to back, or side to side separations; 40 feet
for front to front, back to back, or front to back separations;
and 50 feet for any separation in which an access drive is
located between the buildings. The minimum distance between
any building and an accessory building shall be 15 feet.
(b) No principal building shall exceed 160 feet in length in its
longest dimension.
(c) No wall of a principal building fronting on a street shall exceed
100 in length.
(3) Required off-street parking spaces and loading zones pursuant to
Article VI, and specifically restricted as follows:
(a) No parking area shall be located within 25 feet of a property
line nor within the front yard.
(b) No parking shall be permitted on any access driveway.
(c) No outdoor parking or storage of recreational vehicles, boats,
or travel trailers shall be permitted.
(4) Telephone and electric lines. There shall not be permitted overhead
telephone and electric transmission lines traversing a lot.
Telephone and electric transmission lines shall be placed at the
rear of the lot. Where this is not practical or possible, overhead
transmission lines may be place alongside the lot line, and service
to a building or group of buildings on a lot from the transmission
line shall be by underground conduit.
(5) Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be installed in number and
location as directed by the Township Engineer acting upon the
advice of the Chief of the Township Fire Department and the Office
of Fire Prevention, or as required by the New Jersey Residential
Site Improvement Standards.
(6) Interior roads, access drives, and sidewalks. All road and sidewalk
construction shall be pursuant to the New Jersey Residential Site
Improvement Standards. A grass area of a minimum width of two
feet shall be provided between the sidewalks and interior roads and
§ 268-26 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-26
265:815
between the sidewalks and access drives. Street trees shall be
provided along interior roadways consisting of deciduous trees,
having at the time of planting, a minimum caliper of two to 2 1/
2 inches, as measured at four to 4 1/2 feet above the ground.
Placement of trees in relation to street curbing, sidewalks, and/or
right-of-way lines shall be subject to the review of the Township
Engineer and approval by the Planning Board at the time of an
application.
(7) Site plan review required as set forth under Article X.
(8) Architectural design. All buildings and structures shall be designed
with a unified architectural theme that is visually compatible with
the surrounding area. Said design shall consider such elements as
building materials and colors, facade treatments, rooflines, light
fixtures, and site amenities such as street furniture. All buildings
shall have pitched roofs as an integral component of their design.
(9) Lighting. Exterior lighting in accordance with § 268-7, with the
exception that the maximum height of a fixture shall not exceed 20
feet or the height of the soffit line of the principal building,
whichever is the lesser, measured from the ground level to the top
of the light source.
(10) Landscaping. The overall site design shall include a comprehensive
landscaping plan providing a variety of trees, shrubs, and ground
cover(s) designed to shade parking and recreation areas, reduce
stormwater runoff and soil erosion, offer visual screening of trash/
recycling areas and utility installations, accent and complement
buildings, and soften the lines of paved roadways on the interior
and exterior of the site. The preservation of existing natural
features such as rock outcroppings, woodlands, and topographic
elements shall be an integral part of the site planning process, and
at its discretion, the reviewing board may waive additional
screening requirements where such features are present within a
required buffer area.
(11) Buffering. A landscaped buffer shall be required on any side or rear
yard adjacent to a property used or zoned for residential purposes.
The buffer shall be a minimum of 25 feet in width and shall be
landscaped via massed evergreen trees and/or shrubs having a
minimum height of six feet at the time of planting. Such buffer
areas may also be required upon site plan review to have walls and/
or fences in order to screen the use from the single-family zone. No
building or other structure, parking area, driveway or storage area
shall encroach upon such buffer area.
(12) Recycling and solid waste collection and storage areas shall be
provided for the facility, which may be indoors or outdoors. Outdoor
areas shall be screened from view by a fence or wall enclosure that
is compatible with the architectural style of the building. Such
§ 268-26 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-26
265:816
§ 268-27. O Office Building Zone.
fence or wall shall be a maximum of seven feet in height and shall
be landscaped as required by the reviewing board.
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Business and professional offices, including medical offices, banks
and other fiduciary institutions.
(2) Business and professional office parks consisting of one or more
office buildings.
(3) Child-care centers as regulated in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.6.
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Customary accessory structures, buildings and uses, provided that
such are incidental to that of the principal building and use, subject
to the provisions of § 268-10.
(2) Signs as permitted in Article V.
(3) Driveways and off-street parking and loading as required in Article
VI.
(4) Sales and storage of cut evergreens on a temporary basis in
accordance with Chapter 116 of the Code of the Township of Cedar
Grove.
(5) Child-care centers as regulated in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.6.
C. Conditional uses.
(1) Wireless telecommunications antennas on existing structures as
specified in Article VIII.
D. Other provisions and requirements.
(1) Area and yard requirements as specified in the Schedule of
Requirements table (§ 268-5), appended to this chapter. In
addition:
(a) The minimum distance between principal buildings in an office
park shall be 35 feet and 50 feet for any separation in which an
access drive is located between the buildings.
(b) A minimum of 20% of the gross area of an office park
development, exclusive of required setback and/or buffer
areas, shall be devoted to common open space which shall be
maintained by the owner or owner's association.
(2) Site plan review required as set forth under Article X.
§ 268-26 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-27
265:817
(3) Required off-street parking spaces and loading zones pursuant to
Article VI, and specifically restricted as follows:
(a) No parking area shall be located within 15 feet of any side lot
line.
(b) No parking area shall be located within 10 feet of any rear lot
line.
(4) The following additional restrictions shall apply to office parks:
(a) All buildings shall be designed with a unified architectural
theme that is visually compatible with the surrounding area.
Said design shall consider such elements as building materials
and colors, facade treatments, rooflines, light fixtures, and site
amenities such as street furniture.
(b) Interior roadways shall be a minimum of 15 feet in width for
one-way traffic, and a minimum of 20 feet but not more than 30
feet, for two-way traffic. A grass area of a minimum width of
two feet shall be provided between the sidewalks and interior
roads and between sidewalks and access drives.
(c) Telephone and electric lines. There shall not be permitted
overhead telephone and electric transmission lines traversing
a lot. Telephone and electric transmission lines shall be placed
at the rear of the lot. Where this is not practical or possible,
overhead transmission lines may be place alongside the lot
line, and service to a building or group of buildings on a lot
from the transmission line shall be by underground conduit.
(d) Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be installed in number and
location as directed by the Township Engineer acting upon the
advice of the Chief of the Township Fire Department and the
Office of Fire Prevention.
(5) Landscaping. The overall site design shall include a comprehensive
landscaping plan providing a variety of trees, shrubs, and ground
cover(s) designed to shade parking and recreation areas, reduce
stormwater runoff and soil erosion, offer visual screening of trash/
recycling areas and utility installations, accent and complement
buildings, and soften the lines of paved roadways on the interior
and exterior of the site. The preservation of existing natural
features such as rock outcroppings, woodlands, and topographic
elements shall be an integral part of the site planning process, and
at its discretion, the reviewing board may waive additional
screening requirements where such features are present within a
required buffer area.
(6) Recycling and solid waste collection and storage areas shall be
provided, which may be indoors or outdoors. Outdoor areas shall be
screened from view by a fence or wall enclosure that is compatible
§ 268-27 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-27
265:818
§ 268-28. B Retail Shopping Zone.
with the architectural style of the building(s). Such fence or wall
shall be a maximum of seven feet in height and shall be landscaped
as required by the reviewing board.
(7) Where the boundary line setting aside property for office use abuts
a property line setting aside property for residential use,
regardless of an intervening street or highway, no principal
building, accessory building or accessory use, including parking
space, shall be located nearer than 35 feet to said boundary line.
Within said thirty-five-foot strip there shall be maintained a belt of
landscaping consisting of massed evergreen trees and shrubs
sufficient to provide a complete year-round visual screen of at least
four feet in height in the front yard and six feet in height in all other
yards, as well as such fences or walls as the reviewing board may
require. No building or structure shall encroach upon such buffer
area.
(8) Where a child-care center is provided as an accessory use on the
same lot as any other use permitted in the O Zone, the floor area it
occupies in any principal or accessory building shall be excluded in
calculating either the required number of total on-site parking
spaces, or the applicable floor/lot ratio. Parking spaces shall be
provided in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and shall
be in addition to those required for any other use(s) on the same
lot.
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Retail sales stores, shops, and markets, such as, but not limited to
the following: grocery stores, drug stores, delicatessens, specialty
food markets, liquor stores, hardware stores, clothing shops, shoe
stores, sporting goods stores, antique and/or gift shops,
consignment stores, pet stores, bookstores, art galleries, office
supply stores, bakeries, restaurants and cafes. [Amended
4-21-2003 by Ord. No. 03-589]
(2) Retail service establishments such as, but not limited to the
following: florists, dry cleaners, laundromats, shoe repair shops,
barbershops, beauty salons, jewelers, watchmakers, pet grooming
shops, electronics repair shops, small appliance repair shops,
interior decorators and drapers, furniture upholsterers, and
caterers, and personal fitness studios for such activities as dance,
martial arts, and exercise. [Amended 4-21-2003 by Ord. No.
03-589]
(3) Shopping centers providing a combination of retail sales and/or
retail service establishments.
§ 268-27 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-28
265:819
(4) Business and professional offices, including medical offices, banks
and other fiduciary institutions.
(5) Business and professional offices above the first floor where the
first floor contains another principal use permitted in this section
except one-family detached dwellings. [Amended 4-21-2003 by
Ord. No. 03-589]
(6) Apartments above the first floor only, where the first floor contains
another principal use permitted in this section (except one-family
detached dwellings), subject to the limitations and requirements of
this section. [Amended 4-21-2003 by Ord. No. 03-589]
(7) Museums and libraries.
(8) Theaters, exclusive of outdoor drive-in theaters.
(9) Funeral homes or mortuaries, exclusive of crematoriums.
(10) Child-care centers as regulated in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.6.
(11) One-family detached dwellings lawfully existing at the time of
adoption of this provision. [Added 4-21-2003 by Ord. No.
03-589]
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Accessory structures, buildings and uses customarily accessory
and incidental to any of the permitted uses and located on the same
lot with them, subject to the provisions of § 268-10.
(2) Outdoor display of merchandise as provided in § 268-10.
(3) Signs as permitted in Article V.
(4) Driveways and off-street parking and loading as required in Article
VI.
(5) Sales and storage of cut evergreens on a temporary basis in
accordance with Chapter 116 of the Code of the Township of Cedar
Grove.
(6) As an accessory to a bank or pharmacy only, a drive-through
facility. In the case of a pharmacy, such drive-through shall be
permitted only for purposes of dispensing prescriptions. [Added
4-21-2003 by Ord. No. 03-589]
C. Conditional uses.
(1) Motor vehicle service stations as specified in Article VIII.
D. Other provisions and requirements.
§ 268-28 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-28
265:820
(1) Area and yard requirements as specified in the Schedule of
Requirements table (§ 268-5), appended to this chapter. In
addition: [Amended 4-21-2003 by Ord. No. 03-589]
(a) Principal building side yard setback minimum: 10 feet when
adjacent to any residential zone.
(b) The front yard setback requirement for the principal building
shall be eight feet, neither more nor less. Principal buildings
lawfully existing prior to adoption of this provision which do
not conform to this standard shall be exempt from this
requirement unless an expansion is proposed that would
increase the length of the front elevation by 50% or more. Such
exempt principal buildings shall be subject to a minimum front
yard setback requirement of 10 feet and a maximum equal to
the average of the front yard setbacks of the two nearest
principal buildings fronting on the same street.
(c) The entirety of the eight-foot required front yard area shall be
improved to contain a pedestrian sidewalk which shall be
constructed in conformance with Township standards and
specifications for Central Business District sidewalk
improvements. It is the purpose of this subsection not only to
enhance the ambiance of the B District and provide ample
pedestrian facilities, but to encourage pedestrian traffic by
creating outdoor areas for use of retailers and other businesses
for such permitted uses as outdoor cafes, temporary display of
merchandise, and placement of decorative planters and
benches. For purposes of lot coverage calculations, the surface
area devoted to front yard pedestrian sidewalks shall be
deducted from the total coverage area, however such
deduction shall not exceed an area equal to 5% of the lot.
(d) In the case of street side building entrances other than that
facing on the front yard, clearly designated pedestrian
walkways shall be provided linking to public sidewalks, where
same exist. Such pedestrian walkways shall be constructed in
conformance with Township standards and specifications for
Central Business District sidewalk improvements.
(2) Apartments shall be permitted above a first floor establishment
only in accordance with the following provisions:
(a) No such apartment shall be permitted above a laundromat or
dry cleaning establishment wherein dry-cleaning is conducted
on the premises, and no usable space below the second-floor
apartment shall be converted to such use after an apartment
has been created above it.
(b) Exterior decks, terraces, or balconies intended for the use of
apartment occupants shall be restricted to the rear side of any
§ 268-28 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-28
265:821
building containing second-floor apartments and in the case
of a corner lot, shall be screened from view of the adjoining
public street.
(3) Required off-street parking spaces and loading zones pursuant to
Article VI, with the following exception and modifications:
[Amended 4-21-2003 by Ord. No. 03-589]
(a) All parking space required for uses permitted in the B Zone,
with the exception of that required for second-floor
apartments, may be located on a noncontiguous lot within
1,500 feet of the premises of the building it is intended to
serve, but only if it is determined by the reviewing board that it
is impractical to provide the required parking spaces on the
same lot with the building they are intended to serve. The total
number of parking spaces so provided shall not be less than the
sum of that required for each of the individual users of the
facility. Safe, unencumbered pedestrian access shall be
provided between any off-site parking facility and the building
it is intended to serve.
(b) The collective provision of off-street parking facilities by two or
more nonresidential buildings or uses located on adjacent lots
is permitted, provided that the total of such off-street parking
facilities shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for
the various individual uses computed separately in accordance
with the standards set forth in this chapter unless a reduction
is approved by the Board pursuant to Article VI, and further
provided that the land is owned or leased by one or all of the
collective users, and permanent cross easements are
established in a form acceptable to the Township.
(c) Any off-street parking area shall be located to the rear and/or
side of a principal building. Off-street parking is prohibited
from the following locations:
[1] That portion of the front yard that is located between a
principal building and a street or sidewalk.
[2] Any portion of the required eight-foot front yard setback
area, for the full width of a lot.
(d) Where any portion of an off-street parking area lies adjacent to
a public street or to the front yard sidewalk area required by
Subsection D(1) above, a landscape strip having a minimum
width of four feet shall be provided between the parking area
and the street or sidewalk. The intent of such landscaping is
not to completely conceal the parking area from view, but to
retain the attractiveness of the streetscape, provide visual
continuity by aligning trees with the front facade line of
adjacent principal buildings, provide shade, enhance
§ 268-28 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-28
265:822
stormwater absorption, reduce heat reflection, and buffer
pedestrians from on-site vehicular traffic. Said landscape strip
shall consist of a combination of shrubbery having a height of
two to 2 1/2 feet, including evergreen varieties, and deciduous
trees suited to street conditions. Such trees shall have a
minimum caliper of two to 2 1/2 inches, shall be spaced at a
minimum distance of 30 feet on center, and shall be elevated to
a minimum height of six feet. Open rail fencing of a maximum
four-foot height and specimen plantings, such as ornamental
grasses that may exceed the height of the majority of the
landscape shrubbery, are permitted and encouraged within
the landscape strip, however, any such installation shall not
encroach upon a required sight triangle or other line of sight
necessary for vehicular movements.
(4) Site plan review as specified in Article X.
(5) Landscaping. The overall site design shall include a comprehensive
landscaping plan providing a variety of trees, shrubs, and ground
cover(s) designed to shade parking and recreation areas, reduce
stormwater runoff and soil erosion, offer visual screening of trash/
recycling areas and utility installations, accent and complement
buildings, and soften the lines of paved drives and roadways on the
interior and exterior of the site. The preservation of existing
natural features such as rock outcroppings, woodlands, and
topographic elements shall be an integral part of the site planning
process, and at its discretion, the reviewing board may waive
additional screening requirements where such features are present
within a required buffer area.
(6) A landscaped buffer shall be required on any side or rear yard
adjacent to a residential zone. The buffer shall be equal in width to
the respective side yard requirement of the adjacent residential
zone and shall be landscaped via massed evergreen trees and/or
shrubs having a minimum height of six feet at the time of planting.
Such buffer areas may also be required upon site plan review to
have walls and/or fences in order to screen such business use from
the residential zone. No building or other structure, parking area,
driveway or storage area shall encroach upon such buffer area.
(7) Recycling and solid waste collection and storage areas shall be
provided, which may be indoors or outdoors. Outdoor areas shall be
screened from view by a fence or wall enclosure that is compatible
with the architectural style of the building(s). Such fence or wall
shall be a maximum of seven feet in height and shall be landscaped
as required by the reviewing board.
(8) Architecture and building orientation. [Added 4-21-2003 by Ord.
No. 03-589]
§ 268-28 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-28
265:823
(a) Architectural design of all principal and accessory buildings
shall reflect the nature of the B Retail Shopping District by
incorporation of pedestrian-oriented features such as
canopies, awnings, roof overhangs, covered porches and
entryways with columns and/or railings, recessed entries,
display windows, and interior courtyards. Such features shall
apply to facades facing on both the public street and any onsite
parking area. Any building containing multiple units or
storefronts shall be designed with an integrated front facade,
such that materials, textures, and colors are consistent from
one unit to the next.
(b) Each story of any principal building facade that either faces on
a public street or contains access from an on-site parking area
shall be provided with windows in such number, configuration
and design as to complement the architectural style and
exterior finish of the building. In the case of a corner lot, this
provision shall apply, at minimum, to the facade of principal
building orientation, while the other street front facade may, at
the discretion of the reviewing board, be finished with
architectural features designed to provide the appearance of
windows, or faux windows. In no case shall windows contain
reflective or mirrored glass. Any window security grates, bars,
or other such devices shall be installed on the interior of a
building only, and shall be designed for use only during
nonbusiness hours.
(c) Principal buildings shall be oriented with their longest
dimension facing toward the public street on which the lot has
frontage. In the case of a corner lot, orientation shall be toward
the street of highest order. In the case of a corner lot fronting
on streets of equivalent order, principal building orientation
shall be approved by the reviewing board upon showing by the
applicant that the proposed orientation is most compatible
with the uses, lot configurations, and principal building
orientations of surrounding properties inclusive of those at all
other corners of the street intersection. In the case of a lot
having insufficient width to accommodate the longest
dimension of a building, the board shall approve an alternate
orientation only provided that the width of the building along
the street frontage has been maximized and that the building
otherwise conforms to the requirements of this subsection.
(d) Principal buildings shall be provided with first-floor pedestrian
entrances that face on and are accessible from the public
street toward which they are oriented.
(e) Principal buildings shall be provided with parking-level
pedestrian entrances facing on and accessible from any on-site
parking lot. Clearly designated pedestrian access marked by
textured pavement or other surfacing material/finish
§ 268-28 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-28
265:824
§ 268-29. RC Restricted Commercial Zone.
satisfactory to the reviewing board shall be provided between
the parking area and the building(s) it is intended to serve.
(9) The preceding provisions and requirements of Subsection D shall
not apply in the case of existing one-family detached dwellings.
Such dwellings shall be regulated in all respects under the
provisions set forth for the R-8 Residential Zoning District. [Added
4-21-2003 by Ord. No. 03-589]
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Retail sales stores, shops, and markets, such as, but not limited to
the following: grocery stores, drug stores, delicatessens, specialty
food markets, liquor stores, hardware stores, clothing shops, shoe
stores, sporting goods stores, antique and/or gift shops,
consignment stores, pet stores, bookstores, art galleries, office
supply stores, bakeries, restaurants and cafes. [Amended
4-21-2003 by Ord. No. 03-589]
(2) Retail service establishments such as, but not limited to the
following: florists, dry cleaners, laundromats, shoe repair shops,
barbershops, beauty salons, jewelers, watchmakers, pet grooming
shops, electronics repair shops, small appliance repair shops,
interior decorators and drapers, furniture upholsterers, and
caterers, and personal fitness studios for such activities as dance,
martial arts, and exercise. [Amended 4-21-2003 by Ord. No.
03-589]
(3) Business and professional offices, including medical offices, banks
and other fiduciary institutions.
(4) Business and professional offices above the first floor, where the
first floor contains another principal use permitted in this section.
(5) Shopping centers providing a combination of retail sales and/or
retail service establishments.
(6) Funeral homes or mortuaries, exclusive of crematoriums.
(7) Medical clinics.
(8) Nursery and commercial greenhouses.
(9) Commercial schools, including schools of dance, music, art, and
computer programming, but excluding trade schools.
(10) Bowling alleys, indoor tennis courts, commercial gymnasiums and
other indoor sporting or recreational activities, provided that the
structures they occupy are reasonably soundproof.
§ 268-28 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-29
265:825
(11) Theaters and moving picture theaters, except outdoor drive-in
theaters.
(12) Animal hospitals or clinics, but not including animal kennels,
provided that the treatment and keeping of animals is entirely
within an air-conditioned and soundproof building and that no point
on said building is nearer than 200 feet to a dwelling use as of the
date of application.
(13) Child-care centers as regulated in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.6.
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Customary accessory structures, buildings and uses, provided that
such are incidental to that of the principal building and use, subject
to the provisions of § 268-10.
(2) Outdoor display of merchandise as provided in § 268-10.
(3) Signs as permitted in Article V.
(4) Driveways and off-street parking and loading as required in Article
VI.
(5) Sales and storage of cut evergreens on a temporary basis in
accordance with Chapter 116 of the Code of the Township of Cedar
Grove.
(6) A florist shop may be permitted as an accessory use with a nursery
or commercial greenhouse.
(7) Where offices comprise the principal use, child-care centers as
regulated in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.6.
(8) As an accessory to a bank or pharmacy only, a drive-through
facility. In the case of a pharmacy, such drive-through shall be
permitted only for purposes of dispensing prescriptions. [Added
4-21-2003 by Ord. No. 03-589]
C. Conditional uses.
(1) Wireless telecommunications antennas on existing structures as
specified in Article VIII.
(2) Public garages and motor vehicle service stations as specified in
Article VIII.
(3) Hospitals or eleemosynary institutions as specified in Article VIII.
(4) Houses of worship as specified in Article VIII.
D. Other provisions and requirements.
§ 268-29 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-29
265:826
(1) Area and yard requirements as specified in the Schedule of
Requirements table (§ 268-5), appended to this chapter. In
addition:
(a) Principal building side yard setback requirement: 25 feet
where adjacent to any residential zone.
(b) Principal building rear yard setback requirement: 25 feet
where adjacent to any residential zone.
(2) Required off-street parking spaces and loading zones pursuant to
Article VI, with the following exception:
(a) All parking space required for business may be located on a
noncontiguous lot within 1,500 feet of the premises of the
building it is intended to serve, but only if it is determined by
the reviewing board that it is impractical to provide the
required parking spaces on the same lot with the building they
are intended to serve. The total number of parking spaces so
provided shall not be less than the sum of that required for
each of the individual users of the off-site facility. Safe,
unencumbered pedestrian access shall be provided between
any off-site parking facility and the building it is intended to
serve.
(b) The collective provision of off-street parking facilities by two or
more buildings or uses located on adjacent lots is permitted,
provided that the total of such off-street parking facilities shall
not be less than the sum of the requirements for the various
individual uses computed separately in accordance with the
standards set forth in this chapter unless a reduction is
approved by the Board pursuant to Article VI, and further
provided that the land is owned or leased by one or all of the
collective users, and permanent cross easements are
established in a form acceptable to the Township.
(3) Site plan review as specified in Article X.
(4) Site landscaping. The overall site design shall include a
comprehensive landscaping plan providing a variety of trees,
shrubs, and ground cover(s) designed to retain the attractiveness
of the affected streetscape, shade parking, pedestrian, and
recreation areas, reduce storm water runoff and soil erosion, offer
visual screening of trash/recycling areas and utility installations,
accent and complement buildings, buffer the public street right-ofway
from on-site vehicular traffic, and soften the lines of paved
roadways on both the interior and exterior of the site. The
preservation of existing natural features such as rock
outcroppings, woodlands, and topographic elements shall be an
integral part of the site planning process, and at its discretion, the
reviewing board may waive additional screening requirements
§ 268-29 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-29
265:827
where such features are present within a required buffer area.
[Amended 4-21-2003 by Ord. No. 03-589]
(5) A landscaped buffer shall be required on any side or rear yard
adjacent to a residential zone. The buffer shall be equal in width to
the respective side and rear yard requirements of such adjacent
residential zone, but in no event less than 25 feet. Such buffer area
shall be landscaped via massed evergreen trees and/or shrubs
having a minimum height of six feet at the time of planting and may
also be required upon site plan review to have walls and/or fences
in order to screen such business use from the residential zone. No
building or other structure, parking area, driveway or storage area
shall encroach upon such buffer area.
(6) Recycling and solid waste collection and storage areas shall be
provided, which may be indoors or outdoors. Outdoor areas shall be
screened from view by a fence or wall enclosure that is compatible
with the architectural style of the building(s). Such fence or wall
shall be a maximum of seven feet in height and shall be landscaped
as required by the reviewing board.
(7) Where a child-care center is provided as an accessory use, the floor
area it occupies in any principal or accessory building shall be
excluded in calculating either the required number of total on-site
parking spaces, or the applicable floor/lot ratio. Parking spaces
shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
and shall be in addition to those required for any other use(s) on
the same lot.
(8) Architecture and building orientation. [Added 4-21-2003 by Ord.
No. 03-589]
(a) Architectural design of all principal and accessory buildings
shall reflect the nature of the RC Restricted Commercial
District by incorporation of pedestrian-oriented features such
as canopies, awnings, roof overhangs, covered porches and
entryways with columns and/or railings, recessed entries,
display windows, and interior courtyards. Such features shall
apply to facades facing on both the public street and any onsite
parking area. Any building containing multiple units or
storefronts shall be designed with an integrated front facade,
such that materials, textures, and colors are consistent from
one unit to the next.
(b) Each story of any principal building facade that either faces on
a public street or contains access from an on-site parking area
shall be provided with windows in such number, configuration
and design as to complement the architectural style and
exterior finish of the building. In the case of a corner lot, this
provision shall apply, at minimum, to the facade of principal
building orientation, while the other street front facade may, at
§ 268-29 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-29
265:828
the discretion of the reviewing board, be finished with
architectural features designed to provide the appearance of
windows, or faux windows. In no case shall windows contain
reflective or mirrored glass. Any window security grates, bars,
or other such devices shall be installed on the interior of
a building only, and shall be designed for use only during
nonbusiness hours.
(c) Principal buildings shall be oriented with their longest
dimension facing toward the public street on which the lot has
frontage. In the case of a corner lot, orientation shall be toward
the street of highest order. In the case of a corner lot fronting
on streets of equivalent order, principal building orientation
shall be approved by the reviewing board upon showing by the
applicant that the proposed orientation is most compatible
with the uses, lot configurations, and principal building
orientations of surrounding properties inclusive of those at all
other corners of the street intersection. In the case of a lot
having insufficient width to accommodate the longest
dimension of a building, the board shall approve an alternate
orientation only provided that the width of the building along
the street frontage has been maximized and that the building
otherwise conforms to the requirements of this subsection.
(d) Principal buildings shall be provided with first-floor pedestrian
entrances that face on and are accessible from the public
street on which the lot has frontage. Pedestrian sidewalks
constructed in accordance with Township Central Business
District standards shall be provided linking the principal
building with existing sidewalks in the public street right-ofway.
(e) Principal buildings shall be provided with parking-level
pedestrian entrances facing on and accessible from any on-site
parking lot. Clearly designated pedestrian access marked by
textured pavement or other surfacing material/finish
satisfactory to the reviewing board shall be provided between
the parking area and the building(s) it is intended to serve.
(9) Front yard landscaping. With the exception only of those portions
dedicated to access driveway and/or sidewalk crossings from the
public street, or to other permitted structures such as signs, the
entirety of the required front yard setback area across the full
width of any lot shall be dedicated to establishment of lawn and
landscape areas. No parking area of any kind is permitted in the
required front yard (see Article VI). [Added 4-21-2003 by Ord.
No. 03-589]
(a) Such landscaping shall include planting of street trees which
shall consist of deciduous shade trees (with preference given
to native species such as pin oak, red oak, American sycamore,
§ 268-29 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-29
265:829
§ 268-30. M-1 Office/Warehouse Zone.
American beech, red maple, sugar maple, honeylocust, and
American ash) having a minimum caliper of 2 1/2 to three
inches, spaced at a minimum distance of 40 feet on center, and
elevated to a minimum height of six feet.
(b) Front yard landscaping shall be supplemented with clustered
plantings of shrubs, including evergreen varieties,
groundcovers, and, if desired, ornamental grasses, perennials
and/or bulbs. Landscape plans shall include accent trees for
seasonal interest such as American dogwood, carolina
silverbell, or eastern redbud, and where space allows,
evergreen trees for year-round color. Landscaping shall
include front yard foundation plantings adjacent to principal
buildings, front yard buffer plantings adjacent to the edge of
any on-site parking area, and accent plantings adjacent to
driveways, walkways, and/or any freestanding signs located in
the required front yard.
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Business and professional offices.
(2) Warehouses.
(3) Lumberyards.
(4) Building and storage yard uses for general building contractors and
specialty trade contractors, including plumbing, heating and air
conditioning contractors; painters; electricians; carpenters;
roofers; landscapers; stoneworkers and similar contractors.
(5) The manufacturing, packing, processing, treatment or design of
food, personal care, textile, pharmaceutical, apparel, furniture,
paper, instruments, transportation equipment parts, and similar
products, supplies and services.
(6) The manufacturing, packing, processing, treatment or design of
metal products, tools and industrial and commercial machinery,
equipment and parts.
(7) Research laboratories, testing, experimental and computation
centers.
(8) The manufacturing, processing, servicing and design of computers
and related parts and instruments, office equipment, electrical
appliances, domestic appliances and related products, supplies and
services.
(9) Wholesale trade.
§ 268-29 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-30
265:830
(10) Printing, publishing, silk screening and similar processes and
services.
(11) Self-storage facilities.
(12) Child-care centers as regulated in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.6.
(13) Fitness centers, gymnasiums, and other exercise and recreational
facilities. [Added 1-10-2011 by Ord. No. 10-719]
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Accessory structures, buildings and uses customary or incidental to
any of the permitted uses and located on the same lot with them,
subject to the provisions of § 268-10.
(2) Signs as permitted in Article V.
(3) Driveways and off-street parking and loading as required in Article
VI.
(4) Retail outlets and showrooms, provided same do not exceed 20% of
the gross floor area of the principal building and further provided
the products sold or displayed are manufactured, processed,
treated or serviced on the subject premises.
(5) Business offices related to the principal permitted use.
(6) Where offices comprise the principal use, child-care centers as
regulated in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.6.
C. Conditional uses.
(1) Public utility installations as specified in Article VIII.
(2) Wireless telecommunications antennas on existing structures as
specified in Article VIII.
(3) Public garages and motor vehicle service stations as specified in
Article VIII.
(4) Houses of worship as specified in Article VIII.
D. Other provisions and requirements.
(1) Area and yard requirements as specified in the Schedule of
Requirements table (§ 268-5), appended to this chapter, with the
following exceptions for business and professional office buildings:
(a) Maximum principal building coverage shall not exceed 20%.
(b) The maximum permitted floor/lot ratio shall be 0.30.
(2) Industrial uses permitted in the M-1 Zone must comply with the
following minimum performance standards and must demonstrate
§ 268-30 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-30
265:831
such compliance before the issuance of any building permit or
occupancy permit. Such uses shall at no time cause or result in any:
(a) Discharge of industrial waste of any kind into any reservoir,
pond or lake or stream, sanitary sewer, street or any effluent
containing acids, oils, dust, toxic metals, corrosive or other
toxic substances in solution or suspension which would create
odors or discolor, poison or otherwise pollute in any way the
stream or sewage disposal system.
(b) Discharge or disposition of waste of any kind, whether to
surface or ground water, air, or land, except in accordance with
applicable local, county, state and/or federal laws and
regulations and such permits as may be issued to control and
limit such releases.
(c) Electric or magnetic waves being created that would be
detrimental to radio or television reception beyond the
boundaries of the subject lot.
(3) Site plan review required as set forth under Article X.
(4) Off-street parking spaces shall be located other than in the
required front yard and on the same lot as the building it is
intended to serve, subject to Article VI. Where office and/or retail
uses accompany a warehouse or manufacturing use, the required
number of parking spaces shall be the aggregate of the individual
requirement for each.
(5) Landscaping. The overall site design shall include a comprehensive
landscaping plan providing a variety of trees, shrubs, and ground
cover(s) designed to shade parking and recreation areas, reduce
stormwater runoff and soil erosion, offer visual screening of trash/
recycling areas and utility installations, accent and complement
buildings, and soften the lines of paved roadways on both the
interior and exterior of the site. The preservation of existing
natural features such as rock outcroppings, woodlands, and
topographic elements shall be an integral part of the site planning
process, and at its discretion, the reviewing board may waive
additional screening requirements where such features are present
within a required buffer area.
(6) Where the boundary line setting aside property for office/
warehouse use abuts a property line setting aside property for
residential use, regardless of an intervening street or highway, no
principal building, accessory building or accessory use, including
parking space, shall be located nearer than 50 feet to said
boundary line. Within said fifty-foot strip there shall be maintained
a belt of landscaping consisting of massed evergreen trees and
shrubs sufficient to provide a complete year-round visual screen of
at least four feet in height in the front yard and six feet in height in
all other yards, as well as such fences or walls as the reviewing
§ 268-30 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-30
265:832
board may require. No building or structure shall encroach upon
such buffer area.
(7) Building walls. All exterior walls shall be finished with brick or
other architectural materials approved by the Planning Board.
(8) Storage of materials.
(a) All materials and equipment shall be stored in completely
enclosed buildings or shall otherwise be screened by walls,
fences and landscaping as may be determined by the Planning
Board to be adequate to appropriately screen such materials
and equipment from outside the boundaries of the lot.
(b) All tanks for aboveground storage shall be screened from view
as required in Subsection D(8)(a) above and shall not be nearer
to a residential property line than 150 feet.
(9) Recycling and solid waste collection and storage areas shall be
provided, which may be indoors or outdoors. Outdoor areas shall be
screened from view by a fence or wall enclosure that is compatible
with the architectural style of the building(s). Such fence or wall
shall be a maximum of seven feet in height and shall be landscaped
as required by the reviewing board.
(10) The following uses are specifically prohibited in the M-1 Zone:
(a) Lumber and wood production, including sawmills, planing
mills and similar uses.
(b) Chemical product manufacturing and processing, including the
manufacturing of plastics, soaps and other cleaning materials;
paints, agricultural chemicals, industrial chemicals and similar
products.
(c) Petroleum refining uses, including the production of paving
and roofing materials and similar uses.
(d) Rubber and plastic manufacturing, including the production of
tires, inner tubes, footwear, seals, hoses, belts and similar
products.
(e) The manufacturing of stone, clay, glass and concrete products.
(f) Primary metal uses, including steel works, blast furnaces,
foundries and similar uses.
(11) Where a child-care center is provided as an accessory use, the floor
area it occupies in any principal or accessory building shall be
excluded in calculating either the required number of total on-site
parking spaces, or the applicable floor/lot ratio. Parking spaces
shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
§ 268-30 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-30
265:833
§ 268-31. M-2 Office/Warehouse Zone.
and shall be in addition to those required for any other use(s) on
the same lot.
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Business and professional offices.
(2) Warehouses.
(3) The manufacturing, packing, processing, treatment or design of
food, personal care, textile, pharmaceutical, apparel, furniture,
paper, instruments, transportation equipment parts, and similar
products, supplies and services.
(4) The manufacturing, packing, processing, treatment or design of
metal products, tools and industrial and commercial machinery,
equipment and parts.
(5) Research laboratories, testing, experimental and computation
centers.
(6) The manufacturing, processing, servicing and design of computers
and related parts and instruments, office equipment, electrical
appliances, domestic appliances and related products, supplies and
services.
(7) Wholesale trade.
(8) Printing, publishing, silk screening and similar processes and
services.
(9) Self-storage facilities.
(10) Child-care centers as regulated in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.6.
(11) Fitness centers, gymnasiums, and other exercise and recreational
facilities. [Added 1-10-2011 by Ord. No. 10-719]
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Accessory structures, buildings and uses customary or incidental to
any of the permitted uses and located on the same lot with them,
subject to the provisions of § 268-10.
(2) Signs as permitted in Article V.
(3) Driveways and off-street parking and loading as required in Article
VI.
(4) Retail outlets and showrooms, provided same do not exceed 20% of
the gross floor area of the principal building and further provided
the products sold or displayed are manufactured, processed,
treated or serviced on the subject premises.
§ 268-30 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-31
265:834
(5) Business offices related to the principal permitted use.
(6) Where offices comprise the principal use, child-care centers as
regulated in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.6.
C. Conditional uses.
(1) Public utility installations as specified in Article VIII.
(2) Wireless telecommunications antennas on existing structures as
specified in Article VIII.
(3) Houses of worship as specified in Article VIII.
D. Other provisions and requirements.
(1) Area and yard requirements as specified in the Schedule of
Requirements table (§ 268-5), appended to this chapter, with the
following exceptions for business and professional office buildings:
(a) Maximum principal building coverage shall not exceed 20%.
(b) The maximum permitted floor/lot ratio shall be 0.30.
(2) Industrial uses permitted in the M-2 Zone must comply with the
following minimum performance standards and must demonstrate
such compliance before the issuance of any building permit or
occupancy permit. Such uses shall at no time cause or result in any:
(a) Discharge of industrial waste of any kind into any reservoir,
pond or lake or stream, sanitary sewer, street or any effluent
containing acids, oils, dust, toxic metals, corrosive or other
toxic substances in solution or suspension which would create
odors or discolor, poison or otherwise pollute in any way the
stream or sewage disposal system.
(b) Discharge or disposition of waste of any kind, whether to
surface or ground water, air, or land, except in accordance with
applicable local, county, state and/or federal laws and
regulations and such permits as may be issued to control and
limit such releases.
(c) Electric or magnetic waves being created that would be
detrimental to radio or television reception beyond the
boundaries of the subject lot.
(3) Site plan review required as set forth under Article X.
(4) Off-street parking spaces shall be located other than in the
required front yard and on the same lot as the building it is
intended to serve, subject to Article VI. Where office and/or retail
uses accompany a warehouse or manufacturing use, the required
number of parking spaces shall be the aggregate of the individual
requirement for each.
§ 268-31 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-31
265:835
(5) Landscaping. The overall site design shall include a comprehensive
landscaping plan providing a variety of trees, shrubs, and ground
cover(s) designed to: shade parking and recreation areas, reduce
stormwater runoff and soil erosion, offer visual screening of trash/
recycling areas and utility installations, accent and complement
buildings, and soften the lines of paved roadways on both the
interior and exterior of the site. The preservation of existing
natural features such as rock outcroppings, woodlands, and
topographic elements shall be an integral part of the site planning
process, and at its discretion, the reviewing board may waive
additional screening requirements where such features are present
within a required buffer area.
(6) Where the boundary line setting aside property for office/
warehouse use abuts a property line setting aside property for
residential use, regardless of an intervening street or highway, no
principal building, accessory building or accessory use, including
parking space, shall be located nearer than 50 feet to said
boundary line. Within said fifty-foot strip there shall be maintained
a belt of landscaping consisting of massed evergreen trees and
shrubs sufficient to provide a complete year-round visual screen of
at least four feet in height in the front yard and six feet in height in
all other yards, as well as such fences or walls as the reviewing
board may require. No building or structure shall encroach upon
such buffer area.
(7) Building walls. All exterior walls shall be finished with brick or
other architectural materials approved by the Planning Board.
(8) Storage of materials.
(a) All materials and equipment shall be stored in completely
enclosed buildings or shall otherwise be screened by walls,
fences and landscaping as may be determined by the Planning
Board to be adequate to appropriately screen such materials
and equipment from outside the boundaries of the lot.
(b) All tanks for aboveground storage shall be screened from view
as required in Subsection D(8)(a) above and shall not be nearer
to a residential property line than 150 feet.
(9) Recycling and solid waste collection and storage areas shall be
provided, which may be indoors or outdoors. Outdoor areas shall be
screened from view by a fence or wall enclosure that is compatible
with the architectural style of the building(s). Such fence or wall
shall be a maximum of seven feet in height and shall be landscaped
as required by the reviewing board.
(10) The following uses are specifically prohibited in the M-2 Zone:
(a) Lumber and wood production, including sawmills, planing
mills and similar uses.
§ 268-31 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-31
265:836
§ 268-32. GF Government Facilities Zone.
(b) Chemical product manufacturing and processing, including the
manufacturing of plastics, soaps and other cleaning materials;
paints, agricultural chemicals, industrial chemicals and similar
products.
(c) Petroleum refining uses, including the production of paving
and roofing materials and similar uses.
(d) Rubber and plastic manufacturing, including the production of
tires, inner tubes, footwear, seals, hoses, belts and similar
products.
(e) The manufacturing of stone, clay, glass and concrete products.
(f) Primary metal uses, including steel works, blast furnaces,
foundries and similar uses.
(11) Where a child-care center is provided as an accessory use, the floor
area it occupies in any principal or accessory building shall be
excluded in calculating either the required number of total on-site
parking spaces, or the applicable floor/lot ratio. Parking spaces
shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
and shall be in addition to those required for any other use(s) on
the same lot.
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Government offices, including post offices.
(2) Libraries and museums.
(3) Recycling facilities and public works yards.
(4) Sewage treatment plants.
(5) Water treatment, storage, and distribution facilities.
(6) Child-care centers as regulated in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.6.
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Accessory structures, buildings and uses customary or incidental to
any of the permitted uses and located on the same lot with them,
subject to the provisions of § 268-10.
(2) Signs as permitted in Article V.
(3) Driveways and off-street parking and loading as required in Article
VI.
(4) Where offices comprise the principal use, child-care centers as
regulated in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.6.
§ 268-31 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-32
265:837
§ 268-32.1. Multifamily Affordable Housing (MF-AH) Zone. [Added
9-17-2018 by Ord. No. 18-829]
The Multifamily Affordable Housing Zone requires a 20% affordable housing
set aside for affordable sale units and a 15% affordable housing set aside for
affordable rental units. Affordable housing shall be provided in accordance
with the requirements of the New Jersey Fair Housing Act, N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1 et seq., the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls (UHAC), and
the Township's court-approved Affordable Housing Ordinance.114
C. Conditional uses.
(1) Public utility installations not specifically designated above, as
permitted uses, as specified in Article VIII.
(2) Wireless telecommunications antennas on existing structures as
specified in Article VIII.
(3) Public garages and motor vehicle service stations as specified in
Article VIII.
D. Other provisions and requirements.
(1) Where a child-care center is provided as an accessory use, the floor
area it occupies in any principal or accessory building shall be
excluded in calculating either the required number of total on-site
parking spaces, or the applicable floor/lot ratio. Parking spaces
shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
and shall be in addition to those required for any other use(s) on
the same lot.
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Multifamily housing.
(2) Community residences for the developmentally disabled,
community shelters for victims of domestic violence, community
residences for the terminally ill, and community residences for
persons with head injuries, each in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-66.1.
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Customary accessory structures, buildings and uses, provided that
such are incidental to that of the principal building and use, subject
to the provisions of § 268-10 and applicable requirements of this
section.
(2) Private recreational facilities for the exclusive use of residents,
such as swimming pools, tennis courts, and playgrounds, and
customary accessory buildings shall include such buildings as
114. Editor's Note: See Ch. 80, Affordable Housing.
§ 268-32 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-32.1
265:838
clubhouses, storage buildings, or garages, subject to the provisions
of § 268-10 and applicable requirements of this section.
(3) Signs as permitted in Article V.
(4) Driveways and off-street parking as provided in Article VI.
(5) Indoor and surface parking for multifamily housing.
(6) Family day-care homes as regulated in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.5b.
C. Area, yard, bulk, parking and open space requirements. The following
table identifies the area, yard, bulk, parking and open space
requirements for the Multifamily Affordable Housing Zone:
Description Requirement
Minimum tract area 23 acres
Maximum tract development area 16.25 acres
Minimum lot width (tract) 200 feet
Minimum lot depth (tract) 600 feet
Minimum front yard setback 30 feet
Minimum side yard setback1 30 feet
Minimum rear yard setback1 30 feet
Minimum setback from buildings
on site:
Front to front; front to side; side
to side
100 feet
Rear to rear 100 feet
Rear to side 100 feet
Minimum building setback to
internal roadway
20 feet
Maximum building coverage
(residential)
15%
Maximum impervious coverage 35%
Maximum building height 5 stories/55 feet
Maximum number of apartments 347
Maximum gross density of
apartments
15 dwelling units per acre2
Minimum percent set-aside
(affordable rental units)
15% of all units
Minimum percent set-aside
(affordable for-sale units)
20% of all units
§ 268-32.1 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-32.1
265:839
Description Requirement
Maximum number of townhouses 278
Maximum gross density of
attached/townhouse units
12 dwelling units per acre
Minimum percent set-aside for
attached/townhouse units
20% of all units
Maximum number affordable
units per building
20
Impervious coverage (parking)
setbacks:
From building 15 feet
From property line or public
street
15 feet
Parking spaces 2 per unit3 Plus 1 visitor space per
5 dwelling units
Two-way drive aisle width 24 feet
Minimum landscaped perimeter
buffer
25 feet4
Open Space Area - minimum 30% developed tract area5
NOTES:
1. Patios, decks, balconies and fences shall be located within
required building setbacks.
2. Density shall be calculated for all lots in the zone to determine
the number of residential apartments that shall be permitted on
Lots 247, 320 and 330.
3. There shall be a minimum of one garage or underground parking
space per unit.
4. Landscaped buffer shall be continuously planted with double
rows of trees 15 feet on center at least eight feet in height at the
time of planting.
5. Developed tract area is that portion of the tract upon which
development is situated. Areas in required setbacks and
landscaped buffers may be counted toward the minimum open
space area.
D. Other requirements.
(1) Tract development area.
(a) All residential development and associated improvements shall
be limited to Block 280, Lots 247, 320 and 330.
§ 268-32.1 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-32.1
265:840
(b) An open space management plan shall be submitted for Block
280, Lots 551.1 and 552, at the time of site plan approval for
development of Lots 247, 320 and 330, which shall be subject
to Planning Board approval at the time of site plan
development approval. Lots 551.1 and 552 may be donated to
the Township of Cedar Grove as open space or held by the
owner or an open space organization established to own and
maintain such open space, provided the open space is
appropriately deed restricted to ensure its continued
maintenance as such.
(c) The development shall include improved pedestrian trail
linkages to access the West Essex Trail from the development.
(2) Affordable housing requirements/very-low-, low- and moderateincome
units.
(a) Except as specifically provided in Subsection D(2)(c) below,
affordable units shall conform to the requirements of the New
Jersey Fair Housing Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq. ("FHA"),
the "Round 2" regulations adopted by the New Jersey Council
on Affordable Housing, N.J.A.C. 5:93-1.1 et seq.,115 the Uniform
Housing Affordability Controls ("UHAC"), N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et
seq., all other relevant statutes, regulations, and policies, and
the Cedar Grove Township's court-approved Third Round
Affordable Housing Ordinance.
(b) Affordability average; bedroom distribution. Affordable units
shall be provided in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3,
Affordability average; bedroom distribution.
(c) Very-low-, low-, and moderate-income housing shall be
constructed and rented in accordance with the New Jersey Fair
Housing Act and the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls
("UHAC") found at N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., including
standards for the split between very-low-, low- and moderateincome
housing, except that, consistent with N.J.S.A.
52:27D-329.1, at least 13% of the affordable units shall be
very-low-income units, i.e., affordable to households earning
30% or less of the regional median household income by
household size; and at least 37% of the affordable units shall be
low-income units. The balance of the affordable units shall be
moderate-income units.
(d) Affordable units shall be affirmatively marketed in accordance
with the affirmative marketing provisions identified at N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.15.
(e) Controls on affordability. There shall be an income control
period pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.11 of at least 30 years, and
115. Editor's Note: The regulations in N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired October 16, 2016.
§ 268-32.1 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-32.1
265:841
thereafter until Cedar Grove takes action to release the
controls on affordability, for all affordable units.
[1] The applicant shall submit a copy of the draft deed
restriction to be placed on the affordable units at the time
of application for site plan approval for Planning Board
Attorney review and approval prior to the Planning Board
granting preliminary site plan approval.
[2] Affordability controls shall be established in the form of a
deed restriction, which shall be approved by the Planning
Board Attorney and recorded with the County Clerk and
filed with the Cedar Grove Municipal Clerk and Cedar
Grove municipal housing liaison.
(f) Affordable units shall be administered by a qualified
administrative agent in accordance with the administrative
procedures for affordable units identified in the UHAC. The
developer shall be responsible for the cost for all aspects of
administering the affordable units, including but not limited to
affirmative marketing, income qualification, tenant placement/
purchaser selection, maintenance of controls, etc.
(3) Site plan review required as set forth under Article X. An
application for site plan approval shall comply with the Township's
submission requirements procedures for a site plan application.
(a) A comprehensive traffic study shall be submitted with the
application for development. This study will include a matrix
with estimated projections for vehicle movements in and out of
the facility in each hour of each day in a typical seven-day
week. The projections for each hour will be built up from
separate estimates for ingress and egress, and for different
categories of use. The latter will include, but not be limited to,
residents, deliveries and visitors. Added together, the separate
categories will equal all traffic in and out. The study will also
include background traffic in each direction on the public road
servicing the facility in the same twenty-four-hour, seven-day
format. The factual and analytical basis for all estimates will be
explained.
(b) The Planning Board may use the traffic study to foster proper
design, such as, but not limited to, ingress and egress, and to
determine the applicant's pro-rata share of off-site and off-tract
improvements, if any, that may be required. The Planning
Board shall not use the traffic study to alter the density of sites
to be developed with inclusionary zoning.
(c) The applicant shall have the option of preparing the traffic
study or choosing a consultant from a list of at least two
professionals (prepared by the municipality) to prepare the
studies. If the developer chooses a consultant from the
§ 268-32.1 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-32.1
265:842
municipally prepared list, the developer and municipality shall
both rely on the consultant's recommendations.
(4) Open space.
(a) Not less than 30% of the developed tract area of a permitted
multifamily development shall be dedicated to common open
space areas. Such space may include required buffers, setback
areas, stormwater management facilities, active recreational
areas, as well as natural, undeveloped areas, and shall be
maintained by the owner or a homeowners' association and
appropriately deed restricted.
(b) Of the tract area dedicated to common open space and
recreation facilities, at least 1/2 (or 15% of the tract area) shall
consist of natural, undeveloped open space, which may include
perimeter buffering. Such buffer areas with predevelopment
natural vegetative cover shall be retained and appropriately
protected from root damage during construction, which shall
include drip-line limits of disturbance for trees within the
required buffer, which shall be approved by the Township
Engineer prior to site disturbance.
(5) Required off-street parking spaces pursuant to the requirements of
Article VI, and specifically restricted as follows:
(a) No parking area shall be located within 50 feet of a property
line nor between any building or a public road.
(b) No parking shall be permitted on any access driveway.
(c) Dwelling units shall each be provided with a minimum of one
garage parking space of at least nine feet by 18 feet.
(d) Not more than 100 parking spaces shall be provided as surface
parking.
(6) A landscaped buffer shall be required on any side or rear yard
adjacent to any property used or zoned for lower density residential
purposes. The buffer shall be a minimum of 25 feet in width and
shall be landscaped via massed evergreen trees and/or shrubs
having a minimum height of eight feet at the time of planting. Such
buffer areas may also be required upon site plan review to have
walls and/or fences in order to further screen the multifamily use
from surrounding uses and zones. No building or other structure,
parking area, driveway or storage area shall encroach upon such
buffer area.
(7) Buildings shall conform to the following additional limitations and
requirements:
(a) All buildings and accessory structures shall be designed with a
unified architectural theme that is visually compatible with the
§ 268-32.1 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-32.1
265:843
surrounding area. Said design shall consider such elements
as building materials and colors, facade treatments, rooflines,
light fixtures, and site amenities such as street furniture. All
buildings shall have pitched roofs as an integral component of
their design. Exterior building material colors shall be earthtone
and designed to blend into the surrounding neighborhood.
(b) Limitations on size. Buildings exceeding 100 feet in length
shall be interrupted by offset planes not exceeding 100 feet in
length. Each plane shall be recessed or offset by two feet or
more. Exterior finishes shall vary for each offset plane, which
shall be subject to Planning Board approval.
(8) Telephone and electric lines. There shall not be permitted overhead
telephone and electric transmission lines traversing a lot.
Telephone and electric transmission lines shall be placed at the
rear of the lot. Where this is not practical or possible, overhead
transmission lines may be place alongside the lot line, and service
to a building or group of buildings on a lot from the transmission
line shall be by underground conduit.
(9) Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be installed in number and
location as directed by the Township Engineer acting upon the
advice of the Chief of the Township Fire Department and the Office
of Fire Prevention, or as required by the New Jersey Residential
Site Improvement Standards.
(10) Interior roads, access drives, and sidewalks. All road and sidewalk
construction shall be pursuant to the New Jersey Residential Site
Improvement Standards. A grass area of a minimum width of two
feet shall be provided between the sidewalks and interior roads and
between the sidewalks and access drives.
(11) Recycling. There shall be included within each new multifamily
building an indoor recycling area for the collection and storage of
residentially generated recyclable materials.
(12) Solid waste. Solid waste collection and storage areas shall be
similarly provided within each multifamily building for the facility,
and may be indoors or outdoors. Outdoor areas shall be enclosed by
a maximum seven-foot-high fence or wall enclosure compatible
with the architectural style of the building, and landscaped as
required by the reviewing board.
(13) Lighting. Exterior lighting in accordance with § 268-7, with the
exception that the maximum height of a fixture shall not exceed 20
feet measured from the ground level to the top of the light source.
(a) All light fixtures shall be downward directed and side shielded
to prevent direct view of the light source of light fixtures from
off site. The Planning Board shall have the authority to approve
the type and style of light fixtures used, which may be a
§ 268-32.1 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-32.1
265:844
§ 268-32.2. Multifamily Affordable Housing Inclusionary Overlay
(MF-AH-IO) Zone. [Added 9-17-2018 by Ord. No. 18-830]
The Multifamily Affordable Housing Inclusionary Overlay (MF-AH-IO) Zone
adds an inclusionary residential development option in addition to the
underlying nonresidential zoning that permits townhouse development at
a gross density of 10 dwelling units per acre including a 20% affordable
housing set-aside; and Multifamily apartments at a gross density of 14
dwelling units per acre including a 15% affordable housing set-aside if
the affordable housing units will be for rent or a 20% affordable housing
set-aside if the affordable units will be for sale. Affordable housing shall
be provided in accordance with the requirements of the New Jersey Fair
Housing Act and N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., the Uniform Housing
Affordability Controls (UHAC).
decorative design, or shoebox style fixture with a 150° beam
spread.
(b) The lamp of the light fixture shall be sufficiently recessed to
prevent direct view of the light source from off site.
(14) Landscaping. The overall site design shall include a comprehensive
landscaping plan providing a variety of trees, shrubs, and ground
cover(s) designed to shade parking and recreation areas, reduce
stormwater runoff and soil erosion, offer visual screening, accent
and complement buildings, and soften the lines of paved roadways
on the interior and exterior of the site. The preservation of existing
natural features such as rock outcroppings, woodlands, and
topographic elements shall be an integral part of the site planning
process, and, at its discretion, the reviewing board may waive
additional screening requirements where such features are present
within a required buffer area.
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Multifamily apartment buildings, including affordable housing as
prescribed above.
(2) Attached townhouses, including affordable housing as prescribed
above.
(3) Community residences for the developmentally disabled,
community shelters for victims of domestic violence, community
residences for the terminally ill, and community residences for
persons with head injuries, each in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-66.1.
(4) Uses permitted and developed in accordance with the existing
underlying zoning that are in existence as of the date of adoption of
this section, which uses shall be permitted to continue and/or
expand in accordance with the provisions of underlying zoning
without the need for an application for use variance approval from
§ 268-32.1 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-32.2
265:845
the Zoning Board of Adjustment as a nonpermitted use, provided
that no existing nonresidential use, even if permitted and
conforming to the zoning as of the date of adoption of this section,
shall be permitted to expand beyond the limits of the tax lot(s) upon
which such use is located as of the date of adoption of this section.
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Customary accessory structures, buildings and uses, provided that
such are incidental to that of the principal building and use, subject
to the provisions of § 268-10 and applicable requirements of this
section.
(2) Private recreational facilities for the exclusive use of residents,
such as swimming pools, tennis courts, and playgrounds, and
customary accessory buildings shall include such buildings as
clubhouses, storage buildings, or garages, subject to the provisions
of § 268-10 and applicable requirements of this section.
(3) Signs as permitted in Article V.
(4) Driveways and off-street parking as provided in Article VI.
(5) Family day-care homes as regulated in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.5b.
C. Area, yard, bulk, parking and open space requirements. All residential
development within the Multifamily Affordable Housing Inclusionary
Overlay (MF-AH-IO) Zone shall conform in all respects to § 268-25, MF
Multifamily Zone, Subsection C.
D. Affordable housing requirements/very-low-, low- and moderate-income
units.
(1) Except as specifically provided in Subsection D(3) below, affordable
units shall conform to the requirements of the New Jersey Fair
Housing Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq. ("FHA"), the "Round 2"
regulations adopted by the New Jersey Council on Affordable
Housing, N.J.A.C. 5:93-1.1 et seq.,116 the Uniform Housing
Affordability Controls ("UHAC"), N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., all other
relevant statutes, regulations, and policies and the Cedar Grove
Township Third Round Affordable Housing Ordinance.117
(2) Affordability average; bedroom distribution. Affordable units shall
be provided in accordance with N.J.S.A. 5:80-26.3, Affordability
average; bedroom distribution.
(3) Very-low-, low- and moderate-income housing shall be constructed
and rented in accordance with the New Jersey Fair Housing Act and
Uniform Housing Affordability Controls ("UHAC") at N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1 et seq, including standards for the split between very-
116. Editor's Note: The regulations in N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired October 16, 2016.
117. Editor's Note: See Ch. 80, Affordable Housing.
§ 268-32.2 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-32.2
265:846
low-, low- and moderate-income housing, except that, consistent
with N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.1, at least 13% of the affordable units
shall be very-low-income units, i.e., affordable to households
earning 30% or less of the regional median household income
by household size; and at least 37% of the affordable units shall
be low-income units. The balance of the affordable units shall be
moderate-income units.
(4) Affordable units shall be affirmatively marketed in accordance with
the affirmative marketing provisions identified at N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.15.
(5) Controls on affordability. There shall be an income control period
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.11 of at least 30 years for all affordable
units and thereafter until Cedar Grove takes action to release the
controls on affordability.
(a) The applicant shall submit a copy of the draft deed restriction
to be placed on affordable units at the time of application for
site plan approval for Planning Board Attorney review and
approval prior to the Planning Board granting preliminary site
plan approval.
(b) Affordability controls shall be established in the form of a deed
restriction, which shall be approved by the Planning Board
Attorney and recorded with the County Clerk and filed with
Cedar Grove Municipal Clerk and the Cedar Grove municipal
housing liaison.
(6) Affordable units shall be administered by a qualified administrative
agent in accordance with the administrative procedures for
affordable units identified in the UHAC. The developer shall be
responsible for the cost for all aspects of administering the
affordable units, including but not limited to affirmative marketing,
income qualification, tenant placement/purchaser selection,
maintenance of controls, etc.
E. Site plan review required as set forth under Article X. An application for
site plan approval shall comply with the Township's submission
requirements and procedures for a site plan application.
(1) A comprehensive traffic study shall be submitted with the
application for development. This study will include a matrix with
estimated projections for vehicle movements in and out of the
facility in each hour of each day in a typical seven-day week. The
projections for each hour will be built up from separate estimates
for ingress and egress, and for different categories of use. The
latter will include, but not be limited to, residents, deliveries and
visitors. Added together, the separate categories will equal all
traffic in and out. The study will also include background traffic in
each direction on the public road servicing the facility in the same
§ 268-32.2 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-32.2
265:847
twenty-four-hour, seven-day format. The factual and analytical
basis for all estimates will be explained.
(2) The Planning Board shall use the traffic study to foster proper
design, such as but not limited to ingress and egress, and to
determine the applicant's pro-rata share of off-site and off-tract
improvements, if any, that may be required. The Planning Board
shall not use the traffic study to alter the density of sites to be
developed with inclusionary zoning.
(3) The applicant shall have the option of preparing the traffic study or
choosing a consultant from a list of at least two professionals
(prepared by the municipality) to prepare the studies. If the
developer chooses a consultant from the municipally prepared list,
the developer and municipality shall both rely on the consultant's
recommendations.
F. A landscaped buffer shall be required on any side or rear yard adjacent
to any property used or zoned for nonresidential purposes. The buffer
shall be a minimum of 25 feet in width and shall be landscaped via
massed evergreen trees and/or shrubs having a minimum height of
eight feet at the time of planting. Such buffer areas may also be
required upon site plan review to have walls and/or fences in order to
further screen the multifamily development from surrounding land
uses. No building or other structure, parking area, driveway or storage
area shall encroach upon such buffer area.
§ 268-32.2 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-32.2
265:848
ARTICLE VIII
Conditional Uses
§ 268-33. Procedure.
Before a construction permit or certificate of occupancy may be issued for
any conditional use permitted by this chapter, application shall be made to
the Board in compliance with the submission requirements of Article X for
site plan review.
§ 268-34. Criteria.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.), the Planning Board shall have the power to grant
approval of conditional use applications provided same are in full
compliance with the specific conditions provided herein.
§ 268-34.1. Public utility uses.
For purposes of this chapter, the term "public utility uses" shall not
differentiate between facilities which are publicly or privately owned/
operated, and shall include such uses as wireless telecommunications
A. An application for a conditional use approval for any uses specified as
such in this chapter shall be made to the Planning Board which shall
grant or deny such application within 95 days of the date the
application is deemed complete, or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant. The Planning Board shall hear the
application in the same manner and under the same procedure as is set
forth in this chapter for site plan review.
B. Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period prescribed shall
constitute approval of the application, and a certificate of the
Administrative Officer as to the failure of the Planning Board to act
shall be issued on request of the applicant, and it shall be sufficient in
lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence of approval, herein
required, and shall be so accepted by the county recording officer for
purposes of filing subdivision plats.
C. Whenever review or approval of the application by the County Planning
Board is required by N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3, in the case of a subdivision, or
N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.6, in the case of a site plan, the Planning Board shall
condition any approval that it grants upon timely receipt of a favorable
report on the application by the County Planning Board or approval by
the County Planning Board by its failure to report thereon within the
required time period.
D. In approving any application for a conditional use, the Planning Board
may impose any conditions that it deems necessary to accomplish the
reasonable application of applicable standards as provided in this
chapter and may deny any such application based on said standards.
§ 268-33 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-34.1
265:849
facilities, power substations, telephone exchanges, and other utilities
serving the public, such as sewage treatment plants, water storage tanks,
and water treatment facilities, but shall exclude service or storage yards,
dumps, and landfills. Public utility uses shall be permitted in the M-1, M-2
and GF Zoning Districts, only in accordance with the following:
A. A set of plans, specifications and plot plans and a statement setting
forth the need and purpose of the installation shall be filed with the
municipal agency by the applicant in accordance with the submission
requirements of Article X for site plan review.
B. The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed installation in a
specific location is necessary for the provision of service by the utility to
the neighborhood or service area in which the particular use is to be
located.
C. All public utility uses shall comply with the minimum building setback
requirements of the Schedule of Requirements118 table for the zoning
district in which the property is located and with the building height
limitations of this chapter.
D. Off-street parking shall be provided as necessary and as determined by
the Board during site plan review.
E. Access to utility installations shall be restricted and secured to the
satisfaction of the reviewing board.
F. Any generators, air conditioners, or similar noise-generating devices
shall be located within a soundproofed structure, such that the volume
of noise at the property line does not exceed ambient noise levels or 55
decibels (55 dB), whichever is the lesser.
G. Security lighting shall be minimized, and shall be shielded and focused
downward to prevent direct light spillage or glare to neighboring
properties and/or street lines.
H. No signs shall be permitted for commercial advertising purposes at any
public utility use facility. Signs shall be limited to those providing such
information as owner/operator contact addresses and telephone
numbers, safety warnings, equipment specifications, and safety
instructions and no such sign shall exceed two square feet in area.
I. Landscaping shall be provided to screen the facility from view at street
level and a landscaped buffer shall be required along any property line
adjacent to a residential property. The buffer shall be a minimum of 25
feet in width and shall be landscaped via massed evergreen trees and/or
shrubs having a minimum height of six feet at the time of planting.
118. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Requirements is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 268-34.1 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-34.1
265:850
J. Any approval for a public utility use shall be subject to the
requirements, laws, and regulations of any applicable outside
government agency having jurisdiction over such use.
K. In the case of wireless telecommunications towers, monopoles, and
antennas, the following conditions and requirements shall apply in
addition to those above:
(1) Applicants for new telecommunications towers, monopoles, and
antennas shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Planning
Board the need for wireless telecommunications at the proposed
location. The evidence presented to the Board shall describe in
detail, the following:
(a) The wireless telecommunications network layout and its
coverage area requirements.
(b) The need for new telecommunications facilities at the proposed
location within the Township.
(2) No lighting is permitted on a wireless telecommunications tower or
antenna and no such tower or antenna shall be permitted which
would require lighting affixed thereto under Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) or other governmental agency rules or
regulations.
(3) The color of the structure and available camouflaging options shall
be approved by the reviewing board.
(4) In the event a communications tower, monopole, or antenna is not
utilized for a continuous period of one year or more, the antenna(s)
and structure shall be removed at the owner's expense.
(5) Wireless telecommunications facilities shall be maintained to
assure continued structural integrity and visual appearance.
(6) Applications for antennas to be affixed to new telecommunications
towers or monopoles shall not be approved unless the applicant
has:
(a) Submitted a complete description of alternative technologies
or strategies that may be available to enable provision of the
proposed telecommunications services without use of new
towers or monopoles, and demonstrated that such alternatives
or strategies are not feasible in the specific instance or are not
adequate to satisfy the identified need.
(b) Provided documentary evidence demonstrating that a
legitimate attempt has been made, that was ultimately
unsuccessful, to locate antennas on existing towers,
monopoles, buildings, or other structures. Where a suitable
collocation on an existing tower or monopole is found to exist
but an applicant is unable to secure an agreement to locate its
§ 268-34.1 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-34.1
265:851
equipment thereon, the applicant shall provide written
evidence of correspondence with the owner of the structure
verifying that suitable space is not available on the tower and
giving the reasons therefor.
(c) When an applicant to construct a new wireless
telecommunications tower demonstrates to the satisfaction of
the Board that the need for same exists, that alternative
technologies to address that need are not practical or feasible,
and that suitable locations on existing structures either do not
exist, or are not available, the applicant may erect a new tower
in accordance with the following requirements:
[1] Authorization for the construction of any new wireless
telecommunications tower shall be conditioned on
agreement by the tower owner that other wireless
telecommunications service providers will be permitted to
collocate antennas on the proposed tower and to collocate
equipment buildings within the equipment compound,
within the limits of structural and radio frequency
engineering requirements and at rates which reflect the
fair market value for such services. As part of any
application for new tower approval, the applicant shall
document the extent to which additional antennas could be
mounted on the tower and the types of antennas which
could be accommodated as well as the ability to
accommodate the equipment building(s) for such antennas
within the equipment compound.
[2] The maximum height of any tower or monopole, including
all antennas, shall be 150 feet.
[3] The tower and equipment compound shall be set back
from any property line a minimum of 75 feet.
[4] Wireless telecommunications facilities shall be surrounded
by security fencing of at least seven feet in height and all
towers or monopoles shall be designed with anti-climbing
devices to deter unauthorized access.
(d) Site plan application requirements for installation of wireless
telecommunications towers or monopoles shall include, in
addition to the standard submission requirements, the
following:
[1] A report from a qualified expert certifying that the
wireless telecommunications tower and equipment facility
comply with the latest structural and wind loading
requirements as set forth in the Building Officials and
Code Administrators (BOCA) International, Inc. Code; or
the Electronic Industries Association/Telecommunications
Industries Association (EIA/TIA) 222 Revision F Standard,
§ 268-34.1 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-34.1
265:852
§ 268-34.2. Wireless telecommunications antennas on existing
structures.
Wireless telecommunications antennas are permitted to be located upon
existing buildings and other suitable structures, such as water towers,
power line transmission support towers, and existing monopoles, in the
specified zoning districts, in accordance with the following:
entitled "Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Towers
and Antenna Supporting Structures" (or equivalent), as
it may be updated or amended; or such other code as
may apply to such facilities, including a description of
the number and type of antennas it is designed to
accommodate.
[2] A letter of commitment by the applicant stating the intent
and capacity to lease tower and equipment compound
space to other potential users at prevailing market rates
and conditions. Such letter shall commit the tower owner
and successors in interest and shall be recorded prior to
issuance of a construction permit.
[3] Elevation drawings of the proposed tower and accessory
building depicting all proposed antennas, platforms, finish
material, and all accessory equipment.
[4] A copy of the lease or deed for the property.
[5] A plan referencing all existing wireless
telecommunications facilities in the Township, any such
facilities in abutting municipalities which provide service
to any portion of the Township, and any changes proposed
within the following twelve-month period, including plans
for new locations or for the discontinuance or relocation of
existing facilities.
[6] Calculations of the expected radio-frequency emission
levels at the nearest structure in each direction to the
proposed facility.
[7] A visual impact study providing, at minimum, a threehundred-
sixty-degree perspective of the proposed tower at
the proposed location from distances of 1,000 feet, 2,500
feet, and 5,000 feet.
A. All requirements set forth for public utility uses shall be adhered to with
the exception of those applicable to new wireless telecommunications
monopoles or towers.
B. In addition to the submission requirements outlined for public utility
uses, applicants for wireless telecommunications antennas to be
attached to existing buildings and structures shall provide a report by a
§ 268-34.1 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-34.2
265:853
§ 268-34.3. Public garages and motor vehicle service stations.
A public garage or motor vehicle service station is permitted in the zoning
districts as specified, provided that:
qualified expert, certifying to the structural adequacy of the building or
structure to which the antenna shall be attached to support the antenna
and potential associated wind sheers.
C. Antennas shall not extend beyond the height of the existing building or
structure by more than 50% of the permitted height of the building or
structure, or 20 feet, whichever is the lesser, with the limitation that
antennas affixed to an existing telecommunications tower or monopole
shall be attached so as not to extend the height of the tower beyond 150
feet.
D. A wireless telecommunications equipment compound may be erected in
support of such antenna(s) provided it shall not exceed 400 square feet
in area and shall be located in a side or rear yard area. This provision
shall not apply to existing monopoles or towers, where an equipment
compound already exists. In no case shall more than one such
compound be provided on any lot.
E. Such antenna(s) shall be concealed from view by architectural
treatment, or shall be camouflaged or suitably finished and/or painted
so as to blend with the existing structure upon which it is mounted, or
otherwise minimize its visual impact on the surrounding area.
A. A set of plans, specifications and plot plans is filed with the municipal
agency in accordance with the submission requirements of Article X for
site plan review and showing in detail the exact location of such garage
or gasoline station, the number of tanks to be installed, the dimensions
and capacity of each tank, the depth at which the tanks will be placed
below ground, the number of pumps to be installed, the type of
structures and accessory buildings to be constructed, the number of
automobiles to be garaged, and in addition, showing the lot dimensions
of the property, the nearest school, church, hospital, park or other place
of public assembly, the location of adjoining residential properties and
the nearest street intersection within 100 feet of the subject property.
B. All gas pumps shall be located a minimum of 20 feet from the property
line at all points and shall be located at least 50 feet from the nearest
building on any adjacent property.
C. The lot shall have a minimum frontage of 150 feet for one to three
gasoline pumps, plus an additional 50 feet of frontage for each
additional three pumps located on the property. If the property is
located at an intersection, then the frontage is determined to be that
facing the most heavily traveled street.
D. Each lot shall have a minimum depth of 100 feet, except that the lot
depth for stations located at intersections shall be at least 150 feet.
§ 268-34.2 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-34.3
265:854
§ 268-34.4. Public and private schools.
Public and private schools may be permitted in the specified residential
zones in accordance with the following standards:
E. All driveways shall be located at least 25 feet from street intersections
(property line). The width of the driveway on each lot shall be at least
20 feet and shall not exceed 36 feet and shall not be located closer than
10 feet to any property line. There shall be a minimum distance of 20
feet between driveways.
F. Plans submitted shall indicate reasonable landscaping on said lot,
covering at least 2% of the land area thereof.
G. A landscaped buffer shall be required on any side or rear yard adjacent
to a residential zone in conformity with the buffer requirements
specified for the zoning district in which the facility is located.
H. For motor vehicle service stations, light intensity at pavement level
underneath a canopy shall be permitted to reach a maximum of eight
footcandles, however, at property lines, such lighting shall not exceed
0.4 footcandle.
I. All vents from the gas tanks shall be located at least 20 feet from any
property line.
J. Signs shall conform to the provisions of Article V.
K. Provision shall be made for off-street parking as specified in Article VI.
L. Permitted accessory uses to motor vehicle service stations shall include
convenience stores for the retail sale of foods, beverages, and personal
items for use or consumption off the premises, provided that such
stores do not occupy more than 40% of the gross floor area of the
principal building.
A. The applicant shall file an application inclusive of plans and
specifications with the municipal agency in accordance with the
submission requirements of Article X for site plan review.
B. The minimum lot area shall be three acres and the minimum lot
frontage shall be 250 feet.
C. The maximum permitted floor/lot ratio shall be 0.15.
D. The maximum permitted impervious lot coverage shall be 25%.
E. No building shall be located within 75 feet of a street right-of-way line
nor within 50 feet of a side or rear property line.
F. No active recreation area or parking area shall be located within 25 feet
of a property line nor within the front yard.
G. Signs shall conform to the provisions of Article V.
§ 268-34.3 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-34.4
265:855
§ 268-34.5. Hospitals and eleemosynary institutions.
Hospitals and eleemosynary structures and uses may be permitted in the
SL/C and RC Zone provided that the following standards are observed:
H. Off-street parking space shall be required in accordance with the
standards set forth in Article VI. In addition, adequate space shall be
provided to permit access and turnaround by school buses and other
vehicles, and safe pickup and discharge of children to a sidewalk giving
direct access to the school building.
I. A landscaped buffer shall be required on any side or rear yard adjacent
to a residential property. The buffer shall be a minimum of 25 feet in
width and shall be landscaped via massed evergreen trees and/or
shrubs having a minimum height of six feet at the time of planting. Such
buffer areas may also be required upon site plan review to have walls
and/or fences to ensure year-round visual screening, maintain privacy,
and contain accessory recreational uses within the school grounds. No
building or other structure, parking area, driveway or storage area
shall encroach upon such buffer area.
A. The applicant shall file an application inclusive of plans, specifications,
and a statement setting forth full particulars on the operation of the
structure or use with the municipal agency in accordance with the
submission requirements of Article X for site plan review.
B. The minimum lot area shall be five acres and the minimum lot frontage
shall be 250 feet.
C. The maximum permitted floor/lot ratio shall be 0.25.
D. The maximum permitted impervious lot coverage shall be 40%.
E. No parking area shall be located within 25 feet of a property line nor
within the front yard.
F. No building shall be located within 75 feet of a street right-of-way line
nor within 50 feet of a side or rear property line.
G. Signs shall conform to the provisions of Article V.
H. Off-street parking space shall be required in accordance with standards
set forth in Article VI.
I. There shall be adequate landscaping to screen the use from adjoining
properties. On any side or rear yard adjacent to a residential property
this shall include a landscaped buffer of a minimum of 50 feet in width
consisting of massed evergreen trees and/or shrubs having a minimum
height of six feet at the time of planting. Such buffer areas may also be
required upon site plan review to have walls and/or fences to ensure
year-round visual screening. No building or other structure, parking
area, driveway or storage area shall encroach upon such buffer area.
§ 268-34.4 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-34.5
265:856
§ 268-34.6. Houses of worship.
Houses of worship may be located in the R-18, R-15, R-10, R-8, RC, M-1, and
M-2 Zoning Districts in accordance with the requirements of this section:
J. Site development shall conform in all other respects to the
requirements set forth for the zoning district in which the hospital is
located.
A. The applicant shall file an application inclusive of plans and
specifications with the municipal agency in accordance with the
submission requirements of Article X for site plan review.
B. The minimum lot area shall be three acres and the minimum lot
frontage shall be 250 feet.
C. No building shall be located within 75 feet of a street right-of-way line
nor within 50 feet of a side or rear property line.
D. Accessory buildings such as parish houses, rectories, and schools, if
provided, shall be located within the required setback lines for the
principal building and, if not connected, shall be located a minimum
distance from one another of 30 feet.
E. The maximum permitted floor/lot ratio shall be 0.15.
F. The maximum permitted impervious lot coverage shall be 35%.
G. No parking area shall be located within 25 feet of a property line nor
within the front yard.
H. A landscaped buffer shall be required on any side or rear yard adjacent
to a residential property. The buffer shall be a minimum of 25 feet in
width and shall be landscaped via massed evergreen trees and/or
shrubs having a minimum height of six feet at the time of planting. Such
buffer areas may also be required upon site plan review to have walls
and/or fences to ensure year-round visual screening. No building or
other structure, parking area, driveway or storage area shall encroach
upon such buffer area.
I. Signs shall conform to the provisions of Article V.
J. Off-street parking space shall be required in accordance with the
standards set forth in Article VI, and shall be cumulative, such that the
total number of required spaces shall not be less than the sum of the
individual requirement for each principal and accessory use. In the case
of an accessory on-site school, adequate space shall also be provided to
permit access and turnaround by school vehicles, and safe pickup and
discharge of children to a sidewalk giving direct access to the school
building.
§ 268-34.5 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-34.6
265:857

ARTICLE IX
Planned Developments
§ 268-35. Purpose.
The Township of Cedar Grove has determined that flexibility in design
and land use planning is appropriate and needed in certain areas of the
municipality, in order to protect environmentally sensitive lands and
preserve remaining open space, to a encourage cohesively and efficiently
designed development projects, and to provide additional housing options
for senior citizens. To accommodate alternative methodologies that further
these goals while at the same time, providing for growth that is compatible
with the character of the community and with the intents and purposes of
the Township Master Plan, this article provides procedures and substantive
regulations governing permitted residential cluster developments and
planned residential developments. Planned developments are permitted
pursuant to this article to achieve the following objectives:
§ 268-36. Procedure.
Planned developments and all individual uses and lots contained therein,
shall be subject to the provisions and submission requirements for site plan
review (Article X) and where applicable, land subdivision (Chapter 234).
No final approval shall be granted for any portion of a tract proposed for
residential cluster or planned residential community development without
a preliminary site plan for the development of the entire tract having first
been approved.
§ 268-37. Criteria.
Prior to approval of any preliminary or final site plan for any residential
cluster development or planned residential community development, the
Planning Board shall find the following facts and conclusions:
A. A development pattern in harmony with the objectives of the various
plans, programs, and ordinances adopted or approved by the Township
to guide its growth and development.
B. An efficient use of land resulting in smaller networks of utilities and
streets and thereby lower development and housing costs.
C. The preservation of open space for recreation and aesthetic beauty, and
of desirable natural site characteristics, including environmental and
ecological systems and amenities.
D. Broadening of the uses permitted in residential developments and
variation in the relationship of uses, structures, open spaces and
heights of structures in developments conceived as cohesive unified
projects.
§ 268-35 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-37
265:859
§ 268-38. General standards.
A. Any departures by the proposed development from zoning regulations
otherwise applicable to the subject property, conform to the regulations
set forth herein for such planned developments.
B. The proposals for maintenance and conservation of the common open
space in the residential cluster or planned retirement community
development application are reliable, and that the amount, location,
and purpose of the common open space are adequate.
C. Provision through the physical design of the proposed development for
public services, control over vehicular and pedestrian traffic, and the
amenities of light and air, recreation, and visual enjoyment are
adequate.
D. The proposed planned development will not have an unreasonably
adverse impact upon the area in which it is proposed to be established.
E. In the case of a proposed development which contemplates
construction over a period of years, the terms and conditions intended
to protect the interests of the public and of the residents, occupants,
and owners of the proposed development in the total completion of the
development are adequate.
A. Ownership. No application for planned development approval shall be
granted unless the Planning Board shall find that the entire tract
proposed for planned development treatment is in single ownership or
under such unified control as to ensure that the entire tract will be
developed as a unified whole. All owners of the tract shall be included
as joint applicants on all applications, and all approvals shall bind all
owners. The violation of any owner as to any tract shall be deemed a
violation as to all owners and all tracts.
B. Minimum tract size. No application for a planned development shall be
granted unless the Planning Board shall find that:
(1) The tract in questions conforms to the minimum tract size
designated for the type of planned development proposed; and
(2) The tract in question is of sufficient size and shape to accommodate
the type and scope of development proposed and appropriate to be
planned and developed as a unified whole.
C. Streets. Private streets may be utilized within any planned
development, in accordance with the requirements of the Residential
Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21 et seq.).
D. Guarantees of completion. Any approval of a planned development shall
be conditioned upon the applicant entering into a developer's
agreement with the Township and posting performance guarantees
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, to ensure the installation and
§ 268-37 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-38
265:860
maintenance of all public improvements and other facilities required as
a condition of any approval granted pursuant to this article.
E. Other regulations. No application for planned development approval
shall be granted unless the Planning Board shall find that, in addition to
complying with each of the standards applicable under this article, the
proposed development complies with:
(1) All standards applicable to site plan approval;
(2) All standards applicable to subdivision plats;
(3) All standards, except to the extent waived, varied or modified
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, applicable in the zoning
district in which the proposed development will be located; and
(4) All other standards applicable to the proposed development under
other federal, state, county, and/or municipal laws, ordinances and/
or regulations.
F. Common facilities and open space. No application for planned
development approval shall be granted unless the Planning Board shall
find that all of the requirements of this subsection are met as to all
common open space and facilities, to be provided in connection with the
proposed development:
(1) The amount and location of all common open space and facilities to
be provided in a planned development shall be consistent with the
minimum standards as established by the appropriate section of
this article for the particular type of planned development.
(2) No private common open space shall be used for the construction
of any structure or improvement, except such structures and
improvements as may be approved as part of the final site plan/
subdivision plat as appropriate to the intended aesthetic, leisure
and recreational uses for which the open space is intended. As a
condition of the approval of the planned development, adequate
safeguards, including recorded covenants or dedication of
development rights, shall be provided to prevent the subsequent
use of the open space for any other structure, improvement or
development.
(3) The approval of a planned development shall be conditioned upon
the final site plan/subdivision plat, including such provisions for the
ownership and maintenance of private common open space and
facilities as are reasonably necessary to ensure their continuity,
care, conservation, maintenance and operation, in accordance with
predetermined standards, by a landowners' organization formed
for the purpose and to ensure that remedial measures will be
available to the Township if the open space or facilities are
permitted to deteriorate or are not maintained by such
organization in a condition consistent with the best interests of the
§ 268-38 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-38
265:861
planned development or the Township. Such organization shall not
be dissolved and shall not dispose of any open space, by sale or
otherwise, except to an organization which will own and maintain
the open space for the benefit of the development in accordance
with the provisions of this subsection. No such organization or
successor organization shall dispose of any open space held by
it except in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and
except after having first offered to dedicate such open space to the
Township.
(4) Common open space may be by mutual agreement of the developer
and the governing body dedicated at any time to the Township for
public use and maintenance, or to another appropriate
governmental agency willing and able to accept the dedication and
to maintain the open space for its intended purposes.
(5) Every landowners' organization, and the covenants and
declarations creating and regulating every landowners'
organization, formed or intended to own or maintain private
common open space or facilities pursuant to the requirements of
this chapter shall meet each of the following standards:
(a) The regulations governing the organization must be
established prior to the sale of any property within the planned
development or the area within the planned development
designated to have the exclusive use or benefit of the proposed
open space or facilities.
(b) Tentative bylaws and rules of the organization and all
covenants and restrictions to be recorded must be available at
the time of the application for final site plan/plat approval prior
to becoming effective.
(c) The organization must be responsible for casualty and liability
insurance, taxes and the maintenance of the open space and
facilities to be deeded to it or maintained by it.
(d) Membership must be mandatory for each landowner and any
successor buyer having a right to the use, enjoyment or benefit
of the open space or facilities.
(e) Landowners having a right to the use, enjoyment or benefit of
the open space or facilities must pay their pro rata share of the
costs of the organization by means of an assessment, to be
levied by the organization, which meets the requirements for
becoming a lien on the property in accordance with the
statutes of the State of New Jersey.
(f) The organization must have the right to adjust the assessment
to meet changed needs. The membership vote required to
authorize such adjustment shall be fixed at not more than 2/3
of the members voting on the issue.
§ 268-38 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-38
265:862
(g) The open space restrictions must be permanent and not for a
given period of years.
(h) The Township shall have the right to enforce the covenants.
(6) In the event that such organization shall fail to maintain the private
open space or facilities in reasonable order and condition, the
Zoning Officer may serve written notice upon such organization or
upon the owners of the development, setting forth the manner in
which the organization has failed to maintain the open space or
facilities in reasonable condition and demanding that such
maintenance deficiencies be cured within 35 days following the
date of the notice. The notice shall state the date, time and place
for a hearing, to be held with the Zoning Officer within 15 days
following the date of the notice, for the purposes of considering any
and all deficiencies in the maintenance of the open space or
facilities and the formulation of a program to eliminate all such
deficiencies. A copy of this subsection shall accompany each such
notice. Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the Zoning Officer may
modify the terms of the original notice as to deficiencies and may
give a reasonable extension of time, not to exceed 65 days, within
which they shall be cured.
(7) If the deficiencies set forth in the original notice or in the
modification thereof shall not have been cured within said 35 days
or any permitted extension thereof, the Township, in order to
preserve and maintain the open space and facilities, may enter
upon and maintain such land or facilities for a period not to exceed
one year. The cost of such maintenance shall be assessed against
the properties within the development that have a right of use,
enjoyment or benefit of the open space or facilities and shall
become a lien and tax on said properties, pro rata in accordance
with their respective assessed valuations at the time the lien is
imposed, and shall be added to and be a part of the taxes to be
levied and assessed thereon and enforced and collected, with
interest, by the same officers and in the same manner as other
taxes.
(8) At least 30 days prior to the conclusion of the year of maintenance
by the Township, or sooner at the request of the organization, the
Township Council shall call a public hearing, upon 15 days' written
notice to such organization and to the owners of the development,
at which hearing the organization and the owners of the
development shall show cause why the Township should not
continue such maintenance for a succeeding year. If the Council
shall determine that the organization is ready and able to maintain
its open space and facilities in reasonable condition, the Township
shall cease maintenance at the end of the year for which it had
assumed maintenance responsibility or, by mutual agreement of
the Council and the organization, at such other date as may be
convenient. If the Township Council shall determine that such
§ 268-38 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-38
265:863
§ 268-39. Permitted planned developments.
The following planned residential developments are permitted pursuant to
this article in the zoning districts indicated:
§ 268-39.1. Residential cluster developments.
The standards of this section are intended to permit minor modifications of
the yard and area requirements of the various zoning districts, exclusive of
minimum lot area per unit and lot coverage requirements, in order to permit
the grouping of structures pursuant to a preconceived plan of development.
organization is not ready and able to maintain said open space or
facilities in reasonable condition, the Township may, at its option,
continue its maintenance during the next succeeding year and
from year to year thereafter, subject to a similar hearing and
determination in each succeeding year.
A. Residential Cluster (RC) developments in the R-18, R-30, R-40, and
R-5A single-family residential zones, subject to the requirements
herein.
B. Planned Retirement Community (PRC) developments in the SL/C Senior
Living/Care Zone, subject to the requirements herein.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Uses permitted in the zoning district.
(2) Common open space.
(3) Developed common areas and recreational facilities.
B. Minimum tract area. The minimum permitted tract area for a
residential cluster development is 10 acres.
C. Density and lot coverage. No permit for a residential cluster
development shall authorize any increase in the overall density or
intensity of development nor any increase in the overall lot coverage
permitted by the district regulations applicable in the district in which
such development is to be located.
D. Open space. No dwelling unit in a residential cluster development shall
be located on a lot having less than the minimum lot area required by
the regulations of the district in which it is located, unless an area at
least equal to any deficiency below said minimum is provided and
maintained as part of a common open space for the benefit of the
inhabitants of said unit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
(1) Not less than 40% of the tract area of a residential cluster
development shall be dedicated to contiguous, natural,
undeveloped open space.
§ 268-38 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-39.1
265:864
§ 268-39.2. Planned retirement community developments.
The standards applicable to planned retirement communities (PRC's) are
intended to provide for senior citizen housing opportunities in the form
of independent retirement communities. Such developments permit agerestricted
multifamily residential structures designed for occupancy by
senior citizens, as well as an array of amenities specifically designed to meet
the physical and social needs of such households.
E. Other provisions and requirements.
(1) Open space shall be designed to preserve natural features such as
woodlands and rock outcroppings, and to protect and/or buffer
environmentally sensitive areas on the tract.
(2) Portions of the tract proposed for development shall be situated in
the nearest feasible proximity to infrastructure connections, such
as sewerage and water mains, needed for the project.
(3) No building shall be situated closer to a street line or tract
boundary line than the applicable setback distance requirement for
the front, side, or rear yard, as required in the zoning district.
(4) The minimum distance permitted between residential dwellings
shall be 30 feet for side to front, side to rear, or side to side
separations; 120 feet for front to front separations; and 70 feet for
rear to rear separations.
(5) The standards set forth in this section are in addition to all other
standards made applicable to the particular residential cluster
development being proposed by the provisions of this chapter, and
no application for approval of a residential cluster development
shall be approved unless all such other standards, including but not
limited to those relating to planned developments, site plan or
subdivision approval, and to the district in which the proposed
development will be located, have been met or, where permitted,
waived pursuant to the applicable provisions of this chapter.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Independent retirement communities consisting of multifamily
residential buildings specifically designed and intended for and
limited to occupancy by households composed of at least one adult
55 years of age or older, except as specifically provided herein, and
with no children under the age of 19. Permitted residential
buildings shall include any one of the following:
(a) Garden apartments.
(b) Quadriplexes with attached garages.
(c) Townhouses with attached garages.
§ 268-39.1 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-39.2
265:865
B. Accessory uses.
(1) Recreational and social facilities for the use of residents and their
guests, such as clubhouses, gymnasiums and health clubs, tennis
courts, swimming pools, community meeting and party rooms.
(2) Storage facilities and utility or maintenance structures.
(3) Private garages attached to or constructed beneath residential
dwelling units and outdoor off-street parking spaces.
C. Age restrictions. Through its corporation, association or owners, the
land and buildings in any PRC shall be restricted by bylaws, rules,
regulations, and restrictions of record, to use, ownership and
occupancy by persons of 55 years of age or older, subject to the
following exceptions, consistent with the requirements of the Fair
Housing Act, as amended.
(1) A member of a couple under the age of 55 years who is residing
with his/her partner, which partner is 55 years of age or over, may
reside in a PRC.
(2) Twenty percent of units may be occupied by households whose
oldest member is aged 45-55 years, provided that all other
requirements of this section are met.
(3) An adult under 55 years of age may reside in the PRC if it is
established that the presence of such person is essential to the
physical care of one or more of the adult occupants of the same
unit, which adult occupant(s) shall be 55 years of age or older.
(4) Children under the age of 19 shall not be permitted to reside in any
unit in the PRC, regardless of the age(s) of the parent(s) with whom
they reside.
(5) One unit in any such development may be occupied by a resident
manager and family not meeting the above criteria.
(6) A PRC shall comply with all applicable requirements of the Federal
Fair Housing Act and all amendments thereto and all applicable
rules and regulations of the United States Department of Housing
and Urban Development (HUD) regarding such use, ownership,
and occupancy, and shall further comply with all applicable HUD
rules and regulations for self-certification of compliance with the
Act and with HUD's rules and regulations. The residency restriction
applicable to the development may be reviewed by the Township
Attorney for compliance with this section.
D. Development standards.
(1) Minimum tract area. The minimum gross tract area for a PRC
development is 10 acres.
§ 268-39.2 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-39.2
265:866
(2) Maximum density.
(a) The maximum density of development for a PRC consisting of
garden apartments shall not exceed 10 units per gross acre.
(b) The maximum density of development for a PRC consisting of
quadriplexes shall not exceed eight units per gross acre.
(c) The maximum density of development for a PRC consisting of
townhouses shall not exceed six units per gross acre.
(3) Lot coverage. The maximum principal building coverage on the
tract shall not exceed 25%, while the maximum total impervious
coverage shall not exceed 50%.
(4) Street line setbacks. No building shall be located closer to a public
street right-of-way line than 50 feet. The minimum distance to the
curbline of any private street shall be 15 feet.
(5) Yard and area requirements. The PRC development shall conform
to the standards of the Schedule of Requirements table, as
delineated therein under the category "SL/C-PRC," appended to
this chapter.
(6) Distance between structures. The minimum distance between
multifamily structures in a PRC shall be 25 feet for side to front,
side to back, or side to side separations; 40 feet for front to front,
back to back, or front to back separations; and 50 feet for any
separation in which an access drive, other than an emergency
access drive, is located between the buildings. Separation
distances shall be measured from building wall to building wall;
however, bay windows, steps, and chimneys may intrude into the
space, provided that such intrusion is not greater than two feet.
(7) Length of structures. No principal building shall exceed 160 feet in
length in its longest dimension.
(8) Height of structures.
(a) Principal buildings having no underground parking garages.
The maximum height of any principal building shall not exceed
2 1/2 stories above grade nor 35 feet.
(b) Principal buildings having underground parking garages. In
the case of apartment buildings wherein parking is provided
underneath the building (with an entrance at grade), the
maximum height shall not exceed 44 feet, without limitation to
the number of stories. For purposes of this provision, such
height shall be measured from the average elevation of the preconstruction
grade, as measured at all the proposed building
corners, to the highest elevation of the roof surface or ridgeline
on pitched roofs.
§ 268-39.2 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-39.2
265:867
(c) Accessory buildings. The maximum height of any accessory
building shall not exceed 15 feet, except that one accessory
building devoted exclusively to use as a clubhouse shall be
permitted to consist of a maximum 2 1/2 stories above grade
and not more than 35 feet in height.
(9) Unit maximums. No more than 20 dwelling units shall be contained
in any one continuous structure, and there shall be no more than 12
dwelling units in any unbroken building line. A setback of not less
than four feet shall be deemed a satisfactory break in the building
line.
E. Architectural design. The design of buildings and accessory structures
within the PRC shall be coordinated to complement one another and to
reflect a common architectural theme that is visually compatible with
the surrounding area. The design theme shall address at minimum,
building facades, rooflines, construction materials and colors, finish
details, entryways, and all accessory site elements such as light
fixtures, street furniture, signs, and fencing. Buildings shall be
residential in appearance, designed to achieve a human scale through
the use and placement of such elements as windows, doors, columns,
and canopies. All buildings shall have pitched roofs as an integral
component of their design.
F. Landscaping. The overall site design shall include a comprehensive
landscaping plan providing a variety of trees, shrubs, and ground
cover(s) designed to shade parking and recreation areas, reduce
stormwater runoff and soil erosion, offer visual screening of trash/
recycling areas and utility installations, accent and complement
buildings, and soften the lines of paved roadways on the interior and
exterior of the site. The preservation of existing natural features such
as rock outcroppings, woodlands, and topographic elements shall be an
integral part of the site planning process, and at its discretion, the
reviewing board may waive additional screening requirements where
such features are present within a required buffer area.
G. Open space. A planned retirement community shall provide developed
and undeveloped open space and common recreational or community
facilities for the exclusive use of residents.
(1) Not less than 40% of the tract area of a PRC development shall be
dedicated to common open space and recreation facilities. Such
space may include required buffers, setback areas, stormwater
management facilities, active recreational areas, as well as natural,
undeveloped areas.
(2) Of the tract area dedicated to common open space and recreation
facilities, at least 1/2 (or 20% of the tract area) shall consist of
natural, undeveloped open space.
(3) Remaining areas set aside for such purposes shall be utilized to
provide facilities for active and passive recreation particularly
§ 268-39.2 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-39.2
265:868
suitable for adults aged 55 years or older. Such recreation may
include such amenities as a swimming pool, a multipurpose
clubhouse building, tennis, boccie, shuffleboard or horseshoe
courts, chipping and putting greens, outdoor sitting areas, walking
paths, exercise trails, and other similar appropriate active and
passive recreational areas and facilities.
(4) Open space shall be designed to preserve natural features such as
woodlands and rock outcroppings, and to protect and/or buffer
environmentally sensitive areas on the tract.
H. Signs. Planned retirement communities shall be permitted one doublefaced
monument type sign identifying the development at each of up to
two entrances to the development, provided that only one such sign
shall be permitted for each street frontage, and that such sign shall not
exceed 32 square feet in area nor six feet above the ground level. The
sign shall be set back from all street and/or property lines a minimum of
10 feet.
I. Lighting. Exterior lighting in accordance with § 268-7, with the
exception that the maximum height of a fixture shall not exceed 20 feet
or the height of the soffit line of the principal building, whichever is the
lesser, measured from the ground level to the top of the light source.
J. Roadways and parking standards.
(1) The requirements of the Residential Site Improvement Standards
(RSIS) shall apply to the development of a PRC.
(2) All requirements of Article VI pertaining to parking, driveways and
loading shall apply to the PRC, except where such requirements
may be, or may become, in conflict with the requirements of the
RSIS.
(3) No parking of recreational vehicles, including boats, shall be
permitted on the site.
(4) Eighty percent of required parking spaces for multifamily
structures shall be provided within garages.
(5) Street trees shall be provided along interior roadways consisting of
deciduous trees, having at the time of planting, a minimum caliper
of two to 2 1/2 inches, as measured at four to 4 1/2 feet above the
ground. Placement of trees in relation to street curbing, sidewalks,
and/or right-of-way lines shall be subject to the review of the
Township Engineer and approval by the Planning Board at the time
of an application.
K. Buffers. Along the length of any property line adjacent to a single-family
residential property, a landscaped buffer of a minimum of 50 feet in
width shall be provided, consisting of massed evergreen trees and/or
shrubs having a minimum height of six feet at the time of planting. Such
§ 268-39.2 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-39.2
265:869
buffer areas may also be required upon site plan review to have walls
and/or fences to ensure year-round visual screening. No building or
other structure, parking area, driveway or storage area shall encroach
upon such buffer area, with the exception of an emergency access road,
utility easement, or unpaved pedestrian trail.
L. Utilities. All electric and telephone utilities for the PRC shall be placed
underground.
M. Recycling. There shall be included in any new multifamily housing
development an indoor or outdoor recycling area for the collection and
storage of residentially generated recyclable materials.
(1) The recycling area shall be of sufficient size to accommodate bins
or containers of adequate size and number consistent with
anticipated usage and current collection methods in the area in
which the project is located.
(2) The recycling area shall be conveniently located for residential
disposition of source separated recyclable materials, preferably
near, but clearly separated from, a refuse dumpster. No recycling
area shall be located within a front yard nor shall be situated less
than five feet from any side or rear yard property line.
(3) The recycling area shall be well lit, and shall be safely and easily
accessible to recycling vehicles and personnel.
(4) Recycling bins shall be provided with lids or covers, and the
recycling area shall be screened from view by means of a maximum
seven-foot high fence or wall enclosure, and shall be landscaped as
required by the Board.
N. Solid waste collection and storage areas shall be similarly provided for
the facility, and may be indoors or outdoors. Outdoor areas shall be
screened from view by a maximum seven-foot high fence or wall
enclosure compatible with the architectural style of the building, and
landscaped as required by the reviewing board.
O. The standards set forth in this section are in addition to all other
standards made applicable to the particular development being
proposed by the provisions of this chapter, and no application for
approval of a planned residential community development shall be
approved unless all such other standards, including but not limited to
those relating to planned developments, site plan or subdivision
approval, and to the district in which the proposed development will be
located, have been met or, where permitted, waived pursuant to the
applicable provisions of this chapter.
§ 268-39.2 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-39.2
265:870
ARTICLE X
Site Plan Approval
§ 268-40. When required.
A site plan shall be required for any excavation, soil moving, or paving, and
for any change or intensification of the use of any building, structure, or
land, and for demolition, construction, alteration, relocation, enlargement,
or reconstruction of any structure or improvement on any lot in any district
in the Township, except as provided herein. No permit shall be issued
for any such work unless approved by the Township Planning Board in
accordance with a site plan that complies with all the applicable
requirements of this article and as set forth in this chapter.
§ 268-41. Site plan approval procedure.
A. Exceptions.
(1) Detached residential dwellings. Subdivision or individual lot
applications for detached one- and two-dwelling-unit buildings
shall be exempt from site plan review and the requirements of this
article.
(2) Maintenance. Maintenance and repair of existing systems or
improvements are specifically exempt from site plan review and the
requirements of this article.
B. Site plan waiver. The Planning Board at its discretion, may grant a
waiver of site plan approval where the proposed improvement or
change in use does not increase the demand for parking, impact the
existing circulation features, increase stormwater runoff, intensify site
lighting, is not in violation of any ordinance provisions, and does not
pose an increased risk to the public health, safety, morals, or general
welfare. Improvements eligible for site plan waivers include but are not
limited to facade changes, freestanding signs, and alterations that do
not increase the square footage or height of the existing building.
C. Application for site plan waiver. To apply for a waiver of site plan
review, the applicant shall submit sufficient information to the Planning
Board so as to facilitate its decision. The information shall include, but
not necessarily be limited to, a survey or other suitable map, the date of
and copies of any prior site plan approval affecting the property, a
description of the proposed improvement or change in use, and a
statement as to why no site plan review is necessary.
A. All site plan applications shall be filed with the Planning Board, or if the
Board so designates, the Administrative Officer, for determination of
administrative completeness pursuant to the duly adopted checklist.
The Planning Board, or such designee, shall also determine whether the
application is to be classified as a major or minor site plan.
§ 268-40 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-41
265:871
§ 268-41.1. Minor site plan approval procedure.
B. The Board, or its designee, shall classify all site plans as either major or
minor according to the following criteria. If determined to be a minor
site plan, public notice and public hearing shall not be required.
Approval of a minor site plan shall be deemed final approval, and such
approval may, at the discretion of the Board, be conditioned pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-l et seq. In order to be classified as a minor site plan, an
application must meet all of the following criteria:
(1) The proposed development does not involve a planned residential
development.
(2) The proposed development does not involve any new street or any
off-tract improvement which is to be prorated pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-l et seq.
(3) No more than 2,000 square feet of land will be disturbed.
(4) The floor area of any proposed addition to a structure will not
exceed 20% of the floor area of the existing structure.
(5) The proposed development will not alter the site's vehicular
ingress, egress, or traffic circulation pattern.
(6) The proposed improvements do not require changes to exterior
light fixtures that will substantively alter the intensity or
configuration of the site lighting pattern.
A. The Planning Board, or if the Board so designates, the Administrative
Officer, shall determine within 45 days of filing of an application,
whether the application is complete and shall notify the developer, in
writing, of any deficiencies within such time. The Planning Board may
waive submission of any required exhibits in appropriate cases and for
specific site plans. Requests for such waiver(s) shall accompany a site
plan application, stating the reasons why such waiver(s) is requested.
B. A complete application shall contain sufficient information so as to
allow the Board to determine whether the requirements for minor site
plan approval have been met. In addition, a complete minor site plan
application shall contain those items required in the checklist.
C. Minor site plan approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days of
the day the application is deemed complete, or within such further time
as may be consented to by the applicant. Any minor site plan
application that includes a request for variance relief shall be acted
upon within 120 days of the day it is deemed complete, or within such
further time as may be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the
Board to act within this period shall constitute minor site plan approval.
Developer's agreements are not required in conjunction with any minor
site plan approval.
§ 268-41 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-41.1
265:872
§ 268-41.2. Preliminary site plan approval procedure.
§ 268-41.3. Final site plan approval procedure.
D. The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions upon which
minor site plan approval was granted, whether conditional or
otherwise, shall not be changed for a period of two years after the date
of minor site plan approval.
A. Plans for site plan approval shall first be filed with the Planning and
Zoning Coordinator. The Planning and Zoning Coordinator shall within
five days after receipt of such plans or following any additional length of
time as agreed to by the applicant, file said site plans with the Planning
Board. For review and recommendation in seeking a variance pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d and § 38-16A(4) of the Code of the Township of
Cedar Grove, the Zoning Board of Adjustment may entertain and grant
site plan applications and approvals to the same extent and subject to
the same restrictions as the Planning Board.
B. The site plan and any engineering documents to be submitted shall be
required in tentative form for discussion purposes for preliminary
approval. If any architectural plans are required to be submitted for site
plan approval, the preliminary plans and elevations shall be sufficient.
If an application for development is found to be incomplete, the
developer shall be notified thereof within 45 days of the submission of
such applications, or it shall be deemed to be properly submitted.
C. For a site plan for 10 acres of land or less, the Planning Board shall
grant or deny preliminary approval within 45 days of the date the
application is deemed complete, or within such further time as may be
consented to by the developer. For a site plan of more than 10 acres, the
Planning Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 95 days
of the date the application is deemed complete, or within such further
time as may be consented to by the developer. Otherwise the Planning
Board shall be deemed to have granted preliminary approval of the site
plan.
D. If the Planning Board requires any substantial amendment in the layout
of improvements proposed by the developer than have been the subject
of a hearing, an amended application for development shall be
submitted and proceeded upon, as in the case of the original application
for development.
E. If all the information and submission requirements of this article have
been submitted and satisfied, the Planning Board shall schedule a
public hearing thereon. Following the public hearing, the Planning
Board shall, by resolution, grant preliminary approval of the site plan,
grant preliminary approval of the site plan with modifications, or
disapprove the site plan and shall notify the applicant of its decision and
the reasons therefor. If the proposed development complies with this
chapter, the Planning Board shall grant preliminary site plan approval.
§ 268-41.1 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-41.3
265:873
§ 268-42. Considerations.
No application for a site plan approval shall be granted unless the Planning
Board shall find that the proposed development will adequately address
each of the following considerations:
A. The Planning Board shall grant final approval if the detailed drawings,
specifications, and estimates of the application for final approval
conform to the standards established for final approval and the
conditions of preliminary approval.
B. Final approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days after the
application is deemed complete, or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant. Failure of the Planning Board to act
within the period prescribed shall constitute final approval and a
certificate of the Administrative Officer as to the failure of the Planning
Board to act shall be issued on request of the applicant, and it shall be
sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence of
approval herein required.
C. Whenever review or approval of the application by the County Planning
Board is required by Section 8 of P.L. 1968, c. 285 (N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.6),
the Municipal Planning Board shall condition any approval that it
grants upon timely receipt of a favorable report on the application by
the County Planning Board or approval by the County Planning Board
by its failure to report thereon within the required time period.
D. Should an applicant desire to make changes to a duly approved site
plan, the procedure as set forth herein above shall be followed.
A. Consistency of the layout or arrangement of the land development with
the requirements of this chapter.
B. Streets in the land development of sufficient width, suitable grade, and
configuration to accommodate prospective traffic, provide access for
fire-fighting and emergency equipment, and provide a convenient
layout consistent with the Official Map and the circulation element of
the Master Plan, if any. No street of a width greater than 50 feet within
the right-of-way lines shall be required unless said street constitutes an
extension of any existing street of the greater width, or already has
been shown on the Master Plan at the greater width, or already has
been shown in greater width on the Official Map.
C. Adequacy of water supply, sewerage facilities, drainage, shade trees,
and other utilities necessary for essential services to residents and
occupants.
D. Adherence to the requirements of Chapter 140, Flood Damage
Prevention, pertinent to lands designated as subject to flooding
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65e to avoid danger to life or property.
§ 268-41.3 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-42
265:874
§ 268-43. Required documents and information.
All site plans and supporting documents informally or formally presented
shall comply with requirements hereinafter set forth and shall contain the
following information and data pursuant to their classification as either a
minor or major site plan.
§ 268-43.1. Required documents and information for minor site
plans.
E. Protection and conservation of soils from erosion by wind or water from
excavation or grading. When the activities proposed include the
movement of soil as defined in Chapter 226, Soil Removal, the applicant
shall provide all information required pursuant to Chapter 226, and
shall demonstrate compliance with the standards and requirements set
forth therein.
F. Compliance with Township standards and specifications governing the
design of site improvements including grading, improvement and
construction of streets, drives, and walkways, curbs, gutters,
streetlights, shade trees, fire hydrants, water, drainage and sewerage
facilities, and other improvements as shall be found necessary, and
provisions ensuring that such facilities shall be completed either prior
to or subsequent to final approval of the site plan.
G. Provisions for off-tract water, sewer, drainage, and street improvements
which are necessitated by a land development, subject to the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42.
H. Preservation of existing natural resources on the site.
I. Safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation, parking and
loading.
J. Screening, landscaping, site lighting, signage, and location of
structures.
K. Conformity with provisions and standards of Chapter 146, Article III,
Recycling, applicable municipal and county access management codes,
the State Highway Access Management Act [P.L. 1989, c. 32 (N.J.S.A.
27:7-91)], and public safety regulations concerning stormwater
detention facilities.
L. Inclusion of facilities for collection and storage of source separated
recyclable materials in new multifamily housing developments pursuant
to applicable requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection and the Department of Community Affairs.
A. Eighteen copies of the application form inclusive of a brief description
of the project and the proposed use or uses of the land and buildings,
the site plan checklist, the landscape plan checklist, the environmental
questionnaire, and the required fees.
§ 268-42 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-43.1
265:875
B. Eighteen copies of the site plan of a size in conformity with the
requirements of the New Jersey Map Filing Law, but not exceeding 24
by 36 inches. Plans shall be folded with the title block revealed. All
information appearing shall be legible and the scale of the drawing
shall not be less than one inch equals 50 feet. All boundary distances
shall be in feet and decimals of a foot, and all bearings shall be given to
the nearest 10 seconds. The error of closure shall not exceed one to
10,000.
C. Project title, names and addresses of applicant(s) and owner(s) of
record, North arrow, scale, Tax Map block and lot numbers, name, title,
address and license number of professional(s) who prepared the plan,
plan preparation date and the date(s) of any subsequent revisions, and
signature block for the Chairman and Secretary of the Board and the
Township Engineer.
D. An area map, showing the zone in which the property in question is
located, and the zone district of adjoining properties and all properties
within a two-hundred foot radius of the property in question, including
Tax Map lot and block numbers and owners. Said area map may be
drawn at a scale of one inch equals 400 feet.
E. The entire property in question, even though only a portion of said
property may be involved in the site plan; provided, however, that
where it is physically impossible to show the entire property on the
required sheet, multiple equally sized sheets may be submitted,
together with a key map.
F. The location of all existing watercourses, wooded areas and major
trees, easements, rights-of-way, streets, roads, highways, utilities,
railroads, rivers, buildings, structures, or any other features having an
effect on the use of the subject property whether directly on the tract or
off-tract.
G. The location of existing buildings, whether proposed to remain or be
removed, or partially removed. The outline of buildings to be removed
shall be indicated by a dashed line and those that are to remain shall be
shaded.
H. Lot acreage to the nearest tenth and the location and ground area of
each proposed building, sign, structure or any other land use.
I. The location and design of off-street parking areas and loading areas,
showing the size, number, and configuration of parking spaces, the
traffic circulation plan, and the size and location of bays, aisles, and
barriers, in accordance with standards set forth herein.
J. All means of vehicular access and egress to and from the site onto
public streets, showing size and location of driveways, curb cuts, and
sidewalks.
§ 268-43.1 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-43.1
265:876
§ 268-43.2. Required documents and information for major site
plans.
In addition to those items required for minor site plans above, the following
are to be provided:
K. The location and design of landscaping including planting plan, buffer
areas, and screening devices.
L. All lot lines, setbacks, and yard dimensions, and for applications
including signs, details including the proposed materials, lighting if any,
dimensions, sizes, and setbacks applicable to such signs. [Amended
4-21-2003 by Ord. No. 03-589]
M. A zoning comparison chart listing the standards of the Schedule of
Requirements table for the district in which the property is located and
providing the figures for each standard, as they are proposed within the
site plan application.
N. Existing contours shall be indicated by dashed lines at intervals of two
feet where slopes are less than 5% and at intervals of five feet where
slopes are 5% or more and shall refer to United States Coast and
Geodetic Survey datum where possible, or to assumed datum as
provided and/or approved by the Township Engineer. Where any
changes in contours are proposed, finished grades should be shown as
solid lines.
O. The finished floor elevations of existing structures and all proposed new
structures to be erected on the property. Spot elevations at all building
corners shall also be provided.
P. Preliminary architectural plans for the proposed building addition or
structure, indicating typical floor plans, elevations, height and general
design and architectural styling.
Q. Copies of the application, when same is required, to the Essex County
Planning Board for approval of the site plan.
R. The applicant shall supply certification from the Township Tax Collector
that all property taxes and assessments are paid and current.
S. Such other information or data as may be required by the Planning
Board in order to determine that the details of the site plan are in
accordance with the standards of the ordinances of the Township and
all other general laws.
A. The names of all owners of record of all properties within 200 feet of the
subject parcel(s) as they appear on the Tax List prepared by the
Township Tax Assessor and the block and lot numbers of the properties.
B. A copy of any covenants or deed restrictions that are intended to cover
all or any part of the tract.
§ 268-43.1 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-43.2
265:877
C. A written description of the proposed operations in sufficient detail to
indicate the effects of the operation in producing traffic congestion,
noise, glare, air pollution, fire hazards or safety hazards; in addition, a
description of the proposed number of shifts, if shift-work operation is
contemplated, together with a projection of the maximum number of
employees per shift or, where shift work is not contemplated, a
projection of the proposed hours of operation for the commercial use.
D. A survey prepared by a licensed land surveyor of the State of New
Jersey shall accompany the site plan and shall show the boundaries of
the parcel and the limits of all proposed streets, recreational areas and
other property to be dedicated to public use. The site plan shall further
be accompanied by such other exhibits of an architectural or planning
nature as shall be submitted by the applicant or as shall be required by
the Planning Board pursuant to any ordinance now in existence or any
ordinance hereinafter enacted in the Township.
E. Boundaries of the property, building or setback lines, and lines of
existing streets, lots, reservations, easements, and areas dedicated to
public use.
F. The location of all driveways within 200 feet of the subject property.
G. The proposed location of lighting, direction of illumination and amount
of illumination, expressed in average horizontal footcandles, in
conformance with applicable standards of the Township.
H. Proposed stormwater drainage system, including off-site drainage, in
conformance with the applicable standards of the Township.
I. The location, size, and type of existing natural features, including trees
having a caliper of four inches or more. The location, size, and type of
proposed landscaping improvements, including seeded or sodded
areas, planting areas of trees and shrubs and natural features to be
preserved.
J. A determination of the presence/absence of wetlands on the subject
property, certified by a professional qualified to provide such
determination. In the event wetlands are present on the property, a
delineation of same, if available, or the general location and size as
determined at the time of the application, and proof of submission to
the appropriate state regulatory agency, as applicable, of a request for
letter of interpretation.
K. In the event the application for development entails the moving of 300
cubic yards or more, of soil, the applicant shall provide all information
required for submission of a soil moving permit application, under
Chapter 226 of the Township Code, and such information shall coincide
with that required for a major or a minor soil moving permit, depending
upon the volume of soil moving in question.
§ 268-43.2 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-43.2
265:878
L. In addition to the foregoing requirements, any applicant seeking
approval of a site plan of 10 acres or more shall furnish the following
information:
(1) Existing school, zoning and special district boundaries and the
approximate location of all buildings and the pertinent topography
within a radius of 200 feet of the premises in question. Such
features shall be shown on a separate map or as a key map on a
special detailed map itself.
(2) The location of all existing structures, such as walls, fences,
culverts, bridges, and roadways, with spot elevations of such
structures. The outline of structures to be removed shall be
indicated by a dashed line, and those that are to remain shall be
shaded.
(3) Approximate location of all storm drainage structures and utility
lines, with grades and direction of flow, and, if any existing utility
lines are underground, the estimated location of said lines shall be
shown. The approximate location of hydrant or fire stations within
600 feet of the premises shall be indicated in a written notation on
the maps submitted.
(4) All proposed easements and public and community areas, all
proposed streets, together with profiles including grade of said
streets and cross sections showing width of roadways, location and
width of sidewalks and location and size of utility lines. All
proposed streets, sidewalks and utility lines and on- and off-site
drainage facilities shall be constructed in accordance with the
standards and specifications established by this chapter and/or
such other ordinances of the Township establishing such standards
and specifications.
(5) The location of all proposed waterlines, valves and hydrants and of
all sewer lines or alternative means of water supply or sewage
disposal and treatment.
M. Architectural details to accurately reflect the scale, proportion,
elevations, style and character of proposed buildings and structures.
Information shall include proposed building materials and facade
finishes, roofing plans, fenestration, decorative or accent trim, awnings,
overhangs, porches, and any wall-mounted light fixtures or signs.
[Added 4-21-2003 by Ord. No. 03-589119]
N. Such other information or data as may be required by the Planning
Board in order to determine that the details of the site plan are in
accordance with the standards of the ordinances of the Township and
all other general laws.
119. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection M
as Subsection N.
§ 268-43.2 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-43.3
265:879
§ 268-43.3. Optional documents and information for site plans.
Such parcel mapping data and information as may feasibly be provided
in a digitized format or in a format allowing for conversion to a digitized
format (i.e., state plane coordinates) for integration and manipulation under
Geographic Information Systems (GIS) technology.
§ 268-44. Effect of preliminary approval.
A. Preliminary approval of a site plan pursuant to this article shall, except
as provided in Subsection B of this section, confer upon the applicant
the following rights for a three-year period from the date of the
preliminary approval:
(1) That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be changed, including but not
limited to use requirements; layout and design standards for
streets, curbs and sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions and off-tract
improvements; and any requirements peculiar to site plan approval
pursuant to this article, except that nothing herein shall be
construed to prevent the municipality from modifying by ordinance
such general terms and conditions of preliminary approval as relate
to public health and safety.
(2) That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval, the whole or a section or
sections of the preliminary site plan.
(3) That the applicant may apply for and the Planning Board may grant
extensions on such preliminary approval for an additional period of
at least one year but not to exceed a total extension of two years,
provided that if the design standards have been revised by
ordinance, such revised standards may govern.
B. In the case of a site plan for an area of 50 acres or more, the Planning
Board may grant the rights referred to in Subsection A(1), (2) and (3)
above for such period of time, longer than three years, as shall be
determined by the Planning Board to be reasonable, taking into
consideration the number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor
area permissible under preliminary approval, economic conditions and
the comprehensiveness of the development. The applicant may apply
for thereafter and the Planning Board may thereafter grant an
extension to preliminary approval for such additional period of time as
shall be determined by the Planning Board to be reasonable, taking into
consideration the number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor
area permissible under preliminary approval, the potential number of
dwelling units and nonresidential floor area of the section or sections
awaiting final approval, economic conditions, and the
comprehensiveness of the development, provided that if the design
standards have been revised, such revised standards may govern.
§ 268-43.3 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-45
265:880
§ 268-45. Effect of final approval.
§ 268-46. Additional provisions to be complied with.
To any extent not specifically provided herein, the procedures for site plan
review before the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be
those set forth in Chapter 38, Land Use Procedures, and the Municipal Land
Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 268-47. Installation of public improvements.
For purposes of this section, the term "public improvements" shall include
streets, grading, pavement, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, streetlighting, shade
trees, surveyor's monuments, water mains, culverts, storm sewers, sanitary
sewers, drainage structures, erosion and sedimentation control devices,
and public improvements of open space.
§ 268-47.1. Developer's agreement.
Subsequent to every final approval of a site plan application requiring the
installation, expansion, or modification of any on-tract public improvements,
and prior to any land disturbance or construction on the property which is
the subject of same, the developer shall enter into a developer's agreement
with the Township. Such agreement shall be authorized by the governing
body and shall require installation and maintenance by the developer and
A. The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval first
granted and all other rights conferred upon the developer pursuant to
this article, whether conditionally or otherwise, shall not be changed
for a period of two years after the date of final approval. If the
developer has followed the standards prescribed for final approval, the
Planning Board may extend such period of protection for an extension
of one year but not to exceed three such extensions. Notwithstanding
any other provisions of this chapter, the granting of final approval
terminates the time period of preliminary approval pursuant to this
article.
B. In the case of a site plan for 150 acres or more, the Planning Board may
grant the rights referred to in Subsection A of this section for such
period of time, longer than two years, as shall be determined by the
Planning Board to be reasonable, taking into consideration the number
of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible under final
approval, economic conditions and the comprehensiveness of the
development. The developer may apply for thereafter and the Planning
Board may thereafter grant an extension of final approval for such
additional period of time as shall be determined by the Planning Board
to be reasonable, taking into consideration the number of dwelling
units and nonresidential floor area permissible under final approval, the
number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area remaining to be
developed, economic conditions, and the comprehensiveness of the
development.
§ 268-45 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-47.1
265:881
its successors in interest, of the public improvements, imposing such
limitations upon the development of the site as are necessary to ensure
proper construction of the public improvements, and assuring the
installation of said improvements on or before an agreed date by filing of a
performance guarantee as stipulated herein.
§ 268-47.2. Performance guarantee.
The Township Engineer shall prepare an itemized cost estimate of the
improvements covered by the performance guarantee including the cost to
the Township to undertake and complete such installations, if necessary.
The performance guarantee shall be payable and deposited to the Township
in an amount equal to 100% of the Township Engineer's estimated cost,
and shall be in the form of cash, irrevocable letter of credit, certified
check, or a surety. The Township Engineer's estimate shall be appended
to each performance guarantee posted by the obligor. In the event that
other governmental agencies or public utilities automatically will own the
utilities to be installed or the improvements are covered by a performance
or maintenance guarantee to another governmental agency, no performance
or maintenance guarantee, as the case may be, shall be required by the
Township.
A. At least 10% of the amount of the approved performance guarantee
shall be deposited by the developer in cash with the Township. The
remaining 90% may be in cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or surety
bond. In the event of a default, the 10% required cash deposit may be
applied first to the completion of the required improvements and any
bidding and legal costs associated therewith, and the remaining 90%
portion may thereafter be resorted to, if necessary, for the completion
of the required improvements and any additional bidding and legal
costs associated therewith.
B. An irrevocable letter of credit shall be acceptable if it:
(1) Constitutes an unconditional payment obligation of the issuer
running solely to the Township for an express initial period of time
in the amount prescribed;
(2) Is issued by a banking or savings institution authorized to do so and
doing business in this state;
(3) Is for a period of time of at least one year; and
(4) Permits the municipality to draw upon the letter of credit if the
obligor fails to furnish another letter of credit which complies with
the provisions of this section 30 days or more in advance of the
expiration date of the letter of credit, or such longer period in
advance thereof as is stated in the letter of credit.
C. In the case of surety bonds, the developer shall be the principal and the
bond shall be provided by a surety company operating pursuant to a
valid certificate of authority issued pursuant to N.J.S.A. 17:17-1 et seq.
§ 268-47.1 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-47.2
265:882
§ 268-47.3. Waiver of developer's agreement.
The Township Council shall have the power to waive the requirement for
a developer's agreement, by resolution, in the event that it determines the
matter is of such a nature that an agreement is not necessary for purposes
of enforcement of the decision of the municipal agency and the protection
of the public health, safety or welfare.
§ 268-48. Issuance of certificate of occupancy; security deposit.
The Construction Official may issue certificates of occupancy even though
site work required by the Planning Board under this article remains
incomplete, provided that the applicant for same first deposits with the
Construction Official cash, sufficient in the opinion of the Construction
Official to pay the cost of completion of the required work. When such
cash is deposited, the Construction Official shall obtain from the applicant
a written commitment setting forth the date upon which the applicant shall
have completed the required work and stating that, if the said work is not
then so completed, the Township shall be entitled to complete said work
using the cash deposit to pay for same, returning the unused portion to
the applicant or holding the applicant responsible for any completion costs
in excess of such deposit. On-site inspection fees will be charged for all
commercial and industrial site plan inspections for engineering time in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.
Such bond shall be approved as to form by the Township Attorney and
posted with the Township Clerk.
D. The Township shall issue its receipt, as applicable, for such deposits
and shall cause the same to be deposited in the name of the Township to
be retained as security for completion of all required improvements and
to be returned to the applicant on completion of required work in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:44D-53, or in the event of
a default on the part of the developer, to be used by the Township to pay
the cost and expense of completing all required improvements.
§ 268-47.2 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-48
265:883

ARTICLE XI
Variance Applications
§ 268-49. When required.
No zoning permit shall be granted for the construction, alteration, use,
or change in use of any building, structure, or land where the proposed
construction, alteration, use or change in use would be in violation of any
provision of this chapter unless a variance has been granted to authorize
such deviation by the appropriate reviewing board in accordance with
Chapter 38, Land Use Procedures, and the New Jersey Municipal Land Use
Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.).
§ 268-50. Variance application procedure.
All variance applications shall be filed with the applicable reviewing board,
or if the Board so designates, the Administrative Officer, for determination
of completeness pursuant to the duly adopted checklist. The Board or
its Administrative Officer shall determine within 45 days of filing of an
application, whether the application is complete and shall notify the
applicant in writing of any deficiencies within such time. The Board may
waive submission of any required exhibits in appropriate cases and for
specific variance applications.
§ 268-51. Required documents and information.
All variance applications shall contain the information and data described
in the following checklist. Variance applications which accompany a
subdivision or site plan application shall also include all the information
and data required for submission of the subdivision or site plan application,
pursuant to Chapter 234 or Article X of this chapter, respectively.
A. Eighteen copies of the application form inclusive of a brief description
of the project and the proposed use or uses of the land and buildings,
the landscape plan checklist, the environmental questionnaire, and the
required fees.
B. Eighteen copies of a plot plan providing lot dimensions, property metes
and boundary lines, location of existing and proposed structures,
required yard setback lines, existing and proposed setback distances
for buildings and structures, location of driveway(s), sidewalks, and
parking areas.
C. A zoning comparison chart listing the standards of the Schedule of
Requirements table for the district in which the property is located and
providing the figures for each standard, as they are proposed within the
application.
D. Copies of the application, when same is required, to the Essex County
Planning Board for approval of a subdivision or site plan.
§ 268-49 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-51
265:885
E. Written certification from the Township Tax Collector that all property
taxes and assessments are paid and current.
F. The names of all owners of record of all properties within 200 feet of the
subject parcel(s) as they appear on the Certified Tax List prepared by
the Township Tax Assessor and the block and lot numbers of the
properties.
G. Preliminary architectural plans for any proposed building, building
addition, or structure, indicating typical floor plans, elevations, height
and general design and architectural styling.
H. A copy of any covenants or deed restrictions that are intended to cover
all or any part of the tract.
I. Such other information or data as may be required by the Board in
order to render a decision in the matter.
J. A list of any checklist items for which waivers are specifically requested
and a narrative paragraph explaining why the applicant is entitled to
such waivers.
§ 268-51 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-51
265:886
ARTICLE XII
Administration and Enforcement
§ 268-52. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the
Zoning Officer of the Township. Prior to any change in the use of a structure
or land, a zoning permit shall be obtained in order to assure compliance
with this chapter. In no case shall a permit be granted for the construction
or alteration of any building or use of land where the proposed construction,
alteration or use would be in violation of any provision of this chapter. It
shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer and any duly authorized assistants
to cause any building lands, plans or premises to be inspected or examined
and to order in writing the remedying of any conditions found to exist in
violation of any provision of this chapter. The Zoning Officer shall have the
right to enter any building or premises during business hours in order to
carry out such duties.
§ 268-53. Certificates and permits.
A. Filing plans. All applications for building permits shall be made in the
manner prescribed in the Building Code.120
B. Records. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to keep a record of all
applications for permits and a record of all permits issued, with a
notation of all special conditions involved. The Zoning Officer shall file
and safely keep copies of all plans submitted and the same shall form a
part of the records of the zoning office. The Zoning Officer shall prepare
a report for the governing body periodically, at intervals of not greater
than three months, summarizing for the period since the last previous
report, all building permits and certificates issued by the zoning office
and all complaints of violations and the action taken consequent
thereon.
C. Zoning. Zoning permits shall hereafter be secured from the Zoning
Officer prior to construction, erection or alteration of any structure or
part of a structure or use of a structure or land.
A. Certificates of occupancy. It shall be unlawful to use or permit the use of
or occupy any building or premises or part thereof hereafter created,
located, erected changed, converted or enlarged, wholly or partly, until
a certificate of occupancy has been issued for that premises. The
certificate shall certify that the structure or use complies with the
provisions of this chapter.
B. Revocation. On the serving of notice of any violation of any of the
provisions or requirements with respect to any building or use thereof
or of land, as specified in this chapter, the certificate of occupancy for
such use shall thereupon, without further action, be null and void. A
120. Editor's Note: See Ch. 119, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 268-52 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-53
265:887
§ 268-53.1. Conditions for permit approval.
As a condition for any approval required pursuant to this chapter, property
taxes or assessments for local improvements which are due or delinquent
on the property for which any application is made shall be paid.
new certificate of occupancy shall be required for any further use of
such building or land.
C. Filing. A duplicate copy of the certificate of occupancy shall be filed
with the Tax Assessor. A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be
kept in the office of the Construction Official. Copies shall be furnished,
on request, to the Planning Board or to any person having a proprietary
or tenancy interest in the building or land affected.
D. Temporary use permits. It is recognized that it may be in accordance
with the purposes of this chapter to permit temporary activities for a
limited period of time, which uses may be prohibited by other
provisions of this chapter. If such uses are of such nature and are so
located that at the time of petition they will in no way exert a
detrimental effect upon the use of land and will contribute materially to
the welfare of the Township, particularly in a state of emergency, under
conditions peculiar to the time and place involved, then the Zoning
Board may, subject to all regulations for the issuance of special permits
elsewhere specified, issue a permit for a period not to exceed six
months. Such period may be extended not more than once for an
additional period of six months.
§ 268-53 CEDAR GROVE CODE § 268-53.1
265:888
ARTICLE XIII
Amendments
§ 268-54. Amendments authorized.
The regulations, limitations and restrictions of this chapter, including the
Zoning Map, may be amended, changed, modified or repealed by the
governing body in accordance with Sections 34 and 35, Chapter 55, Title
40, of the statutes and amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 268-55. Review by Planning Board.
Prior to the hearing on adoption of a Zoning Ordinance, or any amendment
thereto, the governing body shall refer any such proposed ordinance or
amendment to the Planning Board pursuant to Chapter 38, Land Use
Procedures, § 38-8A(7).
§ 268-54 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-55
265:889

ARTICLE XIV
Penalties; Repealer; When Effective
§ 268-56. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-23-2006 by Ord.
No. 06-656]
For any and every violation of the provisions of this chapter, the owner,
contractor or other person or persons interested as lessee, tenant or
otherwise, in any building or premises where such violation has been
committed or shall exist, and who refuses to abate said violation within five
days after written notice has been served upon him or her by registered
mail or by personal service, shall for each and every violation be subject to
a fine of not more than $2,000 or 90 days' imprisonment, or both, at the
discretion of the court or judicial officer before whom a conviction may be
had; and each and every day that such violation continues after such notice
shall be considered a separate and specific violation of this chapter.
§ 268-57. Repealer; effect.
All ordinances or parts of any ordinance inconsistent with the provisions
of this chapter are hereby repealed. The adoption of this chapter, however,
shall not abate or prevent the continuance of any proceedings instituted
under the ordinance of which this chapter is a revision, nor abate or
prevent any proceedings or prosecution for offenses heretofore committed
in violation of the ordinance known as the "Zoning Ordinance of Township
of Cedar Grove" of which this chapter is a revision. Nothing herein shall
be deemed to change the status of nonconforming uses heretofore created
by virtue of the prior Zoning Ordinance or amendments thereof, it being
the intent that this revision shall supersede said ordinance or amendments
thereof, but that said ordinance and amendments thereof, and this revision
shall constitute a continuing body of law. The intent expressed hereby shall
apply not only to this article, but to the entire chapter as well.
§ 268-58. When effective; completion of work in progress.
This chapter shall take effect upon its final passage and publication as
provided by law, but any building or structure, the erection of which has
been authorized by a permit issued by the Construction Official prior to
the passage of this chapter, shall be completed within one year from the
date of the passage of this chapter in accordance with the permit and the
requirements of law and ordinance in force at the time when such permit
was granted and may be used for the purpose designated in the plans and
in the permit, unless said permit shall contain an earlier completion date.
§ 268-56 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § 268-58
265:891
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
02-587 10-21-2002 Personnel amendment Ch. 52
03-589 4-21-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 268
03-591 4-21-2003 Alarm systems
amendment
Ch. 81
03-592 4-21-2003 Personnel amendment Ch. 52
03-593 4-21-2003 Sale and storage of
Christmas trees
amendment
Ch. 116
03-598 9-8-2003 Towing amendment Ch. 244
03-600 10-20-2003 Littering amendment Ch. 168
03-601 10-20-2003 Sewers amendment;
water amendment
Chs. 217; 259
03-604 12-1-2003 Property maintenance:
multifamily, commercial
and industrial properties
amendment
Ch. 197, Art. I
04-606 3-8-2004 Open Space Trust Fund
amendment
Ch. 248
04-607 3-15-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 251
04-608 3-15-2004 Open Space Trust Fund
amendment
Ch. 248
04-609 5-3-2004 Dumpsters amendment Ch. 197, Art. II
04-610 6-21-2004 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 38
04-614 10-18-2004 Sewers amendment;
water amendment
Chs. 217; 259
04-621 12-6-2004 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 83
04-622 12-6-2004 Open Space Trust Fund
amendment
Ch. 248
05-626 2-14-2005 Towing amendment Ch. 244
§ 268-58 CEDAR GROVE CODE § DL-1
265:892
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
05-627 3-21-2005 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
05-629 4-25-2005 Smoking in school
buildings
Ch. 224, Art. I
05-630 6-20-2005 Personnel amendment Ch. 52
05-631 6-20-2005 Towing amendment Ch. 244
05-632 9-2-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 251
05-637 12-5-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 251
06-638 3-6-2006 Garage sales Ch. 188, Art. VII
06-639 3-6-2006 Places of amusement
amendment
Ch. 88
06-641 4-17-2006 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 38
06-642 3-20-2006 Regional Flood Control
Board
Repealed by Ord.
No. 17-818
06-643 3-20-2006 Professional services
contracts
Ch. 58
06-644 4-3-2006 Noise amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 09-698
06-646 5-15-2006 Stormwater
management
Ch. 228
06-647 5-15-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 268
06-650 8-7-2006 Sewers amendment;
water amendment
Chs. 217; 259
06-651 9-11-2006 Animals amendment Ch. 91
06-652 9-11-2006 Littering amendment Ch. 168
06-653 10-2-2006 Stormwater
management
amendment
Ch. 228
§ DL-1 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § DL-1
265:893
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
06-656 10-23-2006 Penalties amendment Chs. 1, Arts. II
and III; 83; 86;
88; 91; 100, Art.
III; 107; 114;
116; 117; 122;
127; 135; 137,
Art. II; 140; 142,
Art. V; 146, Art.
IV; 148; 150; 153;
158; 161; 165;
168; 176; 179;
181; 184; 186;
188, Art. VI; 190;
194; 197, Arts. I
and II; 198; 201;
205; 208; 213;
217; 221; 226;
230, Arts. I, II, IV,
V and VI; 234;
237; 239; 242;
246; 251; 254;
259; 262; 265;
268
06-657 11-6-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 251
06-663 12-18-2006 Extension of Open
Space Trust Fund
Superseded by
Ord. No. 08-693
06-664 12-18-2006 Trees amendment Ch. 246
07-665 2-5-2007 Animals amendment Ch. 91
07-666 2-5-2007 Sewers amendment Ch. 217
07-668 3-5-2007 Fire prevention: rapid
entry system
Ch. 137, Art. III
07-669 3-5-2007 Trees amendment Ch. 246
07-672 5-21-2007 Flood damage
prevention amendment
Ch. 140
07-674 6-4-2007 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 55
07-677 6-4-2007 Fire prevention: fire
zones on private
property amendment
Ch. 137, Art. II
07-678 6-4-2007 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 38
§ DL-1 CEDAR GROVE CODE § DL-1
265:894
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
07-682 8-6-2007 Sewers amendment;
water amendment
Chs. 217; 259
08-685 3-17-2008 Property maintenance:
storage containers
Ch. 197, Art. III
08-690 9-8-2008 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 102
08-693 12-15-2008 Extension of Open
Space Trust Fund
Ch. 248 (footnote
only)
09-694 3-9-2009 Garage sales
amendment
Ch. 188, Art. II
09-698 5-18-2009 Noise Ch. 176
09-699 8-3-2009 Noise amendment Ch. 176
09-700 10-19-2009 Charitable clothing bins Superseded by
Ord. No. 10-717
10-704 1-25-2010 Open Space Trust Fund
amendment
Ch. 248
10-712 9-20-2010 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 55
10-713 11-15-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 251
10-715 11-15-2010 Uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 119
10-717 12-20-2010 Charitable clothing bins Ch. 118
10-718 12-20-2010 Food-handling
establishments: health
standards and licensing
amendment
Ch. 142, Art. I
10-719 1-10-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 268
10-721 12-20-2010 Open Space Trust Fund
amendment
Ch. 248
11-722 3-21-2011 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 55
11-723 3-21-2011 Rental property:
registration and
licensing; quality-of-life
violations
Ch. 208, Art. II
11-729 7-18-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 268
11-731 9-26-2011 Massage businesses Ch. 169
§ DL-1 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § DL-1
265:895
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
11-732 10-3-2011 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 55
11-733 10-17-2011 Body art establishments Ch. 99
12-738 4-2-2012 Sewers amendment;
water amendment
Chs. 217; 259
12-742 5-7-2012 Background checks:
recreation employees
and volunteers
Ch. 95, Art. I
12-743 6-18-2012 Affordable housing Ch. 80
12-745 7-16-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 251
13-753 2-4-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 251
13-760 10-7-2013 Mobile retail food
establishments
amendment
Ch. 142, Art. V
13-761 10-21-2013 Sewers amendment;
water amendment
Chs. 217; 259
13-762 12-16-2013 Mobile retail food
establishments
amendment
Ch. 142, Art. V
13-764 12-16-2013 Peace and good order:
loitering amendment
Ch. 188, Art. III
14-766 3-17-2014 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 82
14-769 4-10-2014 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 55
14-770 5-5-2014 Animals amendment Ch. 91
14-771 5-5-2014 Outdoor application of
fertilizer
Ch. 183
14-772 5-5-2014 Private storm drain inlet
retrofitting
Ch. 196
14-777 6-16-2014 Animals amendment Ch. 91
15-787 11-2-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 268
16-791 3-21-2016 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 55
16-799 8-8-2016 Garbage, rubbish and
refuse: recycling
amendment
Ch. 146, Art. III
§ DL-1 CEDAR GROVE CODE § DL-1
265:896
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
16-800 11-7-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 251
16-801 12-5-2016 Residential property
maintenance
amendment
Ch. 198
17-803 2-6-2017 Downtown Advisory
Committee
Ch. 21
17-804 2-6-2017 Smoking on public
property
Ch. 224, Art. II
17-805 3-20-2017 Length of service
awards programs:
Volunteer Fire
Department
amendment; Ambulance
and Rescue Squad
amendment
Ch. 39, Art. I; Ch.
39, Art. II
17-812 10-16-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 251
17-813 6-26-2017 Cigarettes and ecigarettes
Ch. 117
17-814 8-14-2017 Noise amendment Ch. 176
17-817 10-16-2017 Sewer amendment;
water amendment
Ch. 217; Ch. 259
17-818 11-6-2017 Regional Flood Control
Board repealer
Ch. 29, reference
only
17-820 12-18-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 251
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
18-824 5-7-2018 Recreation Areas,
Use of Amendment
Ch. 205 13
18-829 9-17-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 268 13
18-830 9-17-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 268 13
18-831 9-10-2018 Peddling and
Soliciting
Amendment
Ch. 190 13
18-832 9-10-2018 Parental Supervision
of Minors
Amendment
Ch. 186 13
§ DL-1 WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES § DL-1
265:897
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
18-833 12-3-2018 Rental Property:
Rent Control
Amendment
Ch. 208,
Art. I
13
18-834 12-3-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 251 13
19-838 3-4-2019 Sewers Amendment;
Water Amendment
Ch. 217; Ch.
259
13
19-839 4-1-2019 Affordable Housing
Amendment
Ch. 80 13
19-846 8-12-2019 Peddling and
Soliciting
Amendment
Ch. 190 13
19-847 10-7-2019 Brush, Grass and
Weeds: Removal
from Private
Property
Amendment
Ch. 100,
Art. II
13
19-848 10-7-2019 Property
Maintenance:
Storage Containers
Amendment
Ch. 197,
Art. III
13
§ DL-1 CEDAR GROVE CODE § DL-1
265:898