Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 8-15-1994 as Ord. No. 1058]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Borough of Collingswood
of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Mayor and Council of
the Borough of Collingswood, as revised, codified and consolidated into
chapters and sections by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of
Chapters 1 through 301, together with an Appendix, are hereby approved,
adopted, ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Borough of
Collingswood," hereinafter known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force. Specifically superseded by this ordinance is the 1971
Code of the Borough of Collingswood, adopted August 16, 1971 by
Ordinance No. 662.
§ 1-3. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Borough Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the public
until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance shall
be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the Borough of
Collingswood by impressing thereon the Seal of the borough, as provided by
law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk of
the borough, to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Borough of Collingswood"
shall be understood and intended to include such additions and
amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the
Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:3
§ 1-6. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Borough of Collingswood, pursuant to law, shall cause to
be published, in the manner required, a copy of this Adopting Ordinance
in a newspaper of general circulation in the borough. Sufficient copies
of the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection
by the public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
publication of this Adopting Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of
the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered
to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk or someone authorized and directed by
the Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the
Code required to be filed in his or her office for the use of the public. All
changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-8. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code book containing the Code may be purchased from the
Clerk upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the Mayor
and Council, which may also arrange, by resolution, for procedures for the
periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-9. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Borough
of Collingswood to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section
or any part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to one (1)
or more of the following: a fine of not more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.), imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days or a period of
community service not exceeding ninety (90) days, in the discretion of the
Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-10. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-6 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 1-11
1:4
§ 1-11. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-12. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
Adopting Ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-13. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-12 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to January 24, 1994.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
the borough's indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges or the approval
of the municipal budget.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:5
§ 1-14. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
L. Any ordinance adopting or amending the Zoning Map.
M. All legislation concerning vehicles and traffic, including but not limited
to Chapter 95, Vehicles and Traffic, of the 1971 Code, as amended.
N. Flood damage prevention legislation [Ordinance No. 747 (July 17,
1978), amended by Ordinance No. 889 (April 6, 1987)].
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one (1) or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the Mayor and Council that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed
had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the following changes, amendments or revisions are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance
(Chapter and section number references are to the ordinances as they
have been renumbered and appear in the Code).1
1. Editor's Note: Pursuant to § 1-14B, the following sections, Articles and chapter are
amended or added: §§ 23-3, 35-3, 35-4, 45-1, 45-2, 45-13, 45-20, 63-1, 69-1, 69-3A(1),
89-4, 89-6, 93-5, 97-15, 101-1, 101-3, 101-4, 105-1, 105-4, 105-9D, 105-10, 105-15,
105-16, 105-18, 105-20, 105-25, 105-26, 105-27, 105-28, 105-29, 113-2, 113-4, 113-7,
117-2, 117-4, 117-5, 117-11, 123-10, 141-7C(1), 141-12, 141-27A, 141-64B(14)(a),
141-64F(1), 141-64H, 141-70B, 149-4, 155-3, 155-5, 173-12B, 173-13, 173-14, 189-4,
197-14, 201-7, 207-6, 207-9A, B and C, 207-13, 211-4, 217-10, 217-11, 217-17, 223-7,
223-18, 233-5, 237-3, 241-2, 247-12, 255-6, 261-5, 261-7, 261-10, 261-12, 261-16, 265-15,
265-18, 265-19, 265-20, 265-22, 265-24, 265-25, 265-27, 265-28, 265-29, 265-41,
269-2B(4), 269-5, 269-8, 269-9, 269-10, 273-4, 277-16, 285-9, 289-17, 301-3, 301-6B and
301-15, Chs. 29, 51, Art. I of Ch. 57, Art. I of Ch. 197, and Arts. I and III of Ch. 265. The
following former sections were deleted: §§ 52-19, 72-10 and 75-1 through 75-29 of the
1971 Code; § 51-53P of Ord. No. 961; and Sec. VII of Ord. No. 922. Furthermore, all
references to the "Building Inspector" are amended to read "Code Enforcement Officer";
all references to the "Superintendent of Highways" are amended to read "Superintendent
of Public Words"; all references to the "Department of Streets" are amended to read
"Department of Public Works"; all references to the "Commissioner of Streets" are
amended to read "Commissioner of Public Works"; and all references to the "Historic
District" are amended to read "Historic Preservation Commission." A complete description
of all the changes is on file in the Borough Clerk's office.
§ 1-13 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 1-14
1:6
ARTICLE II
Ordinances Adopted During Codification
[During the process of codification, certain complete new
ordinances were approved by the Board of Commissioners for
inclusion in the Code of the Borough of Collingswood. Such new
ordinances are noted in the histories of individual chapters as
"Adopted ... during codification; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II." In accordance with recognized codification procedures, these
new ordinances will be adopted separately and are presently
proposed before the Board of Commissioners of the Borough of
Collingswood for that purpose. Upon final adoption of such
ordinances, a complete enumeration of all chapters and Articles in
the Code included in such ordinances will be printed in this Article
along with specific dates of adoption.]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:7
Chapter 7
CLAIMS PROCEDURE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire insurance claims — See Ch. 181, Art. I.
§ 7-1. Submission of claim; certification.
Any person claiming payment from the Borough of Collingswood shall first
submit a detailed statement of the items or demand necessitating such
claim to the responsible executive agency, specifying particularly how the
bill or demand is made up and a certification of the party claiming payment
that it is correct. No bill, claim or demand shall be considered for payment
unless the voucher includes a certification from a designated borough
employee having personal knowledge of the facts that the goods have been
received by or the services rendered to the Borough of Collingswood and
that those services or goods are consistent with an existing contract or
purchase order. The Treasurer shall have the duty to audit, warrant and
make recommendations on all claims and bills.
§ 7-2. Duties of Clerk.
The bill or claim, duly certified, shall be presented to the Municipal Clerk
for inclusion in the proceedings of the next immediate formal meeting of the
Board of Commissioners, and it shall be the duty of the Clerk to examine
all bills or claims submitted for payment in order to ascertain if proper
administrative procedures have been followed. All claims or bills to be
considered by the Board of Commissioners shall be listed systematically and
without preference.
§ 7-3. Consideration of claims by Board of Commissioners; approval
or disapproval.
Claims shall be considered by the Board of Commissioners which shall
approve the same, except that it may reject any claim presented to it,
stating the reason for such rejection. Any disapproved claim shall be
referred back to the Municipal Clerk with such instructions as the Board of
Commissioners may give at the time of disapproval.
§ 7-4. Record of claims and formal action; availability of records.
It shall be the duty of the Municipal Clerk to record all claims in the
official minutes or through an appropriate claims register, indicating that
the Board of Commissioners has, by formal action, approved the same, with
appropriate records as to any claims disapproved or rejected. All records
pertaining to approved or disapproved bills or claims shall be available for
public inspection.
§ 1-14 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 7-5
7:8
§ 7-5. Payment procedure.
After the Clerk has certified that the claims have been approved, he shall
turn the same over to the Treasurer, who shall forthwith prepare the
necessary checks for the payment thereof, which said checks shall be signed
by the Treasurer. After preparing checks for the payment of claims, he shall
record them in proper books of account and thereafter mail the checks to
the claimants.
Chapter 15
COURT, MUNICIPAL
§ 7-5 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 7-5
15:9

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 8-16-1971 by Ord. No. 662 as Ch. 17 of the 1971 Code]
§ 15-1. Court established.
A Municipal Court is hereby established in the Borough of Collingswood,
County of Camden and State of New Jersey, as provided by Chapter 264 of
the Laws of 1948 and the amendments thereto and supplements thereof.2
§ 15-2. Powers and duties.
Said Court shall have all of the powers, duties, jurisdiction and limitations
conferred and provided by any law of the State of New Jersey or any rule or
rules of the Supreme Court.
§ 15-3. Salary of Judge.
The Judge appointed pursuant to law shall be paid such salary as provided
for in the current Salary Ordinance of this Borough, and the same shall
continue until increased or decreased by any future annual salary
ordinance.3
2. Editor's Note: Chapter 264 of the Laws of 1948 was repealed by Chapter 293 of the Laws
of 1993. See now N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1.
3. Editor's Note: The current Salary Ordinance is on file at the Borough offices where it is
available for inspection.
§ 15-1 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 15-3
15:11

ARTICLE II
Public Defender
[Adopted 3-7-1994 by Ord. No. 1047]
§ 15-4. Office established.
The office of Public Defender is hereby established.
§ 15-5. Determination of indigence; representation.
The Judge of the Municipal Court of the Borough of Collingswood is
authorized to make decisions as to which defendants are indigent, and, after
a determination is made, the Public Defender shall represent the defendant.
§ 15-6. Application fee; waiver. [Amended 4-6-1998 by Ord. No.
1147]
The Municipal Court Administrator shall charge a fee of $200 per
application for a Public Defender. The fee, or a part thereof, may be waived
upon a proper showing of absolute indigency without an ability to pay
the application fee. The Judge of the Municipal Court in the Borough of
Collingswood shall make the determination on the ability to pay the fee, or
a part thereof, and the determination of indigency.
§ 15-7. Use of fee moneys.
The application fee shall be used to help defray the cost of hiring a Public
Defender and in the administrative costs of the Municipal Court of the
Borough of Collingswood.
§ 15-4 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 15-7
15:13

ARTICLE III
Joint Municipal Court
[Adopted 1-8-2007 by Ord. No. 1421]
§ 15-8. Authority to enter into agreement.
The Borough of Collingswood shall be authorized to negotiate and enter
into an agreement with the Borough of Woodlynne to establish a single joint
municipal court to be known as "The Municipal Court of the Borough of
Collingswood" and to provide for its administration.
§ 15-8 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 15-8
15:15
Chapter 23
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Air pollution — See Ch. 89.
Development regulations — See Ch. 141.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 167.
Parks — See Ch. 217.
§ 23-1. Commission established; purpose.
There is hereby established an Environmental Commission for the
protection, development and use of natural resources, including water
resources, located within the Borough of Collingswood.
§ 23-2. Membership; compensation; appointment.
The Environmental Commission shall consist of seven (7) members, to serve
without compensation, appointed as provided in N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1.
§ 23-3. Powers and duties.4
The Environmental Commission shall have the powers and duties set forth
in N.J.S.A. 40:56A-2 to 40:56A-6.
Chapter 29
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 57.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 163.
Fire insurance claims — See Ch. 181, Art. I.
§ 29-1. Creation.
There is hereby created and established a combination paid and volunteer
fire department for the Borough of Collingswood which shall consist of
such members, officers and personnel as the governing body shall deem
necessary for the effective government of the department. The governing
body is the appropriate authority to exercise legislative authority to:
A. Provide for the maintenance, regulation and control of the Fire
Department;
4. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 15-8 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 29-1
23:16
§ 29-2. Fire Chief.
B. Adopt and promulgate rules and regulations for the government of the
Fire Department and for the discipline of the Fire Department
members, officers and personnel;
C. Determine the terms of office of the members, officers and personnel,
fix their compensation, and prescribe their powers, functions and
duties, all as the governing body shall deem necessary for the effective
government of the Fire Department;
D. Authorize the following volunteer fire company to comprise the
firefighting force in conjunction and under the authority of the
appointed Borough Fire Chief and full-time firefighting staff:
(1) Collingswood Fire Company No. 1.
E. There shall be appointed, by resolution of the Borough Commission,
paid firefighters who shall be full-time and part-time employees of the
combination paid and volunteer Fire Department of the Borough of
Collingswood. Said appointees shall be hired in conformance with
applicable local, state and federal regulations and laws.
A. The Borough Commission shall appoint an individual to act as the Chief
of Department of the combination paid and volunteer Fire Department
of the Borough of Collingswood who shall have direct authority over all
paid and volunteer officers and members of the Department.
B. The Chief of the Department shall receive such compensation or
stipend for services as shall be provided for by salary ordinance of the
Borough of Collingswood.
C. The qualifications for holding the office of Chief of Department for the
Borough Fire Department shall be as follows:
(1) Minimum of five years of career service in the Collingswood Fire
Department.
(2) New Jersey State Firefighter I certification.
(3) New Jersey State IMS Level 3 certification.
(4) Meet all current local, state and federal requirements to hold the
position of Fire Chief.
D. The tenure of the Chief of the Department shall be governed by the
statutes and regulations of the State of New Jersey, and the Chief of the
Department shall be responsible for reporting directly to the Director of
Public Safety with regard to all activities of the Borough's Fire
Department. In the event of a vacancy in the office of Chief of the
Department, the Captain of the Fire Department shall assume all duties
and responsibilities of that office.
§ 29-1 ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION § 29-2.1
23:17
§ 29-2.1. Duties and powers of Fire Chief.
§ 29-3. Appointments to Department.
A. Administer and enforce the rules and regulations and special
emergency directives for the disposition and discipline of the Fire
Department and the members, officers and personnel;
B. Have, exercise and discharge functions, powers and duties of the Fire
Department;
C. Prescribe the duties and assignments of all members, officers and
personnel;
D. Delegate such authority as deemed necessary for the efficient operation
of the Fire Department to be exercised under the Fire Chief's direction
and supervision;
E. Make a mandatory callback of paid fire department personnel in the
event of an emergency, declaration of a state of emergency, potential
emergency or natural disaster.
A. No person shall become a member of the Collingswood Fire
Department unless he or she shall be at least 18 years of age and
possess a high school diploma or equivalency certificate and be a
citizen of the United States. Such person shall be physically fit to
perform the duties of a firefighter, such fitness to be evidenced by a
certificate to that effect from a physician duly licensed to practice in the
State of New Jersey.
(1) All volunteer applicants shall live either within the Borough of
Collingswood or within its first alarm district and be approved by
municipal resolution after the following process:
(a) Submit application to Collingswood Fire Company No. 1;
(b) Interview and approval of membership committee;
(c) Pass a criminal history check;
(d) Final approval by Chief of Department and Director of Public
Safety.
(2) All paid applicants shall submit an application and pass the hiring
process and meet the minimum requirements that will be
designated by the Chief of Department and/or the policy directives
of the Department.
(3) Junior firefighter applicants will be allowed to join the Department
between the ages of 14 and 18 years of age. They must adhere to
the requirements of the State of New Jersey and Collingswood Fire
Department Policy Directives.
§ 29-2.1 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 29-4
23:18
§ 29-4. Composition of Fire Department.
§ 29-4.1. Powers and duties of Fire Department.
A. The paid Fire Department may consist of the following ranks at the
discretion of the Director of Public Safety. These appointments will be
made by the Director of Public Safety at recommendation from the
Chief of Department. They must meet all requirements to hold such
positions by the State of New Jersey and federal regulations and the
Fire Department Operating Guidelines and Policy Directives.
(1) Chief of Department (1).
(2) Captain (1).
(3) Lieutenant (2).
B. The Collingswood Fire Company No. 1, under its bylaws, can elect line
officer positions to its ranks. The final approval of the line officers will
be made by the Chief of Department and Director of Public Safety,
based off of the member's qualifications, knowledge, skills and abilities.
These officers must meet the minimum requirements of the State of
New Jersey and the Operating Guidelines and Policy Directives of the
Fire Department, to hold such positions. The ranks will fall in line with
that of the Fire Department and could consist of the following ranks
based on the assessment and needs by the Chief of Department and
Director of Public Safety.
(1) Captain (1).
(2) Lieutenants (2).
A. Have exclusive jurisdiction over the control, fighting and
extinguishment of any conflagration or fire which occurs within the
Borough limits or its contracted service areas;
B. Have exclusive jurisdiction over the control and mitigation of
emergency medical and hazardous materials incidents;
C. Provide firefighting service for the extinguishment of fires and the
necessary and incidental protection of life and property throughout the
Borough or its contracted service areas;
D. Investigate the cause, circumstances and origin of fires and report to
the Borough Police Department and County Prosecutor every case of
suspected intentional incendiary fires;
E. Be authorized to enter upon, without fee or hindrance, all premises,
grounds, structures, buildings, and passages whenever necessary in the
performance of its duties;
§ 29-4 ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION § 29-4.1
23:19
§ 29-5. Rules and regulations.
§ 29-6. Firefighting equipment owned by Borough.
The Borough of Collingswood is the owner of all the firefighting apparatus
and equipment of the paid Fire Department, established in the Borough of
Collingswood by this chapter (originally Ordinance No. 283, adopted March
1, 1926).
§ 29-6.1. Maintenance and repair of equipment.
Provisions shall be made for the proper maintenance, repair and
replacement of the apparatus and equipment owned by the Borough.
§ 29-7. Establishment of emergency medical division.
There is hereby created and established an emergency medical division
under the authority of the Collingswood Fire Department and Borough of
Collingswood. The emergency medical division will be the primary basic
life support emergency response within the boundaries of the Borough of
Collingswood. The governing body is the appropriate authority to exercise
legislative authority to:
F. Operate a training program to maintain and improve firefighting,
emergency medical and all hazard response efficiency of the members
of the Department;
G. Maintain a Bureau of Fire Prevention and Code Enforcement and
enforce all codes as charged to this division by Borough ordinance;
H. Provide public education to the residents, students, merchants and
visitors of the Borough.
A. Rules and regulations, entitled "Collingswood Fire Department Policy
Directives" and "Collingswood Fire Department Operating Guidelines"
are hereby adopted as and for the rules and regulations and standard
operating guidelines for the Fire Department;
B. Said rules and regulations may be amended from time to time by
resolution approved by the Borough Commission.
A. Provide basic life support emergency care, response and transport
within the boundaries of the Borough of Collingswood.
B. Participate in the Camden County Mutual Aid Plan.
C. Operate under all applicable state statutes, local ordinances, operating
guidelines, policy directives and appointed medical direction.
§ 29-4.1 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 29-7.1
23:20
§ 29-7.1. Emergency medical division implementation.
The Division of Emergency Medical Services shall be implemented pursuant
to N.J.A.C. 8:40 and N.J.S.A. 26:2K-7 et seq.
§ 29-8. Fees for service.
A. The Borough Administrator of the Borough of Collingswood shall be
responsible to enter into a professional service contract for third-party
billing for fees for service for the Fire Department and Emergency
Medical Services.
B. The Administrator and Chief Finance Officer shall review annually the
cost accounting records for service provisions to adjust fees which are
authorized to be imposed by the Fire Department and Emergency
Medical Services.
C. Fire Department fees for service.
(1) Level 1 Response, $500: This will be a response for a motor vehicle
collision that will necessitate services provide by the Collingswood
Fire Department. The fee will include response of a single fire
apparatus resource and its staffing. The fee shall also include any
and all equipment necessary to mitigate any hazards as a result of
the vehicle collisions, which does not require extrication of a
person or people.
(2) Level 2 Response, $750: This will be a response for a motor vehicle
collision that includes everything from Level 1 with the addition of
the necessity for extrication of a person or people from the vehicle.
This will be a basic extrication that will require stabilization,
hazard and utility control, and removal of or mechanically opening
of doors on the vehicle. This fee will apply to any vehicles that
require an extrication of a person or people.
(3) Level 3 Response, $1,000:
(a) This will be a response for a motor vehicle collision that
includes all services from a Level 1 and Level 2 response, with
the addition of more technical operations. This will include, but
not be limited to, extrication of a person or people from the
vehicle, under the vehicle or pinned between vehicles. This
may also include a response to vehicles submerged in water or
under ice. This response will require more than one fire service
apparatus resource and a more technical rescue.
(b) This response will also include any vehicle fire response, which
requires the extinguishment of the fire with a 1 3/4 inches hose
line or greater. The fee will cover the apparatus and manpower
response, along with any additional equipment necessary to
extinguish the fire and mitigate any hazards.
§ 29-7.1 ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION § 29-8
23:21
Chapter 33
HEALTH
(4) Level 4 response, $1,000 for first hour, $250 each additional hour:
This response will include all Level 1 through 3 incidents that
exceed one hour of Fire Department on-scene operation time.
(5) Firefighting and emergency response fees.
(a) If Borough firefighters are dispatched or summoned to respond
to an illegal fire: $250.
(b) Bomb threat or responding to a fire resulting from an
outstanding prior notice of code violation: the actual cost of an
emergency response.
(6) Rates and charges:
(a) Personnel: Rates for personnel will be charged at the hourly
rate of each firefighter that participated in the response.
(b) Equipment and apparatus: Rates will be based off the most
current Federal Emergency Management Agency's most
current schedule of equipment rates.
(7) Fees will be submitted to the insurance carrier of each vehicle that
requires the services of the Fire Department as outlined above
aside from any emergency medical assistance.
D. Emergency Medical Fees for Service as of January 1, 2020:
(1) BLS base charge: $850.
(2) BLS loaded mileage: $17.
(3) BLS treat without transport: $250.
(4) Consumable charges:
(a) Disposable cervical collar: $45.
(b) Oxygen administration: $65.
(c) NARCAN® administration: $95.
(d) EpiPen® administration: $150.
(e) CPAP administration: $95.
(f) Aspirin: $3 each.
(g) Albuterol: $50 each.
§ 29-8 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 29-8
23:22
ARTICLE I
Local Health Services Provided
§ 33-1. Designation of County Health Department as local provider.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 26:3A2-10, the Camden County
Department of Health is hereby designated as the entity responsible for
compliance with the Local Health Services Act for any and all functions
which would be performed by a local health services provider, including
meeting standards of performance.
§ 33-2. Cooperation with Health Services Advisory Board.
The Health Services Advisory Board of the Borough of Collingswood, County
of Camden and State of New Jersey, shall cooperate with the Camden
County Health Department to provide a program of health services in
compliance with the Health Services Act. Further, the Health Services
Advisory Board may serve as liaison between the Camden County Health
Department and the Mayor and Borough Commissioners of Collingswood in
an effort to promote the enactment and enforcement of any and all County
health ordinances.
§ 33-1 ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION § 33-2
23:23

ARTICLE II
Health Services Advisory Board
§ 33-3. Establishment.
There is hereby created and established a Health Services Advisory Board
of the Borough of Collingswood, County of Camden and State of New Jersey,
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 26:3-1.
§ 33-4. Members.
The Health Services Advisory Board of the Borough of Collingswood shall be
comprised of five members, to be appointed by the Mayor of the Borough of
Collingswood with the advice and consent of the Borough Commissioners.
§ 33-5. Term of service.
The terms of the initial appointees to Members of the Health Services
Advisory Board shall be staggered among terms of not less than one year
and not more than three years. Therefore, all appointments shall be for
three-year terms.
§ 33-6. Vacancies.
Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term only.
Appointment to a vacant seat of the Health Services Advisory Board shall be
made in the same manner as original appointment.
§ 33-7. Duties.
The Health Services Advisory Board of the Borough of Collingswood shall
cooperate with the Camden County Health Department to provide a
program of health services in compliance with the Health Services Act.
Further, the Health Services Advisory Board may, from time to time, serve
as liaison between the Camden County Health Department and the Mayor
and Borough Commissioners of Collingswood in an effort to promote the
enforcement of any and all county health ordinances. The Health Services
Advisory Board shall perform any and all related functions necessary to
meet the standards of performance under the Health Services Act.
§ 33-3 ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION § 33-7
23:25
Chapter 35
HOUSING AUTHORITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Condominium conversion — See Ch. 131.
Development regulations — See Ch. 141.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 227.
Rental property — See Ch. 237.
§ 35-1. Housing Authority created.
A body corporate and politic to be known as the "Housing Authority of the
Borough of Collingswood" is hereby created and established, pursuant to
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 55:14A-1 to 58, the Local Housing Authorities Law,
as supplemented and amended, of the State of New Jersey.
§ 35-2. Agency of borough.
The Housing Authority of the Borough of Collingswood shall constitute an
agency and instrumentality of the municipality.
§ 35-3. Membership; appointment; terms.5
The Housing Authority shall consist of seven (7) members. The governing
body of the municipality shall appoint five (5) Commissioners of the
Authority and these immediately appointed shall serve for terms of one (1),
two (2), three (3), four (4) and five (5) years, respectively, from the date of
their appointment; thereafter all future Commissioners so appointed shall
hold office for terms of five (5) years, except all vacancies shall be filled
for such unexpired term. The Mayor of the borough shall appoint one (1)
member for a five-year term.
§ 35-4. Ordinance to be filed with state; appointment of additional
member by state.6
The Borough Clerk be and hereby is authorized and directed to file a
certified copy of this chapter with the Commissioner of the Department
of Environmental Protection and Energy of the State of New Jersey. The
State Director, upon receipt of notification of the creation of the Housing
Authority, shall appoint one (1) member thereof who shall hold office at his
pleasure.
5. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
6. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 33-7 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 35-4
35:26
Chapter 45
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Residency requirements — See Ch. 63. Payment of salaries — See Ch. 69.
§ 35-4 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 35-4
35:27

ARTICLE I
Various Offices and Positions
[Adopted 8-16-1971 by Ord. No. 662 as Ch. 19 of the 1971 Code]
§ 45-1. Establishment of offices; terms of office. [Amended
8-15-1994 by Ord. No. 1058]
Pursuant to law, the following offices and positions are hereby established,
and the term of each shall be as set opposite the respective office or
position:
Office or Position
Terms
(years)
Borough Administrator 3
Borough Clerk 3
Borough Treasurer 1
Chief Financial Officer 1
Solicitor 1
Prosecutor 1
Assistant Prosecutor 1
Administrator of the Municipal Court 3
Assistant Treasurer 3
Tax Collector 4
Tax Assessor 4
Deputy Borough Clerk 3
Tax Search Clerk 3
Director of Public Health 1
Registrar of Vital Statistics 3
Deputy Registrar of Vital Statistics 3
Construction Code Officer,
Plumbing Code Officer,
Electrical Code Officer,
Fire Code Officer
5, or as per current New Jersey
Administrative Code provisions
Enforcement Officer 1
Zoning Officer 1
§ 45-1 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 45-1
35:29
Office or Position
Terms
(years)
Superintendent of Public Works, who
shall
be the Superintendent of Streets and
the
Superintendent of the Sewer
Department
3
Assistant Superintendent of Public
Works
3
Superintendent of the Water
Department
3
Chief Clerk of Public Utilities, who shall
be the
Chief Clerk of the Water Department
and
the Chief Clerk of the Sewer
Department
3
Cashier-Clerk of Public Utilities, who
shall be
the Cashier-Clerk of the Water
Department and the
Cashier-Clerk of the Sewer Department
3
Clerks of the Sewer Department 3
Clerks of the Water Department 3
§ 45-2. Commencement of terms. [Amended 8-15-1994 by Ord. No.
1058]
The terms of all officers and employees above provided shall begin January
1 or as otherwise provided by statute.
§ 45-3. Vacancies.
In the event that vacancies occur in any such office or position, the same
shall be filled for the unexpired term only.
§ 45-4. Holding over.
In the event that any officer or employee is not reappointed upon the
expiration of his or her term, such officer or employee shall continue to
§ 45-1 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 45-4
35:30
hold said office or employment until his or her successor is appointed and
qualifies.
§ 45-5. Removal from office.
Every officer or employee appointed hereunder shall continue to hold said
office or position for the term for which he has been appointed and shall
not be removed therefrom except upon written charges and after a hearing
thereon before the Board of Commissioners or before the Commissioner in
charge of the department under which he serves.
§ 45-6. Tenure.
If any person shall now or hereafter hold any such office or position which
is or shall become under tenure by virtue of any act of the Legislature of the
State of New Jersey, said person shall continue to hold office or position as
provided by said act.
§ 45-7. Statutory changes in terms to prevail.
If the term of any office or position provided for herein shall be changed or
a different term fixed by an act of the Legislature of this state, said act shall
control.
§ 45-8. Qualifications.
The qualifications for all offices or positions hereunder shall be such as are
fixed by law, the governing body or the Commissioner of the department
under whose jurisdiction said office or position falls.
§ 45-9. Appointments; probationary periods.
All appointments made hereunder shall be in the manner prescribed by law.
Any such appointment may be made for a temporary or probationary period
not to exceed six months. Any such temporary or probationary period shall
be determined by the governing body or the Commissioner, as the case may
be, at the time of the original appointment.
§ 45-10. Effect on present officers and employees.
All the persons now holding any offices or positions provided for herein
shall continue to hold the same until their present terms expire or until
their successors are appointed and qualify. Where the term of any officer
or employee shall have been extended by any act of the Legislature or by
an amendment to Ordinance No. 5797 after May 10, 1960, the term of the
officer or employee holding said office upon the effective date of any such
act of the Legislature or amendment of said ordinance shall automatically
be extended in the manner and for the term provided therein.
7. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 579, adopted 4-4-1960, is the original source of enactment of
this article.
§ 45-4 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 45-11
35:31
§ 45-11. Abolishment of offices and positions.
The governing body may abolish any office or position herein provided for,
by resolution, at the end of the term of such appointment, provided that
such office or position is not one which the borough is required to have by
law.
§ 45-12. Duties.
The duties of each officer or employee appointed hereunder shall be such
as are required by law and as shall be determined by the governing body or
by the Commissioner in charge of the department under which said officer
or employee serves.
§ 45-13. Salaries and compensation. [Amended 8-15-1994 by Ord.
No. 1058]
The amount of salary or compensation to be paid shall be such as is
determined by the Municipal Salary Ordinance from time to time.8
8. Editor's Note: The current Salary Ordinance is on file in the Borough offices where it is
available for inspection. See also Ch. 69, Salaries, Payment of.
§ 45-11 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 45-13
35:32
ARTICLE II
Borough Administrator
[Adopted 12-17-1984 by Ord. No. 828]
§ 45-14. Position created.
There be and hereby is created in the Borough of Collingswood the position
of Borough Administrator.
§ 45-15. Duties.
The duties of the Borough Administrator shall include, generally, the
management of the business and operations of the borough, under the
supervision and control of the Board of Commissioners, and such duties as
shall be specifically assigned by said Board from time to time.
§ 45-16. Term of office; probationary period.
The term of office of the Borough Administrator shall be for a three-year
period, inclusive of the first 90 days from appointment, which shall be
deemed a probationary period.
§ 45-17. Compensation.
The compensation of the Borough Administrator shall be as established by
the Salary Ordinance establishing salaries for employees of the Borough of
Collingswood.9
9. Editor's Note: The current Salary Ordinance is on file in the Borough offices where it is
available for inspection. See also Ch. 69, Salaries, Payment of.
§ 45-14 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 45-17
35:33

ARTICLE III
Chief Financial Officer
[Adopted 2-20-1990 by Ord. No. 964]
§ 45-18. Position created.
There be and hereby is created in the Borough of Collingswood the position
of Chief Financial Officer.
§ 45-19. Duties.
The duties of the Chief Financial Officer shall include those set forth under
N.J.S.A. 52:27BB-26 et seq. and those set forth under N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.1
et seq., as amended.
§ 45-20. Term of office. [Amended 8-15-1994 by Ord. No. 1058]
The term of such position shall be for a four-year period, commencing
January 1 of each year, commencing January 1, 1990.
§ 45-21. Compensation.
The compensation of the Chief Financial Officer shall be established by the
Salary Ordinance of the Borough of Collingswood.10
10.Editor's Note: The current Salary Ordinance is on file in the Borough offices where it is
available for inspection. See also Ch. 69, Salaries, Payment of.
§ 45-18 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 45-21
35:35

ARTICLE IV
Chaplain
[Adopted 5-5-2014 by Ord. No. 1547]
§ 45-22. Appointment; qualifications.
The Borough Commissioners of the Borough of Collingswood may appoint
one or more chaplains to the Police and Fire Departments and the Office of
Emergency Management (OEM). Any persons appointed shall be ordained
members of the clergy in good standing in the religious body from which
they are selected. Said chaplain(s) shall become a member of the Borough
Police or Fire Department or the OEM upon appointment.
§ 45-23. Authority.
§ 45-24. Duties and responsibilities.
A. The office of chaplain shall serve at the direction of the Chiefs of the
Police and Fire Departments and the OEM and their officers,
patrolmen, firefighters and their families and the residents of the
Borough of Collingswood.
B. The chaplain is a staff assistant to the Chiefs of the respective
departments and may be consulted for any purpose as provided herein
by the Chief or other designated supervisors. All communications
between the chaplain and all members of the Police and Fire
Departments and the OEM, whether of a personal or professional
nature, will be considered to be confidential.
C. The chaplain shall be a member of the Police or Fire Department or the
OEM of the Borough of Collingswood upon appointment and shall be
considered to be a volunteer.
D. The chaplain shall be an assistant to the Chiefs of the Police and Fire
Departments or the OEM and is authorized to act on their behalf as
directed. While performing the responsibilities authorized herein, the
chaplain shall identify himself or herself as such and shall conduct
himself or herself in a manner becoming his or her position and
denomination.
A. The chaplain shall perform the following duties and such other duties
that may be requested by the Chiefs of the Police, Fire and OEM
Departments:
(1) Assist Police, Fire or OEM Department officials in notifying the
families of officers who sustain serious injury or are killed in the
line of duty.
(2) Respond to the hospital where an injured officer has been
hospitalized, when requested to do so, and coordinate with hospital
§ 45-22 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 45-24
35:37
§ 45-25. Regulations and procedure.
The chaplain shall be required to maintain a working knowledge of the
duties of law enforcement officers, firefighters and the OEM and shall
remain informed of new public safety procedures and attend training
sessions and programs. In addition, the chaplain shall comply with the
following procedures:
staff and the hospital chaplain to provide assistance to the officer
and his or her family in accordance with hospital procedures.
(3) Visit sick or injured police, fire or OEM personnel at home or in the
hospital.
(4) Attend and participate in funerals of active and retired members of
the Police and Fire Departments and the OEM.
(5) Be available to counsel officers and firefighters pursuant to their
requests.
(6) Conduct memorial services.
(7) Participate in in-service training programs.
(8) Attend departmental graduations, promotions, award ceremonies
and other invocations and benedictions.
(9) Assist in programs and plans for youthful offenders as needed.
(10) Assist with departmental public relations.
(11) Notify an officer's regular clergy in case of a death or serious injury
as soon as possible.
(12) Assist officers and their families with referrals for additional
counseling as needed.
(13) Under the direction of the fire/police/OEM, respond to incidents
within the community to counsel civilians in the event of a small- or
large-scale incident, event or tragedy.
B. Any written record the chaplain considers to be necessary in the
performance of his or her duties or as otherwise required needed for
future assistance to officers and their families shall remain confidential
in accordance with all applicable laws and regulations.
C. The chaplain shall meet regularly, and no less than semiannually, with
the Chiefs of the Police and Fire Departments and the OEM and
superior officers for ongoing evaluation, development of programs and
discussion of departmental morale.
A. The chaplain shall conform to all police, fire and OEM procedures and
department regulations as determined to be applicable by the Chiefs.
§ 45-24 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 45-25
35:38
B. The chaplain shall be available by telephone to the Chiefs of Police, Fire
and OEM, their designated representatives and department
dispatchers.
C. The chaplain shall not publicly comment on any law enforcement
officer, department official or any departmental policies or actions.
D. The chaplain shall not release any information to the public without the
prior approval of the Chiefs of Police, Fire and OEM and the person or
officers involved.
§ 45-25 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 45-25
35:39
Chapter 51
PARKING METER ACCOUNT
§ 51-1. Dedication of excess revenues.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:5-2.11 and any amendments
thereof or supplements thereto, all revenues heretofore or hereafter
derived from parking meters in excess of the cost of purchase, installation,
maintenance, overtime parking enforcement and operation thereof are
hereby dedicated to the sole and exclusive purpose of the creation,
purchase, construction and maintenance of off-street parking facilities.
§ 51-2. Funds to be deposited or invested.
All such excess revenues shall be deposited in a special bank account to be
known as "Parking Meter Account," or invested in such securities as may be
permitted by law.
§ 51-3. Use of funds.
Chapter 53
PARKING UTILITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking meter account — See Ch. 51. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 293.
§ 53-1. Establishment.
There is hereby created under the terms of this chapter a public utility
for the purpose of managing its parking operations within the Borough of
Collingswood, County of Camden and State of New Jersey. For budgetary
and accounting purposes, this utility shall be a separate entity, having its
own borrowing capacity, its own separate accounts and its own separate
property, whether it be real, personal or mixed.
A. All such funds shall be used and expended for the creation, purchase,
construction, maintenance and enforcement of parking facilities in the
Borough of Collingswood.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent either the use of
such funds in conjunction with other funds of this borough for any of
such purposes or for use as a down payment under any improvement
ordinance which shall provide for such off-street parking facilities.
§ 45-25 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 53-2
51:40
§ 53-2. Official name.
The name by which the utility shall be known is "the Collingswood Parking
Utility," hereinafter the "Utility."
§ 53-3. Functions.
It shall be the function of the Utility to budget and account for the parking
operations undertaken by the Borough; to preserve, care for, lay out,
construct, maintain, improve and operate lands, buildings, and facilities
used for the provision of public parking and the enforcement of the
Borough's laws and regulations concerning parking; to construct,
reconstruct, alter, provide, renew and maintain buildings or other
structures and equipment and provide for the care, custody and control
thereof in the operation of the Utility; to raise money necessary to pay
for the lands, rights or interest therein acquired for parking activities, and
for improving and equipping the same; to pay or make provision for the
payment of the reasonable expenses in each fiscal year of the Utility; to
pay to those persons entitled thereto the interest and principal on notes
and bonds of the Utility, and to deposit and accumulate reserve funds or
reserves.
§ 53-4. Governing regulations.
The Utility shall be governed by the ordinances, the Administrative Code,
and the resolutions adopted by the Board of Commissioners and by
administrative directives.
§ 53-5. Financial affairs.
The financial affairs of the Utility shall be governed in accordance with the
statutes applying to the financial affairs of the municipality and utilities in
general.
§ 53-6. Acquisition of property.
The Utility may, from time to time, acquire such real property as may
be authorized by the Board of Commissioners by duly adopted ordinances
according to the laws of the State of New Jersey.
§ 53-7. Appointment of employees; salaries and compensation.
The Mayor shall have the full authority to appoint and employ all necessary
employees for the Utility. Salaries of the employees will be in accordance
with classification and salary ordinances duly adopted by the Board of
Commissioners. Portions of salaries of existing employees may be prorated
based on the amount of time spent on parking operations compared to the
employees full-time Borough responsibilities.
§ 53-2 PARKING UTILITY § 53-8
53:41
§ 53-8. Utility charges.
The Utility shall have authority to charge and collect monies for the use of
the Utility's facilities whether they be user charges, rental fees, or lease
payments, and to use these monies to defray the cost of acquisition of lands,
buildings and facilities, rights and interests therein, to equip the facilities,
to pay the Utility's current expenses and to pay the interest and principal
on notes and bonds.
Chapter 57
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 29. Payment of salaries — See Ch. 69.
§ 53-8 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 53-8
53:42
ARTICLE I
Organization; Regulation; Operation
[Adopted 8-16-1971 by Ord. No. 662 as Ch. 24, Art. I, of the 1971
Code; amended in its entirety 8-4-2014 by Ord. No. 1551]
§ 57-1. Department established; Chief of Police.
There is hereby established a department of municipal government of the
Borough of Collingswood to be known and designated as the "Police
Department of the Borough of Collingswood." The office of Chief of Police is
hereby affirmed.
§ 57-2. Appointments and promotions.
A. The Chief of Police and all other appointments to or promotions within
the Department shall be made by the appropriate authority or as
otherwise provided by law.
B. Appointment of the Chief of Police.
(1) When a vacancy occurs in the position of Chief of Police, the Mayor
shall establish a "Chief of Police Hiring Committee," which shall be
comprised of no less than three and no more than five persons
which shall include among its members the Director of the
Department of Public Safety and the Borough Administrator. The
Director of the Department of Public Safety is designated as the
appropriate authority under § 57-7 of this chapter.
(2) The Chief of Police Hiring Committee shall accept and review
applications from prospective eligible Collingswood police officers.
Said applications shall include, at a minimum, a cover letter
describing the individual, his or her interest in the position,
expectations for the position of Police Chief and vision for the
Department, a history of prior promotions starting with the date of
hire, and a writing sample commensurate with the job duties. The
application shall also include a waiver permitting the Hiring
Committee to have access to the individual's personnel file to
review all commendations and discipline, if any.
(3) The Hiring Committee may interview qualified candidates and
make a recommendation to the Borough Commissioners.
(4) The Commissioners, by resolution adopted by a majority vote of the
members, shall appoint the Chief of Police.
(5) The removal of the Chief of Police shall be in the manner and as
provided by law.
C. Hiring and promotion of police officers other than the Chief of Police.
(1) When a vacancy exists in the Department in a position other than
position of Chief of Police, the Chief shall post an announcement in
§ 57-1 PARKING UTILITY § 57-2
53:43
§ 57-3. Qualifications of all police officers.
the Department or, for new hires, in the newspaper, inviting eligible
applicants to apply for the position.
(2) Officers or potential applicants, as the case may be, shall make
application by submitting a resume and cover letter to the Borough
Administrator indicating why the individual believes he or she is
the best candidate for the position.
(3) The Chief of Police shall review applications received, interview
applicants and perform background checks including medical
screening.
(4) The Chief of Police may utilize additional officers in this process as
long as those individuals are not currently seeking the vacant
promotion position.
(5) The Chief of Police shall make recommendation to the Director of
the Department of Public Safety and the Borough Administrator.
(6) The Director of the Department of Public Safety and the Borough
Administrator may, but are not required, to conduct a second round
of interviews.
(7) Examination of applicants. At any time in the process the Borough
may, in its discretion, administer an examination to be given to
each applicant, either written or oral, or both, the purpose of which
shall be to test the mental and moral fitness of the applicant.
(8) The Director shall make recommendation to the Commissioners for
action.
(9) Upon a conditional offer of hire, applicants for initial hire shall be
subject to drug screening and psychological testing.
A. No person shall be appointed an officer or member of the Police
Department unless:
(1) He is a citizen of the United States and a citizen of the State of New
Jersey as required by law.
(2) He is sound in body and of good health sufficient to satisfy the
Board of Trustees of the Police and Fireman's Retirement System of
New Jersey that such person is eligible for membership in the
retirement system.
(3) He is able to read, write and speak the English language well and
intelligently.
(4) He is of good moral character.
§ 57-2 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 57-3
53:44
§ 57-4. Organization of Police Department. [Amended 7-6-2015 by
Ord. No. 1572]
The uniformed officers of the Department shall include the Chief of Police
(one), Deputy Chief (one), Captain (one), Sergeants (up to six), Patrolmen
(up to 22) and such Class I and Class II officers as permitted in § 57-18.
§ 57-5. (Reserved)
§ 57-6. Promulgation of rules and regulations.
The Director of the Department of Public Safety, as the appropriate
authority, shall, by ordinance, make or prescribe such rules and regulations
for the operation of the Police Department as it shall deem advisable,
which rules and regulations shall be binding on all members of the Police
Department and special law enforcement officers. Such rules and
regulations may cover the duties, conduct and discipline of all members and
special law enforcement officers, uniforms and equipment to be worn or
carried, hours of service, leaves of absence, vacations and all other similar
matters necessary or desirable for the better efficiency of the Department.
§ 57-7. Duties of Director of Public Safety.
In addition to the statutory duties as the appropriate authority, the Director
of the Department of Public Safety shall have and exercise the following
authority and shall perform the following duties:
(5) He shall submit to and pass such physical examination and drug
screening conducted by a qualified physician designated by the
Borough Administrator.
B. No person shall be eligible for appointment who has been convicted of
any crime constituting an indictable offense or who has been convicted
of any crime or offense involving moral turpitude that, in the judgment
of the Borough Administrator, would be prejudicial to the morale or
effectiveness of the Police Department.
C. No person shall be eligible for appointment who is less than 21 or more
than 35 years of age, except as such age limitations are affected by
N.J.S.A. 38:23A-2, and provided that nothing herein contained shall be
construed to prohibit the continuance in office or employment of any
person who is permanently employed by the municipality in the Police
Department at a fixed annual salary and whose sole occupation is that
of police officer.
A. He shall advise the Borough Commission with regard to policy on all
matters of a police nature.
B. He shall consult with and advise the Borough Commission on all
matters of policy affecting the Police Department, as established by the
Borough Commission.
§ 57-3 PARKING UTILITY § 57-8
53:45
§ 57-8. Duties of Borough Administrator.
§ 57-9. Line of authority.
The Chief of Police shall be the head of the police force. He shall be directly
responsible to the appropriate authority for the efficiency and routine dayto-
day operations of the police force.
§ 57-10. Duties of Chief of Police.
The Chief of Police shall, pursuant to policies established by the appropriate
authority:
§ 57-11. Composition of Department. [Amended 7-6-2015 by Ord.
No. 1572]
The Police Department shall consist of the Chief of Police, one Deputy Chief,
one Captain, up to six Sergeants, up to 18 patrolmen, and any civilian
personnel as deemed appropriate by the Borough Commission.
A. The Borough Administrator shall have supervisory responsibility for the
conduct of the Police Department and the efficient and effective
operation thereof, subject to the appropriate authority as set forth in
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118 and hereinafter designated. The Borough
Administrator shall be responsible for the enforcement by the Police
Department under the direction of the Chief of Police of the applicable
laws of the state and ordinances of the Borough and for the
administration of the rules and regulations prescribed for the conduct
and control of the Department, subject to the directives of the
appropriate authority.
B. He shall, in the exercise of his authority and in order to accomplish his
duties, issue such orders and give such instructions as he may, from
time to time, deem necessary or proper in the operation, administration
and management of the Police Department and in relation to the work
of the special law enforcement officers assigned to active duty, subject
to the directives of the appropriate authority.
A. Administer and enforce any rules and regulations for the disposition
and discipline of the force and its officers and personnel as
promulgated by ordinance or the appropriate authority.
B. Have, exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties of the
force.
C. Prescribe the duties and assignments of all subordinates and other
personnel.
D. Delegate such of his authority as he may deem necessary for the
efficient operation of the force, to be exercised under his direction and
supervision.
§ 57-8 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 57-12
53:46
§ 57-12. Salaries.
The salaries for the members of the Police Department shall be established
by the Borough Commission in the annual Salary Ordinance or as amended
during the year.11
§ 57-13. Oath of office.
All members of the Police Department shall, before entering upon the
performance of their duties, take and subscribe an oath of office and such
other oaths as may be required by law.
§ 57-14. General powers. [Amended 7-6-2015 by Ord. No. 1572]
The Chief of Police, Deputy Chief of Police, Captain, Sergeants, and
patrolmen shall have the power and authority conferred upon members and
officers of such police force by N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118 and 40A:14-152.
§ 57-15. Chain of command; designation of appropriate authority.
The Chief of Police shall be subordinate to the Borough Administrator and
shall receive his orders from the Borough Administrator. The Administrator
shall be subordinate to and shall receive his orders from the Director of the
Department of Public Safety, who is hereby designated as the "appropriate
authority," pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118.
§ 57-16. Amendments to article and rules and regulations.
The Borough Commission shall, at all times, have full power and authority
to amend or supplement this article and the rules and regulations which
are hereafter adopted, to repeal any part of this article and to repeal or
supplement any one or more of the regulations.
§ 57-17. Duties and conduct of members.
It shall be the duty of the members of the Police Department and special
law enforcement officers, when assigned to active duty, to see to the
enforcement of all applicable state laws and ordinances of the Borough
and to preserve order and prevent infractions of the law and to arrest
violators thereof. Every member of the Police Department and special law
enforcement officer shall conduct himself in a proper and law-abiding
manner at all times and shall avoid the use of unnecessary force. Each
member of the Department and special law enforcement officer shall obey
the orders and directions of his supervisors and shall comply with the
provisions of this article and the rules and regulations of the Department.
§ 57-18. Special law enforcement officers.
11.Editor's Note: The current Salary Ordinance is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 57-12 PARKING UTILITY § 57-18
53:47
A. As permitted by the law, the Borough Administrator may appoint special
law enforcement officers for terms not exceeding one year. Such
appointments may be revoked for cause after adequate hearing, unless
the appointment is for four months or less, in which event the
appointment may be revoked without cause or hearing. They shall not
be members of the Police Department, and their powers, rights and
duties shall immediately cease at the expiration of the term for which
they were appointed or upon revocation of their appointment.
B. No person shall be appointed as such special law enforcement officer
unless the person:
(1) Is a resident of this state during the term of appointment.
(2) Is able to read, write and speak the English language well and
intelligently and has a high school diploma or its equivalent.
(3) Is sound in body and of good health.
(4) Is of good moral character.
(5) Has not been convicted of any offense involving dishonesty or
which would make him unfit to perform the duties of his office.
(6) Has successfully undergone the same psychological testing that is
required of all full-time police officers in the municipality.
C. Every applicant for the position of special law enforcement officer
appointed pursuant to this section shall have fingerprints taken, which
fingerprints shall be filed with the Division of State Police and the
Federal Bureau of Investigation.
D. Every such special law enforcement officer shall be under the
supervision and direction of the Chief of Police except as otherwise
provided in this article.
E. Every such special law enforcement officer shall perform his or her
duties only when expressly assigned to active duty and only within the
limits of the municipality except when in fresh pursuit of any person
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2A:156-11 et seq.
F. Every such special law enforcement officer shall comply with the
provisions of this article and the rules and regulations promulgated for
the conduct and decorum for the regular members of the Police
Department.
G. Appointments as special law enforcement officers shall be made in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.8 et seq., and their duties and
qualifications shall be as set forth therein. [Amended 7-6-2015 by
Ord. No. 1572]
H. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.17, it is hereby established that the
number of Class One special officers shall be limited to 10, and the
§ 57-18 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 57-18
53:48
§ 57-19. Suspension or removal; hearing; penalties.
No member shall be suspended or removed from office or employment in
the Police Department for political reasons or for any other cause than
incapacity, misconduct or disobedience or for violation of this article or the
rules and regulations established for the government of the Police Force
and Department. No member of the Police Department shall be suspended,
removed, fined or reduced from office or employment therein except for just
cause and then only after written charge or charges of the cause or causes
of complaint shall have been preferred against such member, signed by the
person or persons making such charge or charges and filed in the office of
the Borough Administrator and a copy thereof served upon such member
within 15 days after the filing thereof and after the charge or charges shall
have been examined by the Borough Administrator upon reasonable notice
to the person charged, which examination shall be commenced not less
than 15 days nor more than 30 days after said copy of such charge or
charges shall have been so served. It is the intent of this section to give
every member against whom a charge or charges for any cause may be
preferred under this section a fair trial upon said charge or charges and
every reasonable opportunity to make any defense he has or chooses to
make and that, in the event of failure of compliance with any provision of
this section, such charge or charges shall be dismissed.
number of Class Two special officers shall be limited to six. The
classifications shall be based upon the duties to be performed by the
special law enforcement officer as follows:
(1) Class One. Officers of this class shall be authorized to perform
routine traffic detail, spectator control and similar duties. Class
One officers shall have the power to issue summonses for
disorderly persons and petty disorderly persons offenses, violations
of municipal ordinances and violations of Title 39 of the New Jersey
Statutes. The use of a firearm by an officer of this class shall be
strictly prohibited, and no Class One officer shall be assigned any
duties which may require the carrying or use of a firearm.
(2) Class Two. Officers of this class shall be authorized to exercise full
powers and duties similar to those of a permanent, regularly
appointed full-time police officer. The use of a firearm by an officer
of this class may be authorized only after the officer has been fully
certified as successfully completing training as prescribed by the
Borough.
A. If any member of the Police Department shall be suspended pending
trial on charges, such trial shall be commenced within 30 days after
service of a copy thereof upon him; otherwise, the charges shall be
dismissed and the member returned to duty.
B. Upon the trial on charges of any member of the Police Department, the
appropriate authority, if the member shall be found guilty of the
§ 57-18 PARKING UTILITY § 57-19
53:49
§ 57-20. Word usage.
Throughout this article, the masculine gender shall include the feminine,
and the singular number shall include the plural, and vice versa, unless the
context of this article indicates otherwise.
charges, may, in lieu of dismissal from the Department, impose such
penalty as, in its judgment, is warranted by the character of the offense.
C. The Borough Administrator may recommend, in the event of any trial on
charges against any member of the Police Department, the employment
of a hearing officer to conduct the hearing and make findings of fact and
recommendations to the Borough Administrator. The appropriate
authority shall also have the authority to employ special counsel to
review the charges against any such member and to present the same
at the hearing on behalf of the person or persons filing the charges. In
the event that it is deemed necessary by the appropriate authority to
employ the services of a hearing officer or special counsel, the
Administrator shall report the appointment of the same at the next
succeeding Commission meeting after such appointment. Both the
hearing officer and special counsel shall be attorneys at law of the State
of New Jersey, and neither shall be employed in any capacity by the
Borough or any boards created by ordinance.
§ 57-19 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 57-20
53:50
ARTICLE II
Police Training
[Adopted 8-16-1971 by Ord. No. 662 as Ch. 24, Art. II, of the 1971
Code]
§ 57-21. Completion of training required prior to permanent
appointment.
No person shall hereafter be given or accept a permanent appointment
as a police officer in the Borough of Collingswood unless such person has
successfully completed a police training course at a school approved and
authorized by the Police Training Commission in the Department of Law
and Public Safety of the State of New Jersey pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 56 of the Laws of 1961.12
§ 57-22. Probationary appointment.
This Article shall not prohibit the giving or accepting of a probationary or
temporary appointment as a police officer for a period not to exceed one (1)
year, to enable a person seeking a permanent appointment to complete a
police training course as prescribed by the Police Training Commission.
§ 57-23. Prerequisite for training course; leave of absence.
No person shall be permitted to take a police training course unless he
holds a probationary or temporary appointment as a police officer in the
Borough of Collingswood, and such appointee shall be entitled to a leave of
absence with pay during the period of the police training course.
12.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:17B-66 et seq.
§ 57-21 PARKING UTILITY § 57-23
53:51

ARTICLE III
Reciprocal Police Assistance
[Adopted 2-17-1987 as Ord. No. 884]
§ 57-24. Agreement to provide reciprocal assistance.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156, the governing body of the
Borough of Collingswood hereby agrees to the provision of reciprocal police
assistance, as hereinafter prescribed, with those municipal corporations in
Camden County and in those counties contiguous to Camden County which
demonstrate their reciprocity by their enactment of this Article.
§ 57-25. No payment required.
It is hereby expressly provided that upon committing such reciprocal police
assistance, as hereinafter prescribed, no payment shall be required to
be made by the assisted municipality to the municipality providing such
assistance. This exclusion will include (but is not necessarily limited to)
police salaries, the cost of automobiles, motorcycles, the use of police dogs
and/or the cost of other equipment or expenses incurred by providing such
assistance. This provision of nonpayment is in lieu of those rates of pay and
rentals set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156 and as required by law.
§ 57-26. Termination of agreement; notification.
Any of the concurring parties may withdraw from and terminate their part
in this agreement at the end of any calendar year, provided that notice of
such intention to terminate shall be given no later than November 1 of each
year to each participant herein. Otherwise, the agreement shall remain in
force on a yearly basis.
§ 57-27. Incorporation of Mutual Aid Operations Plan.
The Mutual Aid Operations Plan promulgated by the Camden County Chiefs
of Police Association prescribing the specifics of emergency reciprocal
police assistance is hereby incorporated by reference without inclusion
herein. Such Mutual Aid Operations Plan will be periodically updated, but
such updated version will not be enacted until distributed to each party
hereto for his edification and whatever action he may deem appropriate.
§ 57-28. Chief of Police to provide annual summary report.
The Chief of Police shall annually, as soon after the end of the year as
practicable, furnish the respective governing body with a summary report of
services rendered and received, with his comments and recommendations.
§ 57-24 PARKING UTILITY § 57-28
53:53

ARTICLE IV
Duty Manual and Rules and Regulations
[The Duty Manual and rules and regulations for the day-to-day
operations of the Police Department, entitled "Collingswood Police
Department Rules and Regulations, April 1996," as adopted
9-3-1996 by Ord. No. 1105, is on file in the Borough offices.]
PARKING UTILITY § 57-28
53:55

ARTICLE V
Civilian Agent
[Adopted 7-6-2004 by Ord. No. 1339; amended in its entirety
8-4-2014 by Ord. No. 1551]
§ 57-29. Purpose.
It is the desire of the Board of Commissioners of the Borough of
Collingswood to create a position known as a "Civilian Agent," assigned to
the Collingswood Police Department, under the command of the Chief of
Police, with specific duties and assignments to be set by the Chief of Police
for the Borough of Collingswood.
§ 57-30. Position created.
A position is created, known as a "Civilian Agent," assigned to the
Collingswood Police Department for the Borough of Collingswood.
§ 57-29 PARKING UTILITY § 57-30
53:57

ARTICLE VI
Fees for Outside Police Employment
[Adopted 2-5-2013 by Ord. No. 1530]
§ 57-31. Establishment of policy.
A policy shall be established for police outside employment.
§ 57-32. Request by member of Police Department.
Prior to engaging in any outside business or employment, a member or
employee of the Police Department shall request permission to do so from
the Chief of Police. The decision of the Chief of Police to approve or deny
permission to work outside the Department is final and subject only to
appeal to the Borough Commissioners.
§ 57-33. Request by private party or other public entity; amount of
fees.
Where a private party or other public entity desires to contract with the
Borough of Collingswood for off-duty services by a police officer, said
private party or public entity shall request the services through the office
of the Chief of Police. To the extent that personnel are available, the Chief
of Police may, but shall not be required to, assign a police officer to provide
the aforesaid off-duty services. The cost of the services to the private party
or other public entity shall be at $75 per hour plus a vehicle charge of $100
per day per vehicle plus an administration charge of 2%, at the discretion
of the Chief of Police. All payments for the aforesaid services shall be made
to the Borough of Collingswood. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized
to establish such rules and regulations as are necessary to implement this
subsection.
§ 57-34. Establishment of fees.
Police outside employment fees are hereby established.
§ 57-31 PARKING UTILITY § 57-34
53:59
Chapter 61
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT
§ 61-1. Definitions.
The following words shall have the meanings described wherever the same
appears in this chapter, unless the context clearly denotes the contrary:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Collingswood, in the County of Camden, State
of New Jersey.
COMMISSIONER OF PUBLIC WORKS AND PUBLIC BUILDINGS — The
Borough Commissioner duly appointed by the governing body from among
its members and charged with the control, regulation and supervision of the
Department.
DEPARTMENT — Department of Public Works of the Borough.
GOVERNING BODY — The Mayor and Commissioners of the Borough of
Collingswood, in the County of Camden and State of New Jersey.
§ 61-2. Establishment.
There is hereby created and established in the Borough a Department of
Public Works, which consists of a Highway and Sewer Division and a Water
Division, and each is to be supervised and administered by its respective
Superintendent as designated by the governing body.
§ 61-3. Superintendents and Assistant Superintendents appointed;
compensation. [Amended 5-31-2018 by Ord. No. 1638]
Each Superintendent and Assistant Superintendent shall be appointed by
the governing body, and shall receive such salary as the governing body may
determine from time to time and set forth in the Salary Ordinance.
§ 61-4. Authority of Commissioner of Public Works.
The Superintendents and the Department shall be under the control and
supervision of and responsible to the Commissioner of Public Works and
perform such duties as the Commissioner of Public Works may from time to
time designate.
§ 61-5. Powers and Duties of Superintendents and Assistant
Superintendents. [Amended 5-31-2018 by Ord. No. 1638]
A. The Highway and Sewer Superintendent shall have the following
powers and duties:
(1) Supervise and direct all employees of the Highway and Sewer
Division of the Department.
§ 57-34 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 61-5
53:60
(2) Be responsible for the servicing of all requests and complaints of
citizens involving Borough facilities, including but not limited to
storm flooding, sewer failures and road damages.
(3) Supervise the construction, reconstruction, maintenance and
repair of all public streets, sidewalks, curbs and gutters within the
limits of the Borough and prevent interference with the public use
thereof and further maintain reasonable standards of maintenance
and repair of the same.
(4) Supervise the construction, reconstruction, maintenance and
repair of the sanitary and storm sewer systems within the limits of
the Borough.
(5) Develop a comprehensive program for the removal of snow and
leaves and direct removal of snow and leaves and cleaning of
streets.
(6) Maintain all Borough-owned properties and recreational facilities.
(7) Arrange for the keeping of a correct record of the work and
operations of the Highway and Sewer Division of the Department
and at the end of each month shall prepare and present to the
governing body at the next regular meeting a report of the work
and operations of the Highway and Sewer Division of the
Department for the preceding month.
(8) Perform such other duties as the governing body may from time to
time request.
B. The Water Superintendent shall have the following powers and duties:
(1) Supervise and direct all employees of the Water Division of the
Department.
(2) Be responsible for the servicing of all requests and complaints of
citizens involving Borough facilities, including but not limited to
storm flooding, sewer failures and road damages.
(3) Supervise the construction, reconstruction, maintenance and
repair of the water system within the limits of the Borough.
(4) Arrange for the keeping of a correct record of the work and
operations of the Water Division of the Department and at the end
of each month shall prepare and present to the governing body at
the next regular meeting a report of the work and operations of the
Water Division of the Department for the preceding month.
(5) Perform such other duties as the governing body may from time to
time request.
C. The Assistant Water Superintendent shall have the following powers
and duties:
§ 61-5 PARKING UTILITY § 61-5
53:61
§ 61-6. Department employees.
§ 61-7. Crew Chiefs.
The Crew Chiefs of the Highway and Sewer Division of the Department shall
assist the Highway and Sewer Superintendent in the administration and
function of said Division and shall perform such duties as may from time to
time be assigned to him by the Superintendent in addition to ordinary work
of the Division.
§ 61-8. Lead Water Treatment Plant Operator.
The Lead Water Treatment Plant Operator of the Water Division of the
Department shall assist the Water Superintendent in the administration and
function of said Division and shall perform such duties as may from time to
time be assigned to him by the Superintendent in addition to ordinary work
in the Division.
§ 61-9. Personnel rules and regulations.
All employees of the Department shall be subject to and must comply with
the provisions of the Borough ordinance establishing the personnel rules
and regulations for Borough employees.
(1) Under the direction of the licensed operator in charge, will help
supervise the administration, management, and operation of the
water treatment plant.
(2) Maintain liaison with other municipal units.
(3) Under the direction of the licensed operator in charge, supervises
work to maintain the condition, operation, and effectiveness of the
water treatment plant.
(4) Under the direction of the licensed operator in charge, supervises
the construction, maintenance and repair of the water system.
(5) Perform such duties as the governing body may from time to time
request.
A. The employees of the Highway and Sewer Division of the Department of
Public Works shall consist of the Superintendent, Tree Crew Chief,
Highway Crew Chief, Water/Sewer Utility Repair Crew Chief, and as
many other employees as the governing body may deem necessary and
by resolution from time to time appoint.
B. The employees of the Water Division of Public Works shall consist of the
Superintendent, Assistant Superintendent, Lead Water Operator,
Treatment Plant Operator and as many other employees as the
governing body deems necessary. [Amended 5-31-2018 by Ord. No.
1638]
§ 61-5 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 61-10
53:62
§ 61-10. Repealer.
Any and all ordinances inconsistent with the terms of this chapter are
hereby repealed to the extent of any such inconsistencies.
§ 61-11. Severability.
In the event that any clause, section, paragraph or sentence of this chapter
is deemed to be invalid or unenforceable for any reason, then the Borough
Committee hereby declares its intent that the balance of the chapter not
affected by said invalidity shall remain in full force and effect to the extent
that it allows the Borough to meet the goals of the chapter.
§ 61-12. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon proper passage in accordance with the
law.
Chapter 63
RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire department — See Ch. 29.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 45.
Police department — See Ch. 57.
§ 63-1. Residency in borough.13
To the greatest extent possible, all officers and employees of the Borough of
Collingswood shall be and shall remain, as a condition of their employment
and continued employment, bona fide residents of the Borough of
Collingswood, except as otherwise provided by law.
§ 63-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BONA FIDE RESIDENTS — Persons actually living in the Borough of
Collingswood and having an intent of remaining domiciled there.
§ 63-3. Exemption.
The Board of Commissioners or the director of the department to which any
officer or employee is or may be assigned may permit any person who is not
a bona fide resident to become or remain an officer or employee whenever,
13.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 61-10 RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS § 63-3
63:63
in its or his judgment, circumstances exist necessitating or justifying such
nonresidence.
Chapter 65
RETIREMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 45.
§ 63-3 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 63-3
63:64
ARTICLE I
Defined Contribution Retirement Program
[Adopted 9-2-2008 by Ord. No. 1452]
§ 65-1. Participation required for eligible positions.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2, the following positions are deemed to be
eligible for and shall participate in the Defined Contribution Retirement
Program:
§ 65-2. Exempt positions.
Individuals serving in the following positions are exempt from Defined
Contribution Retirement Program membership, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
43:15C-2:
§ 65-3. Legislative authority.
This article shall be implemented, construed and subject to the aforesaid
Chapter 92 of the Laws of 2007 (N.J.S.A. 43:15C-1 et seq.), as amended from
time to time, and any regulations or guidance documents from the Local
Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
A. Borough Administrator, Superintendent of Public Works, Municipal
Court Administrator, Library Director, Director of Community
Development, and Water Department Superintendent;
B. Municipal Attorney;
C. Municipal Engineer;
D. Municipal Prosecutor;
E. Municipal Court Judge;
F. Municipal Public Defender.
A. Tax Collector;
B. Chief Financial Officer;
C. Construction Code Official;
D. Qualified Purchasing Agent;
E. Tax Assessor;
F. Municipal Planner;
G. Registered Municipal Clerk;
H. Licensed Uniform Subcode Inspector;
I. Principal Public Works Manager.
§ 65-1 RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS § 65-3
63:65
Chapter 69
SALARIES, PAYMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 45.
§ 65-3 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 65-3
63:66
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 8-16-1971 by Ord. No. 662 as Ch. 4 of the 1971 Code]
§ 69-1. Determination of salaries. [Amended 8-15-1994 by Ord. No.
1058]
§ 69-2. Duties and terms of employment.
The duties and terms of employment of the several officers and employees
shall be as prescribed by statute, ordinance or resolution if any such have
been enacted; otherwise, such duties and terms shall be such as shall be
prescribed by the Board of Commissioners.
§ 69-3. Method of payment.
A. The rate of compensation of each officer and employee of the Borough
of Collingswood shall be established by and advertised in the Annual
Salary Ordinance. Salaries shall be paid on a biweekly or monthly basis.
The current Salary Ordinance is on file in the borough offices.
B. All other employees shall be paid on a biweekly basis and at an hourly
rate to be determined by the department head.
A. The Treasurer shall present monthly to the governing body for approval
warrants drawn to the order of the Borough of Collingswood Payroll
Account as follows:
(1) In advance for all employees whose salaries are on an annual or
biweekly basis when such salaries are due and payable prior to the
next regular meeting of the governing body. [Amended 8-15-1994
by Ord. No. 1058]
(2) In advance for all employees whose compensation is on an hourly
basis when the compensation has been approved by some
responsible designated official and the Commissioner in charge of
the particular department in which such person is employed and
has been certified to the Municipal Treasurer.
B. At the first meeting of the governing body in January of each year, there
shall be approved an account to be designated the "Borough of
Collingswood Payroll Account," and, from time to time, the Treasurer,
upon receipt of a warrant for the amount due such payroll account,
shall deposit the same to the credit of the payroll account, charging the
appropriate budgetary accounts therewith.
C. The Treasurer shall thereafter draw checks on said payroll account to
the employees entitled to payment therefrom.
D. At either of the regular meetings of the governing body each month, the
Treasurer shall submit for approval or ratification, as the case may be,
the necessary payrolls for the amount due to the several officers and
§ 69-1 RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS § 69-3
63:67
§ 69-4. Retroactive effect; exceptions.
All said salaries shall be retroactive to January 1 for the current year;
provided, however, that where such position or office is filled after the
beginning of the year, the same shall be paid pro rata for the remainder
of the year only, and provided further that in the event that any officer or
employee is entitled to a raise or increment in salary during the course
of any year, then such officer or employee shall be paid such raise or
increment in salary during the course of the year as and when determined
and approved by the Board of Commissioners and shall not be entitled to
receive the same before such determination and approval, anything herein
contained to the contrary notwithstanding.
employees for compensation. The payrolls shall be considered by the
governing body in due course and approved if found to be correct.
E. In case of error or adjustment in the payroll, the Treasurer shall and it
shall be his duty to see that such error or adjustment is properly
corrected and an appropriate record made thereof.
F. Such officers as may be designated by the governing body are hereby
authorized to sign warrants drawn in favor of the payroll account upon
due notice that the appropriate payrolls have been approved by the
proper Commissioner or the proper certifying authorities, which
certifying authorities or Commissioner shall be designated by
resolution or by law.
§ 69-3 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 69-4
63:68
ARTICLE II
Direct Deposit
[Adopted 7-7-2014 by Ord. No. 1550]
§ 69-5. Direct deposit required.
All full time employees and elected public officials who receive
compensation from the Borough of Collingswood are mandated to have
direct deposit of their compensation as of July 18, 2014, in accordance with
P.L. 2013, c. 28, as defined under N.J.S.A. 52:14-15f(b).
§ 69-6. Seasonal and temporary employees exempt.
Seasonal and temporary employees who are employed by the Borough of
Collingswood are exempt from the direct deposit mandate.
§ 69-7. Request for exemption.
Municipal employees may request, in writing, an exemption from the direct
deposit mandate to the Borough of Collingswood Administrator. The
Administrator may grant such an exemption only for good cause.
§ 69-5 RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS § 69-7
63:69
Chapter 72
SHADE TREE ADVISORY COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 265, Art. V. Trees — See Ch. 283.
§ 72-1. Board established; membership.
An advisory board shall be and hereby is created and established consisting
of five volunteers of the borough and shall be known as the "Shade Tree
Advisory Board of the Borough of Collingswood."
§ 72-2. Duties.
The Board shall act in an advisory capacity to the Borough Commission
regarding the planting and care of shade and ornamental trees and
shrubbery now situate or which may hereafter be planted in any public
highway, park or other appropriate area of said borough, except county
parks or parkways. Such advice shall pertain to trimming, spraying, care
and protection of trees in the borough consistent with the borough's policy
to protect existing trees and to encourage further tree growth in the
municipality.
§ 72-3. Community forestry plan; tree care policies.
The Board shall write and implement an annual community forestry plan
and shall determine public tree care policies.
Chapter 77
WATERWORKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Water — See Ch. 301.
§ 77-1. Operation and maintenance.
The Board of Commissioners of the Borough of Collingswood shall provide
for, construct, operate and maintain waterworks and a plant for the supply
of water for domestic and public use in and for the Borough of
Collingswood.
§ 69-7 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 77-2
72:70
§ 77-2. Surveys and examinations.
The Board of Commissioners of the Borough of Collingswood shall cause
to be made surveys, plans and estimates by competent engineers and
mechanics for said waterworks and plant and shall make all such
preliminary examination, exploration, measurements and levelings as may
be necessary and proper for its corporate purposes in respect to a water
supply.
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 85
AFFORDABLE HOUSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing Authority — See Ch. 35. Development regulations — See Ch. 141.
§ 85-1. Purpose.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to address Collingswood's constitutional
obligation to provide for its fair share of low- and moderate-income
housing, as directed by the Superior Court and consistent with N.J.A.C.
5:93-1 et seq., as amended and supplemented, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et
seq., as amended and supplemented, and the New Jersey Fair Housing
Act of 1985. This chapter is intended to provide assurances that lowand
moderate-income units ("affordable units") are created with
controls on affordability over time and that low- and moderate-income
households shall occupy those units. This chapter shall apply except
where inconsistent with applicable law.
B. The Collingswood Borough Planning Board has adopted a Housing
Element and Fair Share Plan pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law
at N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. The Housing Element and Fair Share Plan
has been endorsed by the governing body. This chapter implements and
incorporates the adopted and endorsed Housing Element and Fair
Share Plan and addresses the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:93-1 et seq., as
amended and supplemented, N.J.A.C.5:80-26.1 et seq. as amended and
supplemented, and the New Jersey Fair Housing Act of 1985.
C. The Borough of Collingswood shall file such annual monitoring reports
as may be directed by the Court regarding the status of the
implementation of its Court-approved Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan. The report shall be filed with Fair Share Housing Center and
posted on the Collingswood website.
§ 77-2 WATERWORKS § 85-2
77:71
§ 85-2. Definitions.
The following terms when used in this chapter shall have the meanings
given in this section:
ACT — The Fair Housing Act of 1985, P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301
et seq.)
ADAPTABLE — Constructed in compliance with the technical design
standards of the Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity designated by the Borough to
administer affordable units in accordance with this chapter, N.J.A.C. 5:93,
and UHAC (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26).
AFFIRMATIVE MARKETING — A regional marketing strategy designed
to attract buyers and/or renters of affordable units pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.15.
AFFORDABILITY AVERAGE — The average percentage of median income
at which new restricted units in an affordable housing development are
affordable to low- and moderate-income households.
AFFORDABLE — A sales price or rent level that is within the means of a
low- or moderate-income household as defined within N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4, and,
in the case of an ownership unit, that the sales price for the unit conforms
to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6, as may be amended and
supplemented, and, in the case of a rental unit, that the rent for the
unit conforms to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.12, as may be
amended and supplemented.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included in
or approved pursuant to the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan or
otherwise intended to address the Borough's fair share obligation, and
includes, but is not limited to, an inclusionary development, a municipal
construction project or a one-hundred-percent-affordable housing
development.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROGRAM(S) — Any mechanism in a municipal
Fair Share Plan prepared or implemented to address a municipality's fair
share obligation.
AFFORDABLE UNIT — A housing unit proposed or created pursuant to
the Act and approved for crediting by the Court and/or funded through an
affordable housing trust fund.
AGE-RESTRICTED UNIT — A housing unit designed to meet the needs
of, and exclusively for, the residents of an age-restricted segment of the
population such that:
All the residents of the development wherein the unit is situated are 62
years of age or older; or
A.
At least 80% of the units are occupied by one person who is 55 years of
age or older; or
B.
§ 85-2 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 85-2
77:72
AGENCY — The New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency
established by P.L. 1983, c. 530 (N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1 et seq.).
ALTERNATIVE LIVING ARRANGEMENT — A structure in which households
live in distinct bedrooms, yet share kitchen and plumbing facilities, central
heat and common areas. Alternative living arrangements include, but are
not limited to: transitional facilities for the homeless; Class A, B, C, D and
E boarding homes as regulated by the State of New Jersey Department
of Community Affairs; residential health care facilities as regulated by the
New Jersey Department of Health; group homes for the developmentally
disabled and mentally ill as licensed and/or regulated by the New Jersey
Department of Human Services; and congregate living arrangements.
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE — A facility that is licensed by the New
Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services to provide apartment-style
housing and congregate dining and to assure that assisted living services
are available when needed for four or more adult persons unrelated to the
proprietor and that offers units containing, at a minimum, one unfurnished
room, a private bathroom, a kitchenette and a lockable door on the unit
entrance.
CERTIFIED HOUSEHOLD — A household that has been certified by an
administrative agent as a low-income household or moderate-income
household.
COAH — The Council on Affordable Housing, as established by the New
Jersey Fair Housing Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.).
DCA — The State of New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
DEFICIENT HOUSING UNIT — A housing unit with health and safety code
violations that requires the repair or replacement of a major system. A
major system includes weatherization, roofing, plumbing (including wells),
heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including septic systems), lead paint
abatement and/or load bearing structural systems.
DEVELOPER — Any person, partnership, association, company or
corporation that is the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or any
land included in a proposed development including the holder of an option
to contract to purchase, or other person having an enforceable proprietary
interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation, or enlargement of any use or change in the use of any building
or other structure, or of any mining, excavation or landfill, and any use or
change in the use of any building or other structure, or land or extension
of use of land, for which permission may be required pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
The development has been designated by the Secretary of the United
States Department of Housing and Urban Development as "housing for
older persons" as defined in Section 807(b)(2) of the Fair Housing Act,
42 U.S.C. § 3607.
C.
§ 85-2 WATERWORKS § 85-2
77:73
INCLUSIONARY DEVELOPMENT — A development containing both
affordable units and market rate units. This term includes, but is not limited
to: new construction, the conversion of a nonresidential structure to
residential use and the creation of new affordable units through the gut
rehabilitation or reconstruction of a vacant residential structure.
LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income equal to 50% or less of the median household income.
LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a low-income
household.
MAJOR SYSTEM — The primary structural, mechanical, plumbing,
electrical, fire protection, or occupant service components of a building
which include but are not limited to weatherization, roofing, plumbing
(including wells), heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including septic
systems), lead paint abatement and load-bearing structural systems.
MARKET-RATE UNITS — Housing not restricted to low- and moderateincome
households that may sell or rent at any price.
MEDIAN INCOME — The median income by household size for the
applicable housing region, as adopted annually by COAH or a successor
entity approved by the Court.
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross
annual household income in excess of 50% but less than 80% of the median
household income.
MODERATE-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a
moderate-income household.
NONEXEMPT SALE — Any sale or transfer of ownership other than the
transfer of ownership between husband and wife; the transfer of ownership
between former spouses ordered as a result of a judicial decree of divorce
or judicial separation, but not including sales to third parties; the transfer of
ownership between family members as a result of inheritance; the transfer
of ownership through an executor's deed to a Class A beneficiary and the
transfer of ownership by court order.
RANDOM SELECTION PROCESS — A process by which currently incomeeligible
households are selected for placement in affordable housing units
such that no preference is given to one applicant over another except for
purposes of matching household income and size with an appropriately
priced and sized affordable unit (e.g., by lottery).
REGIONAL ASSET LIMIT — The maximum housing value in each housing
region affordable to a four-person household with an income at 80% of
the regional median as defined by duly adopted regional income limits
published annually by COAH or a successor entity.
REHABILITATION — The repair, renovation, alteration or reconstruction of
any building or structure, pursuant to the Rehabilitation Subcode, N.J.A.C.
5:23-6.
§ 85-2 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 85-2
77:74
RENT — The gross monthly cost of a rental unit to the tenant, including the
rent paid to the landlord, as well as an allowance for tenant-paid utilities
computed in accordance with allowances published by DCA for its Section
8 program. In assisted living residences, rent does not include charges for
food and services.
RESTRICTED UNIT — A dwelling unit, whether a rental unit or an
ownership unit, that is subject to the affordability controls of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1, as amended and supplemented, but does not include a marketrate
unit financed under UHORP or MONI.
UHAC — The Uniform Housing Affordability Controls set forth in N.J.A.C.
5:80-26 et seq.
VERY LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income equal to 30% or less of the median household income for
the applicable housing region.
VERY LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a very
low-income household.
WEATHERIZATION — Building insulation (for attic, exterior walls and crawl
space), siding to improve energy efficiency, replacement storm windows,
replacement storm doors, replacement windows and replacement doors,
and is considered a major system for purposes of a rehabilitation program.
§ 85-3. Applicability.
§ 85-4. Alternative living arrangements.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all affordable housing
developments and affordable housing units that currently exist and that
are proposed to be created within the Borough of Collingswood
pursuant to the Borough's most recently adopted Housing Element and
Fair Share Plan.
B. The following sections shall apply to all developments that contain lowand
moderate-income housing units, including any currently
unanticipated future developments that will provide low- and moderateincome
housing units.
A. The administration of an alternative living arrangement shall be in
compliance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.8 and UHAC, with the following
exceptions:
(1) Affirmative marketing (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15); provided, however,
that the units or bedrooms may be affirmatively marketed by the
provider in accordance with an alternative plan approved by the
Court;
(2) Affordability average and bedroom distribution (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3).
B. With the exception of units established with capital funding through a
twenty-year operating contract with the Department of Human
§ 85-2 WATERWORKS § 85-4
77:75
§ 85-5. Phasing schedule for inclusionary zoning.
In inclusionary developments the following schedule shall be followed:
Maximum Percentage of Market-
Rate Units Completed
Minimum Percentage of Lowand
Moderate-Income Units
Completed
25 0
25+1 10
50 50
75 75
90 100
§ 85-6. New construction.
Services, Division of Developmental Disabilities, alternative living
arrangements shall have at least thirty-year controls on affordability in
accordance with UHAC, unless an alternative commitment is approved
by the Court.
C. The service provider for the alternative living arrangement shall act as
the administrative agent for the purposes of administering the
affirmative marketing and affordability requirements for the alternative
living arrangement.
A. Low/moderate split and bedroom distribution of affordable housing
units.
(1) The fair share obligation shall be divided equally between low- and
moderate-income units, except that where there is an odd number
of affordable housing units, the extra unit shall be a low-income
unit. At least 13% of all restricted rental units shall be very lowincome
units (affordable to a household earning 30% or less of
median income. The very low income units shall be counted as part
of the required number of low income units within the
development. At least 25% of the obligation shall be met through
rental units, including at least half in rental units available to
families. A maximum of 25% may be age restricted. At least half of
the units in total shall be available to families.
(2) In each affordable development, at least 50% of the restricted units
within each bedroom distribution shall be low-income units.
(3) Affordable developments that are not age-restricted shall be
structured in conjunction with realistic market demands such that:
(a) The combined number of efficiency and one-bedroom units
shall be no greater than 20% of the total low- and moderateincome
units;
§ 85-4 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 85-6
77:76
(b) At least 30% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
two-bedroom units;
(c) At least 20% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
three-bedroom units; and
(d) The remaining units may be allocated among two- and threebedroom
units at the discretion of the developer.
(4) Affordable developments that are age-restricted shall be structured
such that the number of bedrooms shall equal the number of agerestricted
low- and moderate-income units within the inclusionary
development. This standard may be met by having all one-bedroom
units or by having a two-bedroom unit for each efficiency unit.
B. Accessibility requirements.
(1) The first floor of all restricted townhouse dwelling units and all
restricted units in all other multistory buildings shall be subject to
the technical design standards of the Barrier Free Subcode,
N.J.A.C. 5:23-7 and the following:
(2) All restricted townhouse dwelling units and all restricted units in
other multistory buildings in which a restricted dwelling unit is
attached to at least one other dwelling unit shall have the following
features:
(a) An adaptable toilet and bathing facility on the first floor; and
(b) An adaptable kitchen on the first floor; and
(c) An interior accessible route of travel on the first floor; and
(d) An adaptable room that can be used as a bedroom, with a door
or the casing for the installation of a door, on the first floor;
and
(e) If not all of the foregoing requirements in Subsection B(2)(a)
through (d) can be satisfied, then an interior accessible route
of travel must be provided between stories within an individual
unit, but if all of the terms of Subsection B(2)(a) through (d)
above have been satisfied, then an interior accessible route of
travel shall not be required between stories within an
individual unit; and
(f) An accessible entranceway as set forth at P.L. 2005, c. 350
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-311a et seq.) and the Barrier Free Subcode,
N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, or evidence that Collingswood has collected
funds from the developer sufficient to make 10% of the
adaptable entrances in the development accessible:
[1] Where a unit has been constructed with an adaptable
entrance, upon the request of a disabled person who is
§ 85-6 WATERWORKS § 85-6
77:77
purchasing or will reside in the dwelling unit, an
accessible entrance shall be installed.
[2] To this end, the builder of restricted units shall deposit
funds within the Borough of Collingswood's Affordable
Housing Trust Fund sufficient to install accessible
entrances in 10% of the affordable units that have been
constructed with adaptable entrances.
[3] The funds deposited under Subsection B(2)(f)[2] above
shall be used by the Borough of Collingswood for the sole
purpose of making the adaptable entrance of an affordable
unit accessible when requested to do so by a person with a
disability who occupies or intends to occupy the unit and
requires an accessible entrance.
[4] The developer of the restricted units shall submit a design
plan and cost estimate to the Construction Official of the
Borough of Collingswood for the conversion of adaptable
to accessible entrances.
[5] Once the Construction Official has determined that the
design plan to convert the unit entrances from adaptable
to accessible meet the requirements of the Barrier Free
Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, and that the cost estimate of
such conversion is reasonable, payment shall be made to
the Borough's Affordable Housing Trust Fund in care of
the Borough Chief Financial Officer who shall ensure that
the funds are deposited into the Affordable Housing Trust
Fund and appropriately earmarked.
[6] Full compliance with the foregoing provisions shall not be
required where an entity can demonstrate that it is "site
impracticable" to meet the requirements. Determinations
of site impracticability shall be in compliance with the
Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
C. Design.
(1) In inclusionary developments, to the extent possible, low- and
moderate-income units shall be integrated with the market units.
(2) In inclusionary developments, low- and moderate-income units
shall have access to all of the same common elements and facilities
as the market units.
D. Maximum rents and sales prices.
(1) In establishing rents and sales prices of affordable housing units,
the administrative agent shall follow the procedures set forth in
UHAC, utilizing the regional income limits approved by the Court.
§ 85-6 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 85-6
77:78
(2) The maximum rent for restricted rental units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households earning
no more than 60% of median income, and the average rent for
restricted rental units shall be affordable to households earning no
more than 52% of median income.
(3) The developers and/or municipal sponsors of restricted rental units
shall establish at least one rent for each bedroom type for both lowincome
and moderate-income units, provided that at least 13% of
all low- and moderate-income rental units shall be affordable to
very low-income households, earning 30% or less of the regional
median household income.
(4) The maximum sales price of restricted ownership units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households earning
no more than 70% of median income, and each affordable
development must achieve an affordability average of 55% for
restricted ownership units; in achieving this affordability average,
moderate-income ownership units must be available for at least
three different sales prices for each bedroom type, and low-income
ownership units must be available for at least two different sales
prices for each bedroom type.
(5) In determining the initial sales prices and rent levels for
compliance with the affordability average requirements for
restricted units other than assisted living facilities and agerestricted
developments, the following standards shall be used:
(a) A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
(b) A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one-and-one-half
person household;
(c) A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a three-person
household;
(d) A three-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a four and one-half
person household; and
(e) A four-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a six-person
household.
(6) In determining the initial sales prices and rents for compliance with
the affordability average requirements for restricted units in
assisted living facilities and age-restricted developments, the
following standards shall be used:
(a) A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
(b) A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one-and-one-half
person household; and
§ 85-6 WATERWORKS § 85-6
77:79
(c) A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a two-person
household or to two one-person households.
(7) The initial purchase price for all restricted ownership units shall be
calculated so that the monthly carrying cost of the unit, including
principal and interest (based on a mortgage loan equal to 95% of
the purchase price and the Federal Reserve H.15 rate of interest),
taxes, homeowner and private mortgage insurance and
condominium or homeowner association fees do not exceed 28% of
the eligible monthly income of the appropriate size household as
determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be amended and
supplemented; provided, however, that the price shall be subject to
the affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may
be amended and supplemented.
(8) The initial rent for a restricted rental unit shall be calculated so as
not to exceed 30% of the eligible monthly income of the appropriate
size household, including an allowance for tenant paid utilities, as
determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be amended and
supplemented; provided, however, that the rent shall be subject to
the affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may
be amended and supplemented.
(9) The price of owner-occupied low- and moderate-income units may
increase annually based on the percentage increase in the regional
median income limit for each housing region. In no event shall the
maximum resale price established by the administrative agent be
lower than the last recorded purchase price.
(10) The rent of low- and moderate-income units may be increased
annually based on the permitted percentage increase in the
Housing Consumer Price Index for the United States. This increase
shall not exceed 9% in any one year. Rents for units constructed
pursuant to low-income housing tax credit regulations shall be
indexed pursuant to the regulations governing low- income housing
tax credits.
E. Multifamily zones/overlay zones.
(1) The general requirements for developments of eight dwelling units
per acre set forth in this Subsection E shall apply to the following:
(a) Planning Board action on subdivision or site plan applications;
(b) Zoning Board adjustment actions and variances;
(c) Redevelopment plans adopted by the governing body; and
(d) Rehabilitation plans adopted by the governing body.
(2) Any property in the Borough of Collingswood that is currently
zoned for nonresidential uses and that is subsequently rezoned for
residential purposes or receives a zoning change or a use variance
§ 85-6 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 85-6
77:80
to permit residential development, or receives a zoning change or a
density variance to permit higher density residential development,
and provided such residential development provides a sufficient
compensatory benefit in terms of the density of development
permitted, shall provide an affordable housing set-aside as set
forth in Subsection E(3) below. The determination of a "sufficient
compensatory benefit" shall be a density that is above the
presumptive density pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.6.
(3) Any rental or for sale multifamily development of five or more units
and a density of eight dwelling units per acre or greater in the
Borough shall be required to set aside a minimum of 15% of the
total number of units as affordable housing units. Where this
requirement results in a fraction of a unit, the fraction shall be
rounded to the nearest whole unit. Fractions of less than 1/2 shall
be rounded off to the lower unit and fractions of greater than 1/2
shall be rounded off to the higher whole unit.
(4) In inclusionary developments, low- and moderate-income units
shall be integrated with the market units. However, for
developments of up to 20 units, not specifically identified in the
Borough's Fair Share Plan, the Borough may, in its sole discretion,
permit payments in lieu of constructing affordable units or the
construction of affordable units off-site, in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:97-6.4. For development of 21 to 30 units, not specifically
identified in the Borough's Fair Share Plan, the Borough may, in its
sole discretion, permit up to 50% of the required set aside to be met
through payments in lieu of constructing affordable units or the
construction of affordable units off-site, in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:97-6.4, provided that the municipality identified how the off-site
units will be provided on a one-for-one basis at the time of the final
site plan approval for the inclusionary development and provides
notice of information regarding the provision of the off-site units to
Fair Share Housing Center 10 days before the site plan approval is
heard. Developments of 31 units or more shall provide the units on
site, with no off-site option.
(5) All payments-in-lieu referenced above shall be expended for
construction of affordable units conforming to a compliance
mechanism recognized in N.J.A.C. 5:93 within four years of the
deposit of the payments-in-lieu in the Borough's Affordable
Housing Trust Fund, and such expenditure shall be deemed a
commitment of funds pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.3.
(6) The Inclusionary Zoning Ordinance shall not be deemed an
admission by the Borough that affordable housing set-asides
automatically constitute an inherently beneficial use for purposes
of zoning variances.
(7) For additional compliance mechanisms, the Borough agrees to rely
on N.J.A.C. 5:93 with regard to the compliance mechanism
§ 85-6 WATERWORKS § 85-6
77:81
§ 85-7. Utilities.
§ 85-8. Occupancy standards.
In referring certified households to specific restricted units, the
administrative agent shall, to the extent feasible and without causing an
undue delay in the occupancy of a unit, strive to:
§ 85-9. Control periods for restricted ownership units and
enforcement mechanisms.
specifically described therein. For additional compliance
mechanisms to address unmet need, the Borough agrees to rely on
N.J.A.C. 5:93-4.2.
(8) Thirteen percent of the Borough's third-round prospective need
obligation will be met through very low income housing, and the
Borough shall provide for a lookback at least once every three
years to make sure this provision is complied with for the units built
during that period.
A. Affordable units shall utilize the same type of heating source as market
units within an inclusionary development.
B. Tenant-paid utilities included in the utility allowance shall be set forth
in the lease and shall be consistent with the utility allowance approved
by DCA for its Section 8 program.
A. Provide an occupant for each bedroom;
B. Provide children of different sexes with separate bedrooms;
C. Provide separate bedrooms for parents and children; and
D. Prevent more than two persons from occupying a single bedroom.
A. Control periods for restricted ownership units shall be in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5, as may be amended and supplemented, and
each restricted ownership unit shall remain subject to the requirements
of this chapter for a period of at least 30 years, until Collingswood takes
action to release the unit from such requirements. Prior to such action,
a restricted ownership unit must remain subject to the requirements of
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented.
B. The affordability control period for a restricted ownership unit shall
commence on the date the initial certified household takes title to the
unit.
C. Prior to the issuance of the initial certificate of occupancy for a
restricted ownership unit and upon each successive sale during the
period of restricted ownership, the administrative agent shall
determine the restricted price for the unit and shall also determine the
§ 85-6 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 85-9
77:82
§ 85-10. Price restrictions for restricted ownership units,
homeowner association fees and resale prices.
Price restrictions for restricted ownership units shall be in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented, including:
§ 85-11. Buyer income eligibility.
nonrestricted, fair market value of the unit based on either an appraisal
or the unit's equalized assessed value without the restrictions in place.
D. At the time of the initial sale of the unit, the initial purchaser shall
execute and deliver to the administrative agent a recapture note
obligating the purchaser (as well as the purchaser's heirs, successors
and assigns) to repay, upon the first nonexempt sale after the unit's
release from the restrictions set forth in this chapter, an amount equal
to the difference between the unit's nonrestricted fair market value and
its restricted price, and the recapture note shall be secured by a
recapture lien evidenced by a duly recorded mortgage on the unit.
E. The affordability controls set forth in this chapter shall remain in effect
despite the entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure with
respect to restricted ownership units.
F. A restricted ownership unit shall be required to obtain a continuing
certificate of occupancy or a certified statement from the construction
official stating that the unit meets all Code standards upon the first
transfer of title following the removal of the restrictions provided under
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5(a), as may be amended and supplemented.
A. The initial purchase price for a restricted ownership unit shall be
approved by the administrative agent.
B. The administrative agent shall approve all resale prices, in writing and
in advance of the resale, to assure compliance with the foregoing
standards.
C. The master deeds of inclusionary developments shall provide no
distinction between the condominium or homeowner association fees
and special assessments paid by low- and moderate-income purchasers
and those paid by market purchasers.
D. The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
administrative agent to increase the maximum sales price for the unit
on the basis of anticipated capital improvements. Eligible capital
improvements shall be those that render the unit suitable for a larger
household or the addition of a bathroom. See § 85-13.
A. Buyer income eligibility for restricted ownership units shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and
supplemented, such that low-income ownership units shall be reserved
for households with a gross household income less than or equal to 50%
§ 85-9 WATERWORKS § 85-11
77:83
§ 85-12. Limitations on indebtedness secured by ownership unit;
subordination.
§ 85-13. Capital improvements to ownership units.
of median income and moderate-income ownership units shall be
reserved for households with a gross household income less than 80%
of median income.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, the administrative agent may,
upon approval by the Borough Commissioners, and subject to the
Court's approval, permit moderate-income purchasers to buy lowincome
units in housing markets if the administrative agent determines
that there is an insufficient number of eligible low-income purchasers to
permit prompt occupancy of the units. All such low-income units to be
sold to moderate-income households shall retain the required pricing
and pricing restrictions for low-income units.
C. A certified household that purchases a restricted ownership unit must
occupy it as the certified household's principal residence and shall not
lease the unit; provided, however, that the administrative agent may
permit the owner of a restricted ownership unit, upon application and a
showing of hardship, to lease the restricted unit to another certified
household for a period not to exceed one year.
D. The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted ownership unit when the household is a low-income
household or a moderate-income household, as applicable to the unit,
and the estimated monthly housing cost for the particular unit
(including principal, interest, taxes, homeowner and private mortgage
insurance and condominium or homeowner association fees, as
applicable) does not exceed 33% of the household's eligible monthly
income.
A. Prior to incurring any indebtedness to be secured by a restricted
ownership unit, the owner shall apply to the administrative agent for a
determination in writing that the proposed indebtedness complies with
the provisions of this section, and the administrative agent shall issue
such determination prior to the owner incurring such indebtedness.
B. With the exception of first purchase money mortgages, neither an
owner nor a lender shall at any time cause or permit the total
indebtedness secured by a restricted ownership unit to exceed 95% of
the maximum allowable resale price of the unit, as such price is
determined by the administrative agent in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.6(b).
A. The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
administrative agent to increase the maximum sales price for the unit
on the basis of capital improvements made since the purchase of the
unit. Eligible capital improvements shall be those that render the unit
§ 85-11 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 85-13
77:84
§ 85-14. Control periods for restricted rental units.
§ 85-15. Rent restrictions for rental units; leases.
suitable for a larger household or that adds an additional bathroom. In
no event shall the maximum sales price of an improved housing unit
exceed the limits of affordability for the larger household.
B. Upon the resale of a restricted ownership unit, all items of property that
are permanently affixed to the unit or were included when the unit was
initially restricted (for example, refrigerator, range, washer, dryer,
dishwasher, wall-to-wall carpeting) shall be included in the maximum
allowable resale price. Other items may be sold to the purchaser at a
reasonable price that has been approved by the administrative agent at
the time of the signing of the agreement to purchase. The purchase of
central air conditioning installed subsequent to the initial sale of the
unit and not included in the base price may be made a condition of the
unit resale, provided that the price, which shall be subject to ten-year,
straight-line depreciation, has been approved by the administrative
agent. Unless otherwise approved by the administrative agent, the
purchase of any property other than central air conditioning shall not
be made a condition of the unit resale. The owner and the purchaser
must personally certify at the time of closing that no unapproved
transfer of funds for the purpose of selling and receiving property has
taken place at the time of or as a condition of resale.
A. Control periods for restricted rental units shall be in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.11, as may be amended and supplemented and each
restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the requirements of this
chapter for a period of at least 30 years, until Collingswood takes action
to release the unit from such requirements. Prior to such action, a
restricted rental unit must remain subject to the requirements of
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented.
B. Deeds of all real property that include restricted rental units shall
contain deed restriction language. The deed restriction shall have
priority over all mortgages on the property, and the deed restriction
shall be filed by the developer or seller with the records office of the
County of Camden. A copy of the filed document shall be provided to the
administrative agent within 30 days of the receipt of a certificate of
occupancy.
C. A restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the affordability controls
of this chapter despite the occurrence of any of the following events:
(1) Sublease or assignment of the lease of the unit;
(2) Sale or other voluntary transfer of the ownership of the unit; or
(3) The entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure on the
property containing the unit.
§ 85-13 WATERWORKS § 85-15
77:85
§ 85-16. Tenant income eligibility.
A. A written lease shall be required for all restricted rental units and
tenants shall be responsible for security deposits and the full amount of
the rent as stated on the lease. A copy of the current lease for each
restricted rental unit shall be provided to the administrative agent.
B. No additional fees or charges shall be added to the approved rent
(except, in the case of units in an assisted living residence, to cover the
customary charges for food and services) without the express written
approval of the administrative agent.
C. Application fees (including the charge for any credit check) shall not
exceed 5% of the monthly rent of the applicable restricted unit and shall
be payable to the administrative agent to be applied to the costs of
administering the controls applicable to the unit as set forth in this
chapter.
D. No rent control ordinance or other pricing restriction shall be
applicable to either the market units or the affordable units in any
development in which at least 15% of the total number of dwelling units
are restricted rental units in compliance with this chapter.
A. Tenant income eligibility shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.13, as may be amended and supplemented, and shall be
determined as follows:
(1) Very low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than or equal to 30% of median
income.
(2) Low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with a
gross household income less than or equal to 50% of median
income.
(3) Moderate-income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than 80% of median income.
B. The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted rental unit when the household is a very low-income
household, low-income household or a moderate-income household, as
applicable to the unit, and the rent proposed for the unit does not
exceed 35% (40% for age-restricted units) of the household's eligible
monthly income as determined pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.16, as may
be amended and supplemented; provided, however, that this limit may
be exceeded if one or more of the following circumstances exists:
(1) The household currently pays more than 35% (40% for households
eligible for age-restricted units) of its gross household income for
rent, and the proposed rent will reduce its housing costs;
§ 85-15 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 85-16
77:86
§ 85-17. Municipal Housing Liaison.
(2) The household has consistently paid more than 35% (40% for
households eligible for age-restricted units) of eligible monthly
income for rent in the past and has proven its ability to pay;
(3) The household is currently in substandard or overcrowded living
conditions;
(4) The household documents the existence of assets with which the
household proposes to supplement the rent payments; or
(5) The household documents reliable anticipated third-party
assistance from an outside source such as a family member in a
form acceptable to the administrative agent and the owner of the
unit.
C. The applicant shall file documentation sufficient to establish the
existence of the circumstances in Subsections A and B above with the
administrative agent, who shall counsel the household on budgeting.
A. The Borough of Collingswood shall appoint a specific municipal
employee to serve as a Municipal Housing Liaison responsible for
administering the affordable housing program, including affordability
controls, the Affirmative Marketing Plan, monitoring and reporting,
and, where applicable, supervising any contracted administrative
agent. Collingswood shall adopt an ordinance creating the position of
Municipal Housing Liaison. Collingswood shall adopt a resolution
appointing a Municipal Housing Liaison. The Municipal Housing
Liaison shall be appointed by the governing body and may be a full- or
part-time municipal employee. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be
approved by the Court and shall be duly qualified through a training
program sponsored by Affordable Housing Professionals of New Jersey
before assuming the duties of Municipal Housing Liaison.
B. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight and
administration of the affordable housing program for Collingswood,
including the following responsibilities which may not be contracted
out to the administrative agent:
(1) Serving as Collingswood's primary point of contact for all inquiries
from the state, affordable housing providers, administrative agents
and interested households;
(2) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in Collingswood's Fair
Share Plan;
(3) Compiling, verifying and submitting annual monitoring reports as
may be required by the Court;
(4) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
administrative agents, as needed; and
§ 85-16 WATERWORKS § 85-17
77:87
§ 85-18. Administrative agent.
The administrative agent shall be an independent entity serving under
contract to and reporting to the municipality. The fees of the administrative
agent shall be paid by the owners of the affordable units for which the
services of the administrative agent are required. The administrative agent
shall perform the duties and responsibilities of an administrative agent as
set forth in UHAC, including those set forth in Sections 5:80-26.14, 16 and
18 thereof, which includes:
(5) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring and affirmative marketing at least
annually and more often as needed.
C. Subject to the approval of the Court, the Borough of Collingswood shall
designate one or more administrative agent(s) to administer newly
constructed affordable units in accordance with UHAC. An operating
manual for each affordable housing program shall be provided by the
administrative agent(s) to be adopted by resolution of the governing
body and subject to approval of the Court. The operating manual(s)
shall be available for public inspection in the office of the Borough
Clerk, in the office of the Municipal Housing Liaison, and in the office(s)
of the administrative agent(s). The Municipal Housing Liaison shall
supervise the contracting administrative agent(s).
A. Affirmative marketing:
(1) Conducting an outreach process to affirmatively market affordable
housing units in accordance with the Affirmative Marketing Plan of
the Borough of Collingswood and the provisions of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.15; and
(2) Providing counseling or contracting to provide counseling services
to low- and moderate-income applicants on subjects such as
budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental lease
requirements, and landlord/tenant law.
B. Household certification:
(1) Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on interviews
with interested households;
(2) Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient documentation of
gross income and assets upon which to base a determination of
income eligibility for a low- or moderate- income unit;
(3) Providing written notification to each applicant as to the
determination of eligibility or noneligibility;
(4) Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units execute a
certificate substantially in the form, as applicable, of either the
§ 85-17 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 85-18
77:88
ownership or rental certificates set forth in Appendixes J and K of
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.;
(5) Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible applicant
households living in the housing region and eligible applicant
households with members working in the housing region where the
units are located; and
(6) Employing a random selection process as provided in the
Affirmative Marketing Plan of the Borough of Collingswood when
referring households for certification to affordable units.
C. Affordability controls:
(1) Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed restrictions
and mortgages for recording at the time of conveyance of title of
each restricted unit;
(2) Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for its
control period, including the recorded deed with restrictions,
recorded mortgage and note, as appropriate;
(3) Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and cancellation
of the mortgage note are effectuated and properly filed with the
Camden County Register of Deeds or County Clerk's office after the
termination of the affordability controls for each restricted unit;
(4) Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and
(5) Ensuring the issuance of continuing certificates of occupancy or
certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10.
D. Resales and rerentals:
(1) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of communicating
information between owners and the administrative agent
regarding the availability of restricted units for resale or rerental;
and
(2) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of communicating
information to low- and moderate-income households regarding the
availability of restricted units for resale or rerental.
E. Processing requests from unit owners:
(1) Reviewing and approving requests for determination from owners
of restricted units who wish to take out home equity loans or
refinance during the term of their ownership that the amount of
indebtedness to be incurred will not violate the terms of this
chapter;
(2) Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices from
owners of restricted units who wish to make capital improvements
to the units that would affect the selling price, such authorizations
§ 85-18 WATERWORKS § 85-18
77:89
to be limited to those improvements resulting in additional
bedrooms or bathrooms and the depreciated cost of central air
conditioning systems;
(3) Notifying the municipality of an owner's intent to sell a restricted
unit; and
(4) Making determinations on requests by owners of restricted units
for hardship waivers.
F. Enforcement:
(1) Securing annually from the municipality a list of all affordable
housing units for which tax bills are mailed to absentee owners,
and notifying all such owners that they must either move back to
their unit or sell it;
(2) Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted units, at
the earliest point of contact in the processing of the project or
development, written acknowledgement of the requirement that no
restricted unit can be offered, or in any other way committed, to
any person, other than a household duly certified to the unit by the
administrative agent;
(3) The posting annually in all rental properties, including two-family
homes, of a notice as to the maximum permitted rent together with
the telephone number of the administrative agent where
complaints of excess rent or other charges can be made;
(4) Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable dwelling units,
reminding them of the notices and requirements outlined in
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4;
(5) Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent payments to the
municipality's Affordable Housing Trust Fund; and
(6) Creating and publishing a written operating manual for each
affordable housing program administered by the administrative
agent, to be approved by the Borough governing body and the
Court, setting forth procedures for administering the affordability
controls.
G. Additional responsibilities:
(1) The administrative agent shall have the authority to take all actions
necessary and appropriate to carry out its responsibilities
hereunder.
(2) The administrative agent shall prepare monitoring reports for
submission to the Municipal Housing Liaison in time to meet any
monitoring requirements and deadlines imposed by the Court.
§ 85-18 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 85-18
77:90
§ 85-19. Affirmative marketing requirements.
(3) The administrative agent shall attend continuing education
sessions on affordability controls, compliance monitoring, and
affirmative marketing at least annually and more often as needed.
A. The Borough of Collingswood shall adopt by resolution an Affirmative
Marketing Plan, subject to approval of the Court, that is compliant with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15, as may be amended and supplemented.
B. The Affirmative Marketing Plan is a regional marketing strategy
designed to attract buyers and/or renters of all majority and minority
groups, regardless of race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry,
marital or familial status, gender, affectional or sexual orientation,
disability, age or number of children to housing units which are being
marketed by a developer, sponsor or owner of affordable housing. The
Affirmative Marketing Plan is intended to target those potentially
eligible persons who are least likely to apply for affordable units in that
region. It is a continuing program that directs marketing activities
toward Housing Region 2 and is required to be followed throughout the
period of restriction.
C. The Affirmative Marketing Plan shall provide a regional preference for
all households that live and/or work in Housing Region 5, comprised of
Burlington, Camden and Gloucester Counties.
D. The municipality has the ultimate responsibility for adopting the
Affirmative Marketing Plan and for the proper administration of the
Affirmative Marketing Program, including initial sales and rentals and
resales and rerentals. The administrative agent designated by the
Borough of Collingswood shall implement the Affirmative Marketing
Plan to assure the affirmative marketing of all affordable units.
E. In implementing the Affirmative Marketing Plan, the administrative
agent shall provide a list of counseling services to low- and moderateincome
applicants on subjects such as budgeting, credit issues,
mortgage qualification, rental lease requirements, and landlord/tenant
law.
F. The Affirmative Marketing Plan shall describe the media to be used in
advertising and publicizing the availability of housing. In implementing
the Affirmative Marketing Plan, the administrative agent shall consider
the use of language translations where appropriate.
G. The affirmative marketing process for available affordable units shall
begin at least four months (120 days) prior to the expected date of
occupancy.
H. Applications for affordable housing shall be available in several
locations, including, at a minimum, the County Administration Building
and/or the County Library for each county within the housing region;
the municipal administration building and the municipal library in the
§ 85-18 WATERWORKS § 85-19
77:91
§ 85-20. Enforcement of affordable housing regulations.
municipality in which the units are located; and the developer's rental
office. Applications shall be mailed to prospective applicants upon
request.
I. The costs of advertising and affirmative marketing of the affordable
units shall be the responsibility of the developer, sponsor or owner.
A. Upon the occurrence of a breach of any of the regulations governing the
affordable unit by an owner, developer or tenant, the municipality shall
have all remedies provided at law or equity, including but not limited to
foreclosure, tenant eviction, a requirement for household
recertification, acceleration of all sums due under a mortgage,
recuperation of any funds from a sale in violation of the regulations,
injunctive relief to prevent further violation of the regulations, entry on
the premises, and specific performance.
B. After providing written notice of a violation to an owner, developer or
tenant of a low- or moderate-income unit and advising the owner,
developer or tenant of the penalties for such violations, the municipality
may take the following action(s) against the owner, developer or tenant
for any violation that remains uncured for a period of 60 days after
service of the written notice:
(1) The municipality may file a court action pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2A:58-11 alleging a violation or violations of the regulations
governing the affordable housing unit. If the owner, developer or
tenant is adjudged by the Court to have violated any provision of
the regulations governing affordable housing units the owner,
developer or tenant shall be subject to one or more of the following
penalties, at the discretion of the Court:
(a) A fine of not more than $500 per day or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed 90 days, or both, provided that each and
every day that the violation continues or exists shall be
considered a separate and specific violation of these provisions
and not a continuation of the initial offense;
(b) In the case of an owner who has rented a low- or moderateincome
unit in violation of the regulations governing affordable
housing units, payment into the Borough of Collingswood
Affordable Housing Trust Fund of the gross amount of rent
illegally collected;
(c) In the case of an owner who has rented a low- or moderateincome
unit in violation of the regulations governing affordable
housing units, payment of an innocent tenant's reasonable
relocation costs, as determined by the Court.
(2) The municipality may file a court action in the Superior Court
seeking a judgment that would result in the termination of the
§ 85-19 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 85-20
77:92
owner's equity or other interest in the unit, in the nature of a
mortgage foreclosure. Any such judgment shall be enforceable as
if the same were a judgment of default of the first purchase money
mortgage and shall constitute a lien against the low- or moderateincome
unit.
(a) The judgment shall be enforceable, at the option of the
municipality, by means of an execution sale by the Sheriff, at
which time the low- and moderate-income unit of the violating
owner shall be sold at a sale price which is not less than the
amount necessary to fully satisfy and pay off any first purchase
money mortgage and prior liens and the costs of the
enforcement proceedings incurred by the municipality,
including attorney's fees. The violating owner shall have his
right to possession terminated as well as his title conveyed
pursuant to the Sheriff's sale.
(b) The proceeds of the Sheriff's sale shall first be applied to
satisfy the first purchase money mortgage lien and any prior
liens upon the low- and moderate-income unit. The excess, if
any, shall be applied to reimburse the municipality for any and
all costs and expenses incurred in connection with either the
court action resulting in the judgment of violation or the
Sheriff's sale. In the event that the proceeds from the Sheriff's
sale are insufficient to reimburse the municipality in full as
aforesaid, the violating owner shall be personally responsible
for the full extent of such deficiency, in addition to any and all
costs incurred by the municipality in connection with collecting
such deficiency. In the event that a surplus remains after
satisfying all of the above, such surplus, if any, shall be placed
in escrow by the municipality for the owner and shall be held in
such escrow for a maximum period of two years or until such
earlier time as the owner shall make a claim with the
municipality for such. Failure of the owner to claim such
balance within the two-year period shall automatically result in
a forfeiture of such balance to the municipality. Any interest
accrued or earned on such balance while being held in escrow
shall belong to and shall be paid to the municipality, whether
such balance shall be paid to the owner or forfeited to the
municipality.
(c) Foreclosure by the municipality due to violation of the
regulations governing affordable housing units shall not
extinguish the restrictions of the regulations governing
affordable housing units as the same apply to the low- and
moderate-income unit. Title shall be conveyed to the purchaser
at the Sheriff's sale, subject to the restrictions and provisions
of the regulations governing the affordable housing unit. The
owner determined to be in violation of the provisions of this
plan and from whom title and possession were taken by means
§ 85-20 WATERWORKS § 85-20
77:93
§ 85-21. Appeals.
Appeals from all decisions of an administrative agent appointed pursuant to
this chapter shall be filed in writing with the Court.
Chapter 89
AIR POLLUTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Development regulations — See Ch. 141.
Littering and dumping — See Ch. 197.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 211.
of the Sheriff's sale shall not be entitled to any right of
redemption.
(d) If there are no bidders at the Sheriff's sale, or if insufficient
amounts are bid to satisfy the first purchase money mortgage
and any prior liens, the municipality may acquire title to the
low- and moderate-income unit by satisfying the first purchase
money mortgage and any prior liens and crediting the violating
owner with an amount equal to the difference between the first
purchase money mortgage and any prior liens and costs of the
enforcement proceedings, including legal fees and the
maximum resale price for which the low- and moderate-income
unit could have been sold under the terms of the regulations
governing affordable housing units. This excess shall be
treated in the same manner as the excess which would have
been realized from an actual sale as previously described.
(e) Failure of the low- and moderate-income unit to be either sold
at the Sheriff's sale or acquired by the municipality shall
obligate the owner to accept an offer to purchase from any
qualified purchaser which may be referred to the owner by the
municipality, with such offer to purchase being equal to the
maximum resale price of the low- and moderate-income unit as
permitted by the regulations governing affordable housing
units.
(f) The owner shall remain fully obligated, responsible and liable
for complying with the terms and restrictions of governing
affordable housing units until such time as title is conveyed
from the owner.
§ 85-20 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 85-21
89:94
ARTICLE I
Chimneys, Smokestacks and Vents
[Adopted 8-16-1971 by Ord. No. 662 as Ch. 33, Art. I, of the 1971
Code]
§ 89-1. Emissions restricted.
It shall be unlawful to cause or permit the emission of noxious gases,
fumes, smoke containing soot, dust or other objectionable materials from
any chimney, smokestack or other vent, in such a quantity or of such a
character as to endanger or be likely to endanger the public health, safety
or property of any person within the limits of the Borough of Collingswood.
§ 89-2. Discharge-control devices.
Any owner, agent, manager, tenant or occupant of any building to which
is attached any chimney, smokestack or other vent connected with any
stationary engine, steam boiler, fuel-burning equipment or any other
apparatus or equipment which does or is likely to emit noxious gases,
fumes, smoke containing soot, dust or other objectionable materials shall
place upon said chimney, smokestack or other vent some satisfactory device
for eliminating such noxious gases, fumes, smoke containing soot, dust or
other objectionable materials before they are discharged into the open air.
§ 89-3. Exceptions.
Nothing in this Article shall be construed to prohibit the use of any steam
roller, steam derrick, tar kettle or other machine, furnace or contrivance
in the construction or repair of any street, highway or building or for the
grading or dredging of any land or body of water or any locomotive operated
by any railroad or public utility company.
§ 89-4. Violations and penalties.14
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article shall be subject to
a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.), imprisonment in the
county jail not exceeding ninety (90) days or a period of community service
not exceeding ninety (90) days, or any combination thereof, in the discretion
of the court. Each day on which said violation continues or occurs shall be
deemed a distinct and separate offense.
14.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 89-1 AIR POLLUTION § 89-4
89:95

ARTICLE II
Buildings, Yards and Open Lots
[Adopted 8-16-1971 by Ord. No. 662 as Ch. 33, Art. II, of the 1971
Code]
§ 89-5. Noxious and offensive emissions.
It shall be unlawful to cause or permit the emission of noxious and offensive
gases, fumes, dust and odors from any factory, mill, plant, storehouse,
warehouse or other building or from any yard or open lot in such a quantity
or of such a character as to endanger or be likely to endanger the public
health and safety or in such a quantity or of such a character as to be
offensive or objectionable to the occupants of other properties or to persons
passing in and along the public highways of the Borough of Collingswood.
§ 89-6. Violations and penalties.15
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article shall be subject to
a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.), imprisonment in the
county jail not exceeding ninety (90) days or a period of community service
not exceeding ninety (90) days, or any combination thereof, in the discretion
of the court. Each day on which said violation continues or occurs shall be
deemed a distinct and separate offense.
15.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 89-5 AIR POLLUTION § 89-6
89:97
Chapter 93
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Drugs and drug paraphernalia — See Ch. 149.
Littering and dumping — See Ch. 197.
Parks — See Ch. 217.
Landlord responsibilities for rental
property — See Ch. 237, Art. I.
§ 89-6 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 89-6
93:98
ARTICLE I
Consumption; Open Containers
[Adopted 3-15-1976 as Ord. No. 716 (Ch. 34, Art. I, of the 1971
Code)]
§ 93-1. Consumption in certain places prohibited.
No person shall consume any liquor, wine, beer or any other alcoholic
beverage or have access to or have in his or her possession any open bottle,
can, jar or any other vessel containing liquor, wine, beer or any alcoholic
beverage:
§ 93-2. Discarding containers.
No person shall discard any bottle, can, jar or other vessel containing or
having contained liquor, wine, beer or any other alcoholic beverage upon
any public street, lane, sidewalk, public parking lot, quasi-public place
or upon any private property not his or her own, without the express
permission of the owner or any person having authority to grant such
permission.
§ 93-3. Exceptions.
The prohibitions contained in § 93-1 hereof shall not apply to any
conveyance or place specifically licensed for the consumption of alcoholic
beverages in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.
§ 93-4. Aiding in or permitting violations.
Any person who suffers, aids, abets or permits any person to violate any
provision of this Article shall also be deemed in violation of this Article.
§ 93-5. Violations and penalties.16
Any person violating this Article, upon conviction thereof, shall pay a fine
not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.), be imprisoned in the county
jail for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days or serve a period of community
A. While in or on a public street, lane, sidewalk, public parking lot or
quasi-public parking lot or any other public or quasi-public place or in
any public conveyance.
B. In a private conveyance while such conveyance is in motion, stopped or
parked in or on a public street, lane, public parking lot or quasi-public
parking lot.
C. While in or on private property not his or her own, without having the
express permission of the owner or any person authorized to grant such
permission.
16.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 93-1 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 93-5
93:99
service for not more than ninety (90) days, or any combination thereof, for
each offense, in the discretion of the court.
§ 93-5 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 93-5
93:100
Chapter 97
AMUSEMENT DEVICES, COIN-OPERATED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements — See Ch. 101.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 193.
Loitering — See Ch. 201.
Noise — See Ch. 207.
Poolrooms — See Ch. 223.
§ 97-1. Purpose; object.
§ 97-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES — Any automatic mechanical
or electronic amusement device, game or device of skill or entertainment
which is operated or set in motion by the deposit therein of any coin or
coins, tokens or slugs or the like thereof, purchased for cash, including but
not limited to video-type games or machines, pinball machines or similar
devices that use a display screen for points, lines or dots or light that can
be manipulated to simulate games or other types of entertainment, and
any type of coin-operated device in which a person views films, pictures,
animation or any type of visual display whatsoever.
§ 97-3. License required; exemption.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to license, regulate and control those
automatic amusement devices which are operated for the purpose of
making a profit.
B. The object of this chapter is to regulate the business of amusement
devices so as to prevent nuisances to patrons and the public, fire
hazards from overcrowding, poor ingress and egress of premises where
amusement devices are located, the promotion of gambling, loitering or
the creation of an unhealthy atmosphere for the youth and citizens of
the borough or other foreseeable undesirable effects of such devices.
A. No person, firm or corporation shall install, place, maintain, operate or
possess in any store, place of business, building, public place or quasipublic
place wherein the public is invited or may enter any coinoperated
amusement device within the limits of the Borough of
Collingswood without first applying for and obtaining a license therefor
for each and every coin-operated amusement device to be installed.
B. Notwithstanding anything contained in this section to the contrary,
there is hereby exempted from the aforementioned licensing fee
§ 93-5 AMUSEMENT DEVICES, COIN-OPERATED § 97-3
97:101
§ 97-4. Application requirements; eligibility.
§ 97-5. Investigation of applicant; recommendation.
Upon receipt of the application set forth above, the Chief of Police of the
Borough of Collingswood or his designee shall cause such investigation
to be made of the applicant's business and moral character as he deems
necessary for the protection of the public good. His investigation may
include photographs and fingerprints of the applicant. If, as a result of such
investigation, the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to
be unsatisfactory and contrary to the public welfare, the Chief of Police shall
deny the application. If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's
character and business responsibility are found to be satisfactory, the Chief
of Police shall recommend his approval to the Commissioners for their
subsequent approval or disapproval.
§ 97-6. Location of devices; use restrictions.
requirements all organizations, associations and corporations not for
profit, organized pursuant to the provisions of Title 15 of the New
Jersey Revised Statutes or otherwise, whose primary activity is
religious, educational or fraternal.
A. All license applicants must be at least eighteen (18) years of age and
shall submit a separate application for each coin-operated amusement
device, which shall be filed, together with the appropriate fee therefor,
with the Borough Clerk, which application shall state the following:
(1) The name, age and address of the owner and/or lessor of the coinoperated
amusement device and the name and address of the
bailee/lessee of such device.
(2) A sketch indicating the location of the premises, the approximate
interior dimensions and the proposed placement within the
premises where said devices are to be installed, used or kept.
(3) The name and address of the owner of such premises.
(4) A specific description of the type of coin-operated amusement
device sought to be licensed, together with the serial number or
other means of identification. All replacement machines shall be
similarly reported to the Municipal Clerk within ten (10) days of
installation.
B. The truth of the information submitted in any application under this
section shall be sworn to, and any willful misstatement therein shall be
considered a violation of this section and shall subject the offender to
the penalties provided herein.
A. Each device shall be located at least ten (10) feet from the entranceway
for the premises in which it is located and placed so that it does not
§ 97-3 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 97-6
97:102
§ 97-7. Hours and days of operation.
The hours of operation of any place licensed under this chapter shall be as
follows:
§ 97-8. License fees.
The fee for a license to operate a coin-operated amusement device shall be
as follows:
§ 97-9. Licenses nontransferable; refunds not granted.
No license issued pursuant to this section is transferable, and no license fee
shall be refunded upon the revocation or surrender of any license.
§ 97-10. Contents of license; display; issuance; expiration.
obstruct or interfere with the free and unfettered passage of patrons or
users of the premises.
B. Each device shall have an unobstructed zone of at least three (3) feet on
one (1) side of the three (3) linear borders of said device wherein the
users of said device may use, watch or wait to use said device.
C. Each device may only be used or operated during the hours of operation
of the premises in which it is located and when the operator or an
employee of the operator is present in the premises.
D. No device subject to this chapter may be operated on a property or
premises whose property line is within five hundred (500) feet of the
property line of a school, church or publicly owned building. [Amended
2-22-1983 by Ord. No. 803]
A. Monday through Saturday, 10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
B. Such place shall not operate on Sunday.
A. For the first three (3) machines: two hundred fifty dollars ($250.) per
device.
B. For four (4) through six (6) machines: one hundred fifty dollars ($150.)
per device.
C. For seven (7) through nine (9) machines: fifty dollars ($50.) per device.
D. For ten (10) or more machines: twenty-five dollars ($25.) per device.
A. Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall specify the location of the
premises on which the licensed coin-operated amusement device is to
be used or kept, a brief description of the device, the device's number
or other means of identification and the name and address of the owner
and lessee or bailee of said device.
§ 97-6 AMUSEMENT DEVICES, COIN-OPERATED § 97-10
97:103
§ 97-11. Use of devices for prizes and profits.
It shall be unlawful to install, maintain and use any such coin-operated
amusement device for the purpose of giving, directly or indirectly, any prize,
return or profit for the use of such device.
§ 97-12. Floor area requirements.
No more than fifty percent (50%) of the gross floor area of any one (1)
location or any room in a location shall be used or covered by coin-operated
amusement devices. Measurement of the area covered by any one (1) device
shall include the floor area actually covered by the machines, together with
the square foot area set forth in the unobstructed zone set forth in § 97-6B.
§ 97-13. Minors.
No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be admitted to the area
in which any coin-operated amusement device is located or be permitted to
use or operate any such device or to frequent or lounge or congregate or
gather in any such place during school hours, which are defined as between
8 a.m. and 3 p.m., Mondays through Fridays, exclusive of legal holidays.
§ 97-14. Conduct.
No persons shall be permitted to frequent or lounge or congregate or gather
in any such place in which any coin-operated device is located so as to cause
a nuisance to patrons or so as to cause any type of fire or safety hazard in
the subject location.
§ 97-15. Violations and penalties.17
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not
more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.), imprisoned in the county jail for a
period not to exceed ninety (90) days or sentenced to a period of community
service for not more than ninety (90) days, or any combination thereof; and
B. All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be posted and at all
times displayed in a conspicuous place at or near the licensed device.
C. All licenses herein provided for shall be issued by the Borough Clerk
only after a resolution of the Board of Commissioners of the Borough of
Collingswood shall have been adopted approving said application and
only after the payment of the license fee herein provided for. All such
licenses shall be valid from the date of issuance until the 31st day of
December next after the same is issued. Any license issued on or after
August 1 shall require the payment of one-half (1/2) of the annual fee
for the remainder of the calendar year of its issuance.
17.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 97-10 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 97-15
97:104
each day in which a violation of any provision of this chapter exists shall
constitute a separate violation.
Chapter 101
AMUSEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 93.
Coin-operated amusement devices — See Ch.
97.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 193.
Littering and dumping — See Ch. 197.
§ 97-15 AMUSEMENTS § 97-15
101:105

ARTICLE I
Shows, Exhibitions, Parades and Circuses
[Adopted 8-16-1971 by Ord. No. 662 as Ch. 35, Art. I, of the 1971
Code]
§ 101-1. License required.18
It shall be unlawful to operate or conduct any theater, show, circus, parade,
carnival, fair, exhibition or any other amusement in the Borough of
Collingswood without first obtaining a license from the Board of
Commissioners.
§ 101-2. Prerequisite to issuance of license.
Before any license is issued for the above purposes, satisfactory evidence
must be presented to the Board of Commissioners that good morals will not
be corrupted nor public safety endangered.
§ 101-3. License fee; issuance; revocation.19
The Board of Commissioners of the Borough of Collingswood is hereby
empowered to issue licenses for the conducting and carrying on of shows,
circuses, exhibitions or entertainments aforesaid in the Borough of
Collingswood, County of Camden and State of New Jersey, upon the
payment to the Borough of Collingswood of a license fee of ten dollars
($10.); provided, however, that said license shall be revocable at the option
of the Board of Commissioners when said Board is satisfied that sufficient
grounds exist to revoke said license; provided, however, that before any
license is revoked, the Board of Commissioners shall grant a summary
hearing to the person or corporation offending.
§ 101-4. Violations and penalties.20
Any person, persons or corporation who or which shall conduct any place
of amusement in the Borough of Collingswood without first obtaining a
license for the conduct of shows and entertainments in such place shall
be subject to a penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.),
imprisonment in the county jail for not more than ninety (90) days or a
period of community service for not more than ninety (90) days, or any
combination thereof.
18.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
19.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
20.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 101-1 AMUSEMENTS § 101-4
101:107
Chapter 105
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 207.
Parks — See Ch. 217.
Rental property — See Ch. 237.
§ 101-4 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 101-4
101:108
ARTICLE I
Licensing and Control of Dogs
[Adopted 8-16-1971 by Ord. No. 662 as Ch. 52 of the 1971 Code]
§ 105-1. Definitions.
The words hereinafter defined shall have the meanings herein indicated for
the purposes of this article, as follows:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Collingswood in the County of Camden.
DOG OF LICENSING AGE — Any dog which has attained the age of seven
months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
KENNEL — Any establishment wherein or whereon the business of
boarding or selling dogs or breeding dogs for sale is carried on, except
a pet shop and veterinarian's office. No kennel shall be permitted in said
Borough.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a dog, includes every
person having a right of property in such dog and every person who has
such dog in his keeping.
PERSON — An individual, firm, partnership, corporation or association of
persons.
PET SHOP — Any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition pen not part
of a kennel, wherein dogs for sale are kept or displayed.
STRAY OR ABANDONED ANIMAL — Any domesticated animal, carnivorous
or otherwise, to effectuate this article.
VETERINARIAN — Any doctor of veterinary medicine who has, at his office
or hospital, space for the temporary keeping of dogs.21
§ 105-2. Dog license required; compliance required.
No person shall keep, harbor or possess any dog within the Borough of
Collingswood without first obtaining a license therefor, to be issued by the
Clerk of the Borough, upon application by the owner and payment of the
prescribed fee. No person shall keep, harbor or possess any dog in said
Borough except in compliance with the provisions of this Article.
§ 105-3. Application for license; registration tag.
Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog of licensing age shall, in the
month of January 1971 and annually thereafter, apply for and procure from
the Clerk of the Borough a license and official metal registration tag for
each such dog so owned, kept or harbored and shall place upon each such
dog a collar or harness with the registration tag securely fastened thereto.
21.Editor's Note: The definition of "vicious dog," which originally followed this definition, was
repealed 8-15-1994 by Ord. No. 1058.
§ 105-1 AMUSEMENTS § 105-4
101:109
§ 105-4. License fee; expiration; exemption from fees; late fee.
[Amended 1-3-1983 by Ord. No. 801; 12-15-1986 by Ord. No. 882;
8-15-1994 by Ord. No. 1058]
§ 105-5. Time limit for making license application.
The owner of any newly acquired dog of licensing age or of any dog which
attains licensing age shall make application for a license and registration
tag for such dog within 10 days after such acquisition or age attainment.
§ 105-6. Application information; issuance of registration numbers.
The application shall state the breed, sex, age, color and markings of the
dog for which the license and registration are sought and whether it is
of a long- or short-haired variety; also the name, street and post office
address of the owner and the person who shall keep or harbor such dog.
The information on said application and the registration number issued
for the dog shall be preserved for a period of three years by the Clerk of
the Borough. In addition, he shall forward similar information to the State
Department of Health each month on forms furnished by said Department.
Registration numbers shall be issued in the order of the applications.
§ 105-7. Dogs brought into Borough.
Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Borough of
Collingswood any dog licensed in another state for the current year and
bearing a registration tag and who shall keep the same or permit the same
to be kept within the Borough for a period of more than 90 days shall
immediately apply for a license and registration tag for each such dog
unless such dog is licensed under § 105-9 of this article.
A. The person applying for the license shall pay a fee of $17 for each
neutered/spayed dog or $20 for each unneutered/unspayed dog.
Included in this fee is a state registration fee of $1; a state pilot clinic
fee of $0.20; and for dogs that have not been spayed or neutered, a
state surcharge fee of $3. All licenses expire on December 31 of the
current year and are renewable the following year. [Amended
4-2-2007 by Ord. No. 1428; 12-27-2011 by Ord. No. 1504]
B. Dogs used as guides for blind persons and commonly known as "Seeing
Eye" dogs, dogs used to assist handicapped persons and commonly
known as "service" dogs and dogs used to assist deaf persons and
commonly known as "hearing ear" dogs shall be licensed and registered
as other dogs hereinabove provided for, except that the owner or
keeper of such dog shall not be required to pay any fee therefor.
C. Any person who violates this section by not securing the required dog
license and/or renewing an expired license prior to March 31 of each
year shall be subject to a late fee of $10. Said fee shall be charged per
household. [Added 1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 1141]
§ 105-4 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 105-8
101:110
§ 105-8. Unlawful removal or attachment of tag.
No person, except an officer in the performance of his duties, shall remove a
registration tag from the collar of any dog without the consent of the owner,
nor shall any person attach a registration tag to a dog for which it was not
issued.
§ 105-9. Licensing requirements for pet shops and veterinary
hospitals.
§ 105-10. License fee for pet shop; no license fee for veterinary
hospital.22
The annual license fee for a pet shop shall be $10. No fee shall be charged
for a veterinary hospital.
A. Any person who keeps or operates or proposes to establish a pet shop
or a veterinary hospital shall apply to the Clerk of the Borough for a
license to entitle him to keep or operate such establishment.
B. The application shall describe the premises where the establishment is
located or is proposed to be located and the purpose for which it is to be
maintained and shall be accompanied by the written approval of the
adjoining property owners within 200 feet of a proposed establishment.
C. The Board of Commissioners shall approve the application and
authorize the issuance of a license after it has found and determined
that the applicant has provided adequate evidence that the use is not
nor shall constitute a nuisance with respect to noise, drainage, lights,
smoke, litter, odors or traffic nor be detrimental to the public interest,
and the license shall be accompanied by written approval showing
compliance with the local and state ordinances, laws and regulations
governing the location of and sanitation at such establishments.
D. All licenses issued for a pet shop or veterinary hospital shall state the
purpose for which the establishment is maintained, and all such
licenses shall expire on the last day of June of each year and be subject
to revocation by the Board of Commissioners on the recommendations
of the State Department of Health or the Board of Commissioners after
the owner has been afforded a hearing by either the State Department
of Health or the Board of Commissioners. [Amended 8-15-1994 by
Ord. No. 1058]
E. Any person holding such license shall not be required to secure
individual licenses for dogs owned by such licensee and kept at such
establishments; such licenses shall not be transferable to another
owner or different premises.
22.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 105-8 AMUSEMENTS § 105-11
101:111
§ 105-11. Dogs off premises of pet shop or veterinary hospital.
No dog kept in a pet shop or veterinary hospital shall be permitted off such
premises, except on a leash or in a crate or under other safe control.
§ 105-12. Disposition of fees.
§ 105-13. Information regarding pet shops and veterinary hospitals
to be forwarded to state.
The Clerk of the Borough shall forward to the State Department of Health a
list of all licensed pet shops and veterinary hospitals within 30 days after the
licenses therefor are issued, which list shall include the name and address
of the licensee and the kind of license issued.
§ 105-14. Annual canvass.
The police of the Borough shall promptly, after February 1, 1971, and
annually thereafter, cause a canvass to be made of all dogs owned, kept or
harbored within the limits of the Borough and shall report to the Clerk of
the Borough, the Board of Commissioners and to the State Department of
A. License fees and other moneys collected or received under the
provision of this Article, except registration tag fees, shall be forwarded
to the Treasurer of the Borough after collection or receipt and shall be
placed in a special account separate from any of the other accounts of
the Borough and which shall be used for the following purposes only:
(1) For collecting, keeping and disposing of dogs liable to seizure
under this Article.
(2) For local prevention and control of rabies.
(3) For providing antirabic treatment under the direction of the Board
of Commissioners for any person known or suspected to have been
exposed to rabies.
(4) For all other purposes prescribed by the statutes of New Jersey
governing the subject and for administering the provisions of this
Article.
B. Any unexpended balance remaining in such special account shall be
retained therein until the end of the third fiscal year following and may
be used for any of the purposes set forth in this section. At the end of
said third fiscal year following and at the end of each fiscal year
thereafter, there shall be transferred from such special account to the
general funds of the Borough any amount then in such account which is
in excess of the total amount paid into said special account during the
last two fiscal years next preceding.
C. The registration fee required for each dog shall be forwarded within 30
days after the collection by the Clerk to the State Department of Health.
§ 105-11 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 105-14
101:112
Health the result thereof, setting forth in separate columns the names and
addresses of persons owning, keeping or harboring such dogs; the number
of licensed dogs owned, kept or harbored by each of said persons, together
with the registration numbers of each of said dogs; and the number of
unlicensed dogs owned, kept or harbored by each of said persons, together
with a complete description of each of said unlicensed dogs.
§ 105-15. Animal Control Officer.23
The Board of Commissioners shall have the power to appoint an Animal
Control Officer or to contract for animal control. Duties shall be to enforce
the provisions of this Article and any other laws or regulations, including
impounding all dogs running at large in violation of the provisions of this
Article, and to perform such other acts as are allowed by law.
§ 105-16. Impounding of dogs; release; disposition.24
A. The Animal Control Officer of the Borough shall take into custody and
impound or cause to be taken into custody and impounded and
thereafter offered for adoption or destroyed as provided in this section:
(1) Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring said dog which said official or his agent or agents have
reason to believe is a stray dog.
(2) Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring said dog without a current registration tag on his collar.
(3) Any female dog in season off the premises of the owner or of the
person keeping or harboring said dog.
B. If any dog so seized wears a collar or harness having inscribed thereon
or attached thereto the name and address of any person or a
registration tag or if the owner or the person keeping or harboring said
dog is known, the Animal Control Officer shall forthwith serve on the
person whose address is given on the collar or on the owner or the
person keeping or harboring said dog, if known, a notice, in writing,
stating that the dog has been seized and will be liable to be offered for
adoption or destroyed if not claimed within seven days after the service
of the notice.
C. A notice under this section may be served either by delivering it to the
person on whom it is to be served or by leaving it at the person's usual
or last known place of abode or at the address given on the collar or by
forwarding it by post in a prepaid letter addressed to that person at his
usual or last known place of abode or to the address given on the collar.
23.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 105-14 AMUSEMENTS § 105-16
101:113
§ 105-17. Seizure of dogs while in immediate pursuit.
Any officer or agent authorized or empowered to perform any duty under
this Article is hereby authorized to go upon any premises to seize for
impounding any dog or dogs which he may lawfully seize and impound when
such officer is in immediate pursuit of such dog or dogs, except upon the
premises of the owner of the dog if said owner is present and forbids the
same.
§ 105-18. Interference with officials.25
No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this Article, and any person who
shall in any way hinder or interfere with the Animal Control Officer, police
officers or officials or any other such officers in the performance of their
duty under the provisions of this Article or who shall refuse to give
information to any person authorized under this Article shall be deemed to
have violated the provisions of this Article.26
D. Every dog so seized and impounded shall be kept, fed and kindly
treated by the Animal Control Officer for the above period of seven days
and may be redeemed by the owner by the payment of the license fee
and maintenance fee which shall be $2 for the first day and $2 for each
additional day that said dog is impounded. All moneys collected by the
Animal Control Officer, excepting the license fee, shall be kept for his
own use but reported to the Borough Treasurer. Licensing fees shall be
paid by the Animal Control Officer to the Borough Treasurer on or
before the first day of each month following receipt thereof by the
Animal Control Officer.
E. Every dog impounded as aforesaid and not redeemed as aforesaid
within said period of seven days may be killed by such Animal Control
Officer, but only in a humane manner causing as little pain as possible.
F. If any resident of the Borough shall deliver to the Animal Control Officer
any dog owned by said resident and request the Animal Control Officer
to kill such dog and at the same time pay such Animal Control Officer
the sum of $5, such Animal Control Officer shall thereupon receive such
dog and kill the same in the manner above prescribed for the killing of
impounded and unredeemed dogs. No impounded dog shall be
redeemed or released until after the same shall have been duly licensed
and tagged as required by this Article.
25.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
26.Editor's Note: Original § 52-19, Vicious dogs, which immediately followed this section, was
deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 105-16 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 105-19
101:114
§ 105-19. Disposition of fines.
All fines under this Article shall be made payable to the Dog Account of the
Borough of Collingswood, and all costs recovered under this Article shall be
paid to the Borough Treasurer of the Borough of Collingswood.
§ 105-20. Rabid animals.27
Any dog or other warm-blooded animal showing signs and/or symptoms and/
or appearing to be mad or rabid and threatening human beings or other
animals shall be killed immediately by any policeman, special officer or
Animal Control Officer in a manner not to mutilate the head portion of said
dog or animal, and the head shall be delivered promptly to the New Jersey
State Department of Health laboratories for analysis to determine whether
said dog or animal was infected with communicable rabies.
§ 105-21. Dogs running at large.
Any person owning, keeping or harboring any dog, whether the dog is
licensed or unlicensed, who shall suffer or permit said dog to run at large
in or about the streets, highways or public places of the Borough or to run
at large upon the lands and premises of any person other than the owner or
persons in possession of said dog without permission of said landowner first
obtained, in writing, shall be guilty of a violation of this Article.
§ 105-22. Leashing of dogs.
No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog shall suffer or permit the
same to be upon the public streets or in any public places of the Borough
unless such dog is accompanied by a person over the age of 12 years and
of such mental and physical capacity that he or she is able to control said
dog by leash, provided, always in any case, that there shall be control of
such dog by an adequate leash with not more than six feet thereof extended
between the person in control of such dog and the dog itself.
§ 105-23. Causing injury to persons or property; waste products.
[Amended 4-19-1982 by Ord. No. 790]
A. Injury to persons. No person owning, keeping or harboring a dog shall
permit or suffer it to do any injury to persons.
B. Injury to property. It shall be unlawful for any person owning or
possessing a dog to permit such dog to go upon any sidewalk, parkway
or private lands or premises without the permission of the owner of
such premises and break, bruise, tear up, crush or injure any lawn,
flower bed, plant, shrub, tree or garden in any manner whatsoever or to
defecate thereon.
27.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 105-19 AMUSEMENTS § 105-23
101:115
§ 105-24. Excessive barking and howling. [Amended 6-16-1975 by
Ord. No. 701]
No person who owns, keeps, harbors or possesses any dog or dogs shall
suffer, permit or allow such dog or dogs to bark and/or howl for such
period or periods of time that it or they reasonably become an annoyance or
nuisance to persons living or being within the vicinity or neighbors thereof.
§ 105-25. Quarantine of certain dangerous animals.28
Any dog, cat or other animal which has attacked or bitten a person shall
be confined, at the expense of the owner or person in charge of it, upon
the premises of the owner or person in charge or at some other place
designated in the notice issued by the quarantining officer who shall be
appointed Animal Control Officer or the enforcing official of the Board of
Commissioners. The quarantine period shall be for at least 10 days after
the animal has attacked or bitten a person. The rules and regulations of the
Board of Health governing quarantine procedures shall be followed.
§ 105-26. Enforcement.29
For the better enforcement of this Article, the Chief of Police of the Borough
and every member of the Department shall share with the Animal Control
Officer all the responsibilities of enforcement, and it shall be the duty of said
Police Chief and all officers under his command to see that the provisions
of this Article are strictly enforced. The Animal Control Officer may, at any
time, call upon the Chief of Police or any officer under his command for aid
and assistance wherever such aid is more conducive toward the effectuating
of this Article; and it shall be the duty of the Police Department and all
members thereof to respond promptly to the call of any citizen who reports
any violation hereof.
C. Waste products accumulations. It shall be unlawful for any person to
cause or permit a dog or cat to be on property, public or private, not
owned or possessed by such person unless such person has in his
immediate possession an appropriate device for scooping excrement
and an appropriate depository for the transmission of excrement to a
receptacle located upon the property owned or possessed by such
person. This subsection shall not apply to a person who is visually or
physically handicapped.
28.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
29.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 105-23 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 105-27
101:116
§ 105-27. Complaints; issuance of process.30
The Judge of the Municipal Court of the Borough or any person duly
designated to sit in his stead is empowered by this Article, upon the filing
of a complaint, in writing, by any person authorized by the Board of
Commissioners, when the plaintiff is the Chief of Police or any member
of the Police Department, the Director of Public Safety of the Borough
or the duly designated Animal Control Officer or when the plaintiff is the
municipality, alleging that a violation of this Article has occurred, which
complaint may be made upon information and belief, to issue process at
the suit of the Borough, as the case may be, as plaintiff. The process
shall be either in the nature of a summons or warrant, which warrant
may issue without any order of the court first being obtained against the
person so charged, which process, when in the nature of a warrant, shall
be returnable forthwith and, when in the nature of a summons, shall be
returnable in not less than five days. The process shall state what provision
of this Article or of any statute pertaining to the subject matter hereof has
been violated by the defendant or defendants. The court having jurisdiction
may, at all times, amend all defects and errors in the complaint and process
issued hereunder.
§ 105-28. Violations and penalties.31
Except as provided by N.J.S.A. 4:19-1 et seq., any person found guilty of
violating or of an offense against any of the provisions of this Article or
of the rules and regulations of the State Department of Health relating
to dogs and other domestic animals or any law or statute relating to the
subject matter hereof shall, upon conviction thereof before any judicial
officer authorized to hear and determine the matter, forfeit and pay such
fine not exceeding the sum of $1,000 as shall be imposed by such judicial
officer in his discretion and/or, if the person so convicted is a natural person,
be imprisoned for such term not exceeding 90 days or serve a period of
community service for not more than 90 days as such judicial officer in
his discretion shall determine; provided, however, that the judicial officer
may impose the fine, imprisonment and/or community service requirement
within the limits established hereunder as in his discretion may seem just
and right.
30.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
31.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 105-27 AMUSEMENTS § 105-28
101:117

ARTICLE II
Cats
[Adopted 4-6-1992 as Ord. No. 1011]
§ 105-29. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL — A dog or cat.
ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY — Any person or agency designated or
certified by the State of New Jersey to enforce the provisions of this Article,
including the Borough of Collingswood Animal Control Officer, or any
person or entity under contract with the Borough for the control of
animals.32
CAT — Any member of the domestic feline species, male, female or altered.
CAT OF LICENSING AGE — Any cat which has attained the age of seven
months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
CATTERY — Any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition pen not part of
a kennel, wherein cats for sale are kept or displayed.
HARBORING — Maintaining custody or control over a cat or permitting
a cat to remain on the premises or providing shelter or food, which shall
include the leaving of food in an area to which stray cats have access.
LICENSING AUTHORITY — The agency or department of the Borough
of Collingswood or any designated representative thereof charged with
administering the issuance and/or revocation of permits and licenses under
the provisions of this Article.
NEUTERED — Rendered permanently incapable of reproduction as certified
by a licensed veterinarian.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a cat, includes every
person having a right of property (or custody) in such cat and every person
who has such cat in his/her keeping or who harbors or maintains a cat or
knowingly permits a cat to remain on or about any premises occupied by
that person.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, organization or
institution commonly recognized by law as a unit.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — A cat that damages either public or private property
or harms the lawful users or occupants thereof.
STRAY CAT — A cat having no known owner or custodian or known place of
care and shelter.
§ 105-30. Vaccination requirements; exemptions.
32.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 105-29 AMUSEMENTS § 105-30
101:119
§ 105-31. License required; display of license number.
Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a cat of licensing age shall
annually apply for and procure from the Clerk of the Borough or other
official designated by the governing body thereof to license cats in the
Borough in which he/she resides a license and official registration tag with
license number or a registration sleeve for each cat so owned, kept or
harbored and shall place upon such cat a collar or other device with the
license number securely fastened or displayed thereto. Acceptable methods
of displaying license numbers shall include but are not limited to breakaway
or elastic collars. License tags or sleeves are not transferable.
§ 105-32. Time limit for making license application.
The owner of any newly acquired cat of licensing age or of any cat which
attains licensing age shall make application for a license tag or sleeve
for such cat within 10 days after such acquisition or age attainment. This
requirement will not apply to a nonresident keeping a cat within the
Borough of Collingswood for no longer than 90 days.
§ 105-33. Cats brought into Borough.
A. Vaccination and license requirements. No person shall own, keep,
harbor or maintain any cat over seven months of age within the
Borough of Collingswood unless such cat is vaccinated and licensed.
The provisions of this section do not apply to cats held in a cattery or to
those held by a state or federally licensed research facility or veterinary
establishment where cats are received or kept for diagnostic, medical,
surgical or other treatments or licensed animal shelters, pounds,
kennels or pet shops.
B. Vaccination. All cats shall be vaccinated against rabies by a licensed
veterinarian in accordance with the latest Compendium of Animal
Rabies Vaccines and Recommendations for Immunization published by
the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians, except as
provided for in Subsection D.
C. Vaccination certificate. A certificate of vaccination shall be issued on a
form recommended by the state to the owner of each vaccinated
animal.
D. Exemptions. Any cat may be exempted from the requirements of such
vaccination for a specified period of time by the local board of health
upon presentation of a veterinarian's certificate stating that because of
an infirmity or other physical condition or regimen of therapy, the
inoculation of such cat shall be deemed inadvisable.
A. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into this Borough
any cat licensed in another state for the current year and bearing a
registration tag or sleeve and who shall keep the same or permit the
same to be kept within the Borough for a period of more than 90 days
§ 105-30 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 105-33
101:120
§ 105-34. Application information.
The application shall state the breed, sex, age, color and markings of the cat
for which the license and registration are sought and whether it is of a longor
short-haired variety; also the name, street and post office address of the
owner and the person who shall keep or harbor such cat. The information
on said application and the registration number issued for the cat shall be
preserved for a period of three years by the Clerk or other local official
designated to license cats in this municipality.
§ 105-35. Contents of license forms and official tags or sleeves.
License forms and official tags or sleeves shall be furnished by the
municipality and shall be numbered serially and shall bear the year of
issuance and the name of the municipality.
§ 105-36. Evidence of rabies inoculation required prior to licensing.
No municipal Clerk or other official designated by the governing body of
any municipality to license cats therein shall grant any such license and
official registration tag or sleeve for any cat unless the owner thereof
provides evidence that the cat to be licensed and registered has been
inoculated with a rabies vaccine of a type approved by and administered
in accordance with the recommendation of the United States Department
of Agriculture and the United States Department of Human Services or has
been certified exempt as provided by § 105-30 of this Article. The rabies
inoculation shall be administered by a duly licensed veterinarian or by such
other veterinarian permitted by law to do the same.
§ 105-37. License fees; delinquent fee.
A license shall be issued after payment of a fee of $8 for each unneutered
cat and $5 for each neutered cat. Persons who fail to obtain a license as
required within the time period specified in this Article will be subject to a
delinquent fee of $2.
§ 105-38. Cats licensed in another municipality; renewal of license;
expiration.
shall immediately apply for a license and registration tag or sleeve for
such cat.
B. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into this Borough
any unlicensed cat and who shall keep the same or permit the same to
be kept within the Borough for a period of more than 10 days shall
immediately apply for a license and registration tag or sleeve for each
such cat.
A. A license from another municipality shall be accepted. The person
applying for the license and registration tag and/or sleeve shall pay the
fee fixed or authorized. The fee for the renewal of a license and
§ 105-33 AMUSEMENTS § 105-38
101:121
§ 105-39. Loss of license; replacement fee.
If a license tag or sleeve has been misplaced or lost, the Borough Clerk may
issue a duplicate license and/or registration sleeve for that particular cat at
a fee of $1.
§ 105-40. Proof of licensing.
Proof of licensing shall be produced by any person owning, keeping,
maintaining or harboring a cat, upon the request of any health official,
police officer, animal control officer or other authorized person.
§ 105-41. Interference with officials.
No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this Article.
§ 105-42. Disposition of fees.
registration tag or sleeve shall be the same as for the original, and said
license, registration tag or sleeve and renewal thereof shall expire on
December 31 in the following year.
B. Only one license and registration tag or sleeve shall be required in the
licensing year for any cat in this Borough. Any valid New Jersey license
tag or sleeve issued by a New Jersey municipality shall be accepted by
this Borough as evidence of compliance.
A. License fees and other moneys collected or received under the
provisions of this Article shall be forwarded to the Treasurer of the
Borough, other accounts of the Borough and shall be used for the
following purposes only:
(1) Collecting, keeping and disposing of cats liable to seizure.
(2) Local prevention and control of rabies.
(3) Providing antirabies treatment under the direction of the local
Board of Health for any person known or suspected to have been
exposed to rabies.
(4) Administering the provisions of this Article.
B. Any unexpected balance remaining in such special account shall be
retained until the end of the third fiscal year following and may be used
for any of the purposes set forth in this section. At the end of said third
fiscal year following and at the end of each fiscal year thereafter, there
shall be transferred from such special account to the general funds of
the Borough any amount then in such account which is in excess of the
total amount paid into the special account during the last two fiscal
years next preceding.
§ 105-38 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 105-43
101:122
§ 105-43. Control over cats; nuisances prohibited.
§ 105-44. Harboring stray or unlicensed cats. [Amended 9-6-2016
by Ord. No. 1606]
No person shall harbor any nonowned, unlicensed or stray cat or make food
available to the same following receipt of a notice from the Secretary of
the Board of Health, police, Nuisance Officer, Animal Control Officer or the
Superintendent of Public Works.
§ 105-45. Violations and penalties.
Except as otherwise provided in this Article, any person who violates or who
fails or refuses to comply with this Article shall be liable to a penalty of
not less than $25 nor more than $500 for each offense, to be recovered by
and in the name of the local Board of Health or by and in the name of the
Borough.
A. Any person who owns, keeps or harbors any cat located within the
Borough of Collingswood or permits a cat to enter the Borough of
Collingswood shall exercise sufficient and proper care and control over
such animal at all times so as to prevent the animal from becoming a
public nuisance or otherwise violating this Article.
B. No person owning, keeping or harboring any cat shall permit it to soil,
defile or commit any nuisance on any place where people congregate or
walk upon any public property whatsoever. This provision shall not
apply to privately owned property of the owner or keeper of the cat and
the property owned or controlled by persons who have invited or
permitted the owner or keeper of a cat to bring such cat upon the
premises.
C. No person owning or keeping a cat shall permit such cat to become a
public nuisance as defined herein.
D. No person shall abandon any cat of any age or permit a cat to become a
stray.
§ 105-43 AMUSEMENTS § 105-45
101:123

ARTICLE III
Chaining or Tethering of Animals
[Adopted 9-2-2003 by Ord. No. 1323]
§ 105-46. Restraint of animals on caretakers', guardians' or
handlers' property, be it owned, leased, rented or otherwise.
[Amended 8-6-2012 by Ord. No. 1524; 12-1-2014 by Ord. No. 1561]
Caretakers, guardians or handlers of animals will exercise diligence and
reasonable care to prevent animals from leaving their premises. An "animal"
shall include a dog or a cat. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted
to allow the presence of livestock or fowl (as defined in § 105-59) on a
premises. Proper restraint of an animal exists when the animal is:
A. Enclosed and properly provided for (N.J.S.A. 4:22-17) within a house,
building, properly maintained fence, pen or other enclosure.
(1) For purposes of this article, a pen shall be considered a fenced-in
area that restricts movement of any animal within a property. A pen
shall be used to house only one animal at any given time. Pens for
each animal weighing 25 pounds or more must measure at least
150 square feet in size, be six feet in height and be soundly
constructed of chain-link metal. Pens for each animal weighing less
than 25 pounds must measure at least 100 square feet in size, be
six feet in height and be soundly constructed of chain-link metal.
When the weight of an animal is an element of a defense to a
penalty issued pursuant to § 105-49 herein, documented proof of an
animal's weight may relieve a caretaker, guardian, or handler from
liability under this section. The documented proof of an animal's
weight must be provided by an office, shelter, or any other entity
that is overseen by a veterinarian licensed by the State Board of
Veterinary Medical Examiners.
(2) All pens must be located in the rear yard of the property and shall
not be located less than 10 feet from the side yard and the rear yard
of the property. The "rear yard" of the property shall be interpreted
in a manner consistent with § 141-4 of the Borough Code to mean
the open space extending across the full width of the lot between
the rear lot line and a line parallel to the rear lot line through the
nearest point of the principal building to the rear lot line. The "side
yard" of the property shall be interpreted in a manner consistent
with § 141-4 of the Borough Code to mean an open space extending
from the front yard to the rear yard and lying between each side lot
line and the building, measured perpendicular from the side lot line
to the nearest point of the principal building.
(3) The pen shall be properly maintained, kept free of the animals'
waste materials and other trash, and be sanitized on a daily basis.
Clean, potable water shall be available at all times and must not be
allowed to freeze over. Foods shall be made available at least once
every 24 hours, or in the case of juvenile animals, at least twice
§ 105-46 AMUSEMENTS § 105-46
101:125
§ 105-47. Restraint while off the caretakers', guardians' or
handlers' property, be it owned, leased, rented or otherwise.
Caretakers, guardians or handlers of animals will exercise diligence and
reasonable care to keep animals under restraint while off the caretakers,
guardians' or handlers' premises. Restraint exists when the animal is:
§ 105-48. Unlawful to chain or tether animals.
Animals shall not be chained, tied, fastened or otherwise tethered to
doghouses, trees, stakes, poles, fences, walls or any other stationary objects
outdoors or indoors as a means of confinement for more than two
consecutive hours in any twenty-four-hour period.
§ 105-49. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates this article shall be subject to the following
punishment:
every 24 hours. Food and water dishes shall be sanitized on a
daily basis. A soundly constructed, adequately sized and properly
positioned and maintained dwelling (i.e., doghouse) must be made
available for the animal within the pen or enclosure.
B. On a leash held by a competent person over the age of 16.
A. Temporarily inside a vehicle, parked or in motion, with a licensed driver
in attendance.
B. Temporarily inside a vehicle, parked or in motion, with a licensed driver
in attendance in a securely fastened cage or animal carrier with
adequate ventilation and large enough to allow room for the animal to
stand and turn around without touching the sides or top of the cage or
carrier.
C. Confined and properly proved for (N.J.S.A. 4:22-17) within a house or
building or secure enclosure with permission of the occupant of the
property where the animal is temporarily located.
D. On a leash held by a competent person over the age of 16.
A. First offense: fine of $25.
B. Second offense: fine of $50.
C. Third offense: fine of $150 and seizure and impoundment of animals by
an animal control officer, police officer, sheriff or humane society
official who shall leave at the place of seizure and impoundment a
conspicuous notice indicating the animal(s) has been seized and
impounded and the address and phone number where the animal is
impounded. Further, notice shall be given that the impounding agency
shall be compensated for costs incurred. The animals may be released
from the impounding agency when evidence exists that proper restraint
§ 105-46 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 105-49
101:126
provisions have been put into place and/or are in place within seven
days. The impoundment agency shall take permanent possession of the
animals if the caretakers, guardians or handlers fail to provide proper
restraint with the seven-day period and/or pending a court hearing.
§ 105-49 AMUSEMENTS § 105-49
101:127

ARTICLE IV
Disposal of Pet Waste
[Adopted 9-7-2004 by Ord. No. 1345]
§ 105-50. Definitions and word usage.
§ 105-51. Requirement for disposal.
All pet owners and keepers are required to immediately and properly
dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited on any property, public or
private, not owned or possessed by that person.
§ 105-52. Exemptions.
All pet owners and keepers who require the use of a disability assistance
animal shall be exempt from the provisions of this section while such animal
is being used for that purpose.
§ 105-53. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Police Department,
the Nuisance Officer and the Local Board of Health of the Borough of
Collingswood.
A. For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use
in the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning.
IMMEDIATE — The pet solid waste is removed at once, without delay.
OWNER/KEEPER — Any person who shall possess, maintain, house or
harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet, whether or not the
owner of such pet.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PET — A domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance
animal) kept for amusement or companionship.
PET SOLID WASTE — Waste matter expelled from the bowels of the
pet; excrement.
PROPER DISPOSAL — Placement in a designated waste receptacle, or
other suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container which is
regularly emptied by the municipality or some other refuse collector; or
disposal into a system designed to convey domestic sewage for proper
treatment and disposal.
B. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular
number, and words used in the singular number include the plural
number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
§ 105-50 AMUSEMENTS § 105-54
101:129
§ 105-54. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.
§ 105-54 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 105-54
101:130
ARTICLE V
Feeding of Wildlife
[Adopted 9-7-2004 by Ord. No. 1348; amended 12-28-2015 by Ord.
No. 1585]
§ 105-55. Definitions and word usage.
§ 105-56. Prohibited conduct.
A. For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use
in the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning.
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible
material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — All animals that are neither human nor domesticated.
B. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular
number, and words used in the singular number include the plural
number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
A. No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned
or operated by the Borough of Collingswood, or any private property in
the Borough of Collingswood, any wildlife, excluding confined wildlife
(for example, wildlife confined in zoos, parks or rehabilitation centers,
or unconfined wildlife at environmental education centers).
B. Feeding of birds shall be permitted outdoors under the following
conditions:
(1) No bird seed or any form of bird food shall be thrown or scattered
on the ground of any property, or placed on any fence.
(2) Bird seed and other forms of bird food must be dispensed from bird
feeding receptacles that are suspended or elevated no less than
five feet from the ground.
(3) No more than two bird feeding receptacles on any property shall
contain bird feed or any form of bird food, at any given time.
(4) Bird feeding receptacles shall be placed in the rear yard of the
property and not less than ten feet from the property line or any
fence. For purposes of this section, the areas comprising a rear
yard shall be in accordance with § 141-4 of the Borough Code.
§ 105-55 AMUSEMENTS § 105-56
101:131
§ 105-57. Enforcement.
§ 105-58. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
may be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.
(5) Bird feeding receptacles shall be filled with no more than three
pounds of bird feed or bird food at any time.
(6) Bird feeding shall not create an unreasonable disturbance that
affects the rights of surrounding property owners or renders other
persons insecure in the use of their property.
(7) It does not become an attraction for rodents or other wildlife and
does not create an accumulation of droppings on the property or
surrounding properties.
A. This article shall be enforced by the Police Department and the Local
Board of Health of the Borough of Collingswood.
B. Any person found to be in violation of § 105-56 A of this article shall be
ordered to cease the feeding immediately.
C. Any person found to be in violation of § 105-56 B of this article shall be
provided with 24 hours to correct the violation. Any person who is
provided with such notice and fails to correct a violation within 24
hours shall be subject to the penalties under § 105-58.
§ 105-56 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 105-58
101:132
ARTICLE VI
Livestock and Fowl
[Adopted 11-3-2008 by Ord. No. 1454]
§ 105-59. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in the
text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning.
FOWL — Any chicken, turkey, goose, duck, emu, ostrich, or any other fowl
customarily found on a farm, and pigeons.
LIVESTOCK — Any bull, cow, calf, heifer, sheep, llama, goat, horse, pony,
swine or any other animal customarily found on a farm.
§ 105-60. Keeping of livestock and fowl prohibited; exception.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to keep, stable,
breed or quarter livestock or fowl, as defined in § 150-59 of this article,
within the corporate limits of the Borough of Collingswood. This term shall
not include the keeping of cats, dogs or other domestic animals within the
limits of the Borough.
§ 105-61. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Police Department and
the Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough of Collingswood.
§ 105-62. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.
§ 105-59 AMUSEMENTS § 105-62
101:133

ARTICLE VII
Pet Shop Sales
[Adopted 4-4-2016 by Ord. No. 1594]
§ 105-63. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL CARE FACILITY — An animal control center or animal shelter,
maintained by or under contract with any state, county, or Borough of
Collingswood, whose mission and practice is, in whole, or significant part,
the rescue and placement of animals in permanent homes or rescue
organizations.
ANIMAL RESCUE ORGANIZATION — Any not-for-profit organization which
has tax-exempt status under § 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal
Revenue Code, whose mission and practice is, in whole or in significant
part, the rescue and placement of animals in permanent homes.
CAT — A member of the species of domestic cat, Felis catus.
DOG — A member of the species of domestic dog, Canis familiaris.
OFFER FOR SALE — To sell, offer for sale or adoption, advertise for the sale
of, barter, auction, give away or otherwise dispose of a dog or cat.
PET SHOP — A retail establishment where dogs and cats are sold,
exchanged, bartered or offered for sale as pet animals to the general public
at retail. Such definition shall not include an animal care facility or animal
rescue organization, as defined.
§ 105-64. Restrictions on sale of animals.
A. A pet shop may offer for sale only those dogs and cats that the pet shop
has obtained from or displays in cooperation with:
(1) An animal care facility; or
(2) An animal rescue organization.
B. A pet shop shall not offer for sale a dog or cat that is younger than eight
weeks old.
§ 105-63 AMUSEMENTS § 105-64
101:135
Chapter 113
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Development regulations — See Ch. 141.
Littering and dumping — See Ch. 197.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 211.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 227.
Solid waste — See Ch. 261.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 265.
§ 113-1. Accumulation prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for an owner or tenant of lands lying within the limits
of the Borough of Collingswood to allow to accumulate on said lands any
brush, weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growth, filth,
garbage, trash and debris.
§ 113-2. Determination of nuisance or hazard.33
Whenever brush, weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious
growths, filth, garbage, trash and debris have been allowed to accumulate
on lands lying within the limits of the Borough of Collingswood and the
borough shall deem it necessary and expedient for the preservation of the
public health, safety or general welfare or to eliminate a fire hazard to
remove the same, said borough shall give the owner or tenant of any such
lands ten (10) days' written notice to remove the same.
§ 113-3. Service of notice.
§ 113-4. Failure to comply; removal by borough; certification of
costs.34
A. In the event that such lands shall be occupied by either the owner or the
tenant, written notice shall be given to such owner or tenant personally
or by leaving such notice on the premises with a member of the owner's
or tenant's family above the age of fourteen (14) years.
B. In the event that such lands shall not be occupied, written notice shall
be sent to the assessed owner of said land at his last known residence
as shown in the office of the Collector of Taxes of the Borough of
Collingswood, by registered mail with postage thereon prepaid.
A. In the event that any owner or tenant shall refuse or neglect to remove
the debris within the time limited by such notice, then the borough may
33.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
34.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 105-64 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 113-4
113:136
§ 113-5. Examination of costs; assessment.
Upon such certification to the Board of Commissioners of the cost of
removal as hereinbefore set forth, the Board of Commissioners shall
examine such certification; and if found correct, the cost as shown thereon
shall, by resolution of the Board of Commissioners, be charged against said
lands.
§ 113-6. Lien.
Upon passage of said resolution by the Board of Commissioners as set forth
in § 113-5 above, the assessment so charged shall forthwith become a lien
on such lands and shall be added to and become a part of the taxes next
to be assessed and levied upon said lands, the same to bear interest at the
same rate as taxes, and shall be collected and enforced by the same officers
and in the same manner as taxes.
§ 113-7. Violations and penalties.35
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.),
by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed ninety (90)
days or by a period of community service not to exceed ninety (90) days, or
any combination thereof.
Chapter 115
BUILDINGS, FIRE DAMAGED
remove or cause to be removed all such accumulations as hereinbefore
set forth.
B. In the event that such owner or tenant shall refuse or neglect to remove
any such accumulations as hereinbefore set forth and it shall be
necessary for the borough to remove or cause such removal, the officer
shall certify the cost thereof to the Board of Commissioners.
35.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 113-4 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 113-7
113:137

ARTICLE I
Securing of Buildings and Structures
[Adopted 10-6-1997 by Ord. No. 1136]
§ 115-1. Duties of Fire Chief; expense; collection; registration
certificate.
A. The Fire Chief or duly authorized representative is empowered to order
the securing of fire damaged buildings or structures. If the owners of
the affected buildings or structures are present, this order shall be
given to them. If no owners or representatives of the building or
structure are present, or the owners refuse to secure the building or
structure, the Fire Chief or his duly authorized representative may
cause the building or structure to be secured, which shall be done
without delay. The expense of securing the buildings or structures shall
be a lien in favor of the borough, charged against the real property of
the responsible owner and shall be collected as any other lien or debt to
the Borough of Collingswood.
B. Registration certificates. Any business or individual that offers services
to a residential or commercial property owner, for the purpose of
securing a fire-damaged building or structure, shall be deemed a
canvasser or solicitor as recognized under Chapter 123, § 123-2, of the
Borough Code and shall further be required to comply with the
registration certificate requirements set forth under Chapter 123,
§ 123-4, of the Code. The application required under this section shall
be developed by the Borough Police Department. Registration
certificates shall be valid for one year. [Added 7-7-2014 by Ord. No.
1549]
C. Proof of insurance and fees. In addition to the registration certificate
requirements set forth under Chapter 123, § 123-4, of the Code,
businesses or individuals governed by this section shall also provide the
Chief of Police, at the time of registration, with proof of commercial
general liability insurance providing for a minimum of $1,000,000 of
insurance coverage. The applicant shall also be responsible for
payment of an annual administrative fee of $25. [Added 7-7-2014 by
Ord. No. 1549]
D. Issuance of registration certificate. Each business or individual, upon
being so registered, shall be issued a registration certificate by the
Chief of Police, upon which shall be affixed one photograph of the
applicant, the signature of the Chief of Police or the Chief's authorized
representative. [Added 7-7-2014 by Ord. No. 1549]
E. Possession of certificate required. Each representative of a business or
individual governed by this section shall carry the original registration
certificate at all times when providing services within the Borough and
shall exhibit same to any fire or police officer upon request.
§ 115-1 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 115-1
113:139
F. Rules and regulations. Every business or individual to whom a
registration certificate is issued under the terms of this section shall be
governed by the following rules and regulations:
(1) No person subject to the terms of this section shall enter or attempt
to enter the building or structure of any resident or commercial
property owner, or approach any such property owners, without the
registration certificate in his possession.
(2) No person subject to the terms of this article shall conduct himself
in such a manner as to harass or annoy any person while soliciting
within the Borough limits.
(3) No person subject to the terms of this section shall interfere with,
hinder, or obstruct any member of the Borough Fire Department,
Borough Police Department, or any other emergency service
personnel from performing their duties in accordance with the
general protection, health, and welfare of the residents of the
Borough.
G. Violations and penalties.
(1) Any person violating the terms of this section, whether as an
individual, principal or agent or employee of another shall, upon
conviction in the Municipal Court of the Borough of Collingswood,
be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000, imprisonment in the
county jail not to exceed 90 days or a period of community service
not to exceed 90 days, or any combination thereof, in the discretion
of the Municipal Court.
(2) Any violation of this section shall further result in the revocation of
a registration certificate for the period of one year, whereupon the
issuance of a new registration certificate shall be governed by the
procedures and requirements set forth within this section.
§ 115-1 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 115-1
113:140
Chapter 117
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 135.
Development regulations — See Ch. 141.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 193.
§ 115-1 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 115-1
117:141

ARTICLE I
Assignment and Display
[Adopted 8-16-1971 by Ord. No. 662 as Ch. 45 of the 1971 Code]
§ 117-1. Preparation of map.
The Borough Engineer is hereby authorized to prepare a map or maps
showing and designating the number of each and every building and lot
fronting upon any street, avenue, highway, lane, alley and public place in
the Borough of Collingswood, County of Camden.
§ 117-2. Location of map.36
Said map or maps shall be permanently located in the office of the Tax
Assessor of the Borough of Collingswood under the supervision of said Tax
Assessor.
§ 117-3. Time limit for compliance.
The owner or owners of any building or buildings in the Borough of
Collingswood having numbers which do not correspond to the numbers
allotted to them on the aforesaid map shall, within thirty (30) days after
receiving notice thereof, display upon each building the number assigned to
it.
§ 117-4. Issuance of number with building permit applications.37
Applicants for building permits shall apply to the Construction Code Official
or the Tax Assessor for a number or numbers to be displayed on the building
or buildings for which said permit is issued.
§ 117-5. Violations and penalties.38
Any person, persons, partnership or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this Article shall, upon being adjudged guilty, be fined not
exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.), imprisoned for not more than
ninety (90) days or sentenced to a period of community service for not more
than ninety (90) days, or any combination thereof.
36.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
37.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
38.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 117-1 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 117-5
117:143

ARTICLE II
Single-Family and Multifamily Units
[Adopted 3-7-1988 as Ord. No. 911]
§ 117-6. Installation of numbers required; effect on existing units.
Every owner of a dwelling unit, whether a single-family unit or a multifamily
residential unit, shall install numbers on said dwelling units corresponding
to the addresses of those units as utilized by the postal service. The
intention of this Article is to apply retroactively and include existing lots and
buildings as well as those created after the effective date of this Article.
§ 117-7. Regulations.
The following regulations shall apply to all single-family and multifamily
units:
§ 117-8. Additional regulations for multifamily dwellings.
The following additional regulations shall apply to multifamily dwellings:
A. The identification numbers shall be no less than two and one-half (21/2)
inches in height.
B. The numbers shall contrast with the background on which they are
mounted.
C. All numbers shall be mounted so that they face the street on which the
building fronts.
D. All numbers shall be mounted no less than three (3) feet above the
street grade level.
E. All numbers shall be visible from the street upon which the dwelling
fronts.
F. The numbers shall be maintained by the owner of the property and shall
be unobstructed by trees, shrubs or other vegetation.
A. Each building shall be identified clearly, and the identification shall be
visible from the street upon which the building fronts.
B. If a complex contains more than one (1) building, each building shall be
clearly titled and the apartment number ranges contained therein
posted in accordance with § 117-7 of this Article.
C. Numbers with directional arrows shall be posted on the walls of
corridors used to enter and exit stairwells and elevators.
§ 117-6 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 117-9
117:145
§ 117-9. Compliance required prior to issuance of certificate of
occupancy.
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any single-family or
multifamily residential unit in the Borough of Collingswood unless said
building is in compliance with the requirements of this Article.
§ 117-10. Enforcement.
This Article shall be enforced by any officer, employee or official of the
Borough of Collingswood.
§ 117-11. Notice to comply; violations and penalties.39
Any property owner in violation of this Article shall receive written notice
thereof from the Borough Subcode Official, requiring compliance with this
Article within thirty (30) days. Should the property owner thereafter fail to
comply and remain in violation of this Article, said violator shall be subject
to a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.), imprisonment for
not more than ninety (90) days or a period of community service for not
more than ninety (90) days, or any combination thereof, upon the filing of a
complaint in the Collingswood Borough Municipal Court.
39.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 117-9 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 117-11
117:146
Chapter 123
CANVASSING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Circulars and handbills — See Ch. 197, Art. I. Noise — See Ch. 207.
§ 117-11 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 117-11
117:147

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 8-16-1971 by Ord. No. 662 as Ch. 47 of the 1971 Code]
§ 123-1. Registration required.
No person, except as provided herein, shall canvass, solicit, distribute
circulars or other matter or call from door to door or place to place in the
Borough of Collingswood without first registering with the Chief of Police
or, in his absence, the officer in charge of the Police Department.
§ 123-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CANVASSER or SOLICITOR — Includes itinerant vendors of merchandise
who shall go from door to door in this borough, selling, causing to be
sold, offering for sale or taking orders for present or future delivery of
merchandise of any description whatever. Merchandise, within the terms
of this article, shall include magazines, periodicals, books and orders or
contracts for a service, home improvement or alterations. For the purpose
of this article, a "canvasser" or "solicitor" shall also be deemed to be one
who is not in the business of selling goods but one who makes surveys for
research purposes, analysis, opinion polls, rating data and any such similar
work which, by its nature, involves a door-to-door or place-to-place activity,
and shall include persons going from door to door or place to place for the
purpose of soliciting contributions, donations or alms for any persons or
organization.
§ 123-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prevent fraud, crime and unethical and
dishonest business practices for the general protection, health and welfare
of the residents of the Borough of Collingswood.
§ 123-4. Application requirements.
Each registrant shall, at the time of registering, file with the Chief of Police
an application, in writing, which shall give the following information:
A. The name, age and physical description of applicant.
B. The complete permanent home and local address of applicant.
C. The name and address of the organization or person for whom
solicitation is being made.
D. A description of the nature of the business and the goods, services or
wares to be sold and sufficient information to determine whether or not
the business he is to transact is interstate or intrastate commerce.
§ 123-1 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 123-4
117:149
§ 123-5. Separate registration required for each solicitor.
A separate registration must be made for every solicitor, agent or employee
soliciting within the Borough limits.
§ 123-6. Issuance of registration certificate. [Amended 2-18-1975
by Ord. No. 698]
Each registrant, upon being so registered, shall be issued forthwith a
registration certificate by the Chief of Police, upon which shall be affixed
one photograph of the applicant, signed by the Chief of Police so that part
of his signature covers part of the photograph.
§ 123-7. Possession of certificate required; inspection upon request.
[Amended 2-18-1975 by Ord. No. 698]
Each registrant shall carry the original certificate at all times when in the
borough and shall exhibit it to any citizen or police officer upon request.41
§ 123-8. Rules and regulations.
Every person to whom a registration certificate is issued under the terms of
this article shall be governed by the following rules and regulations:
E. Two photographs of the applicant, which shall be approximately 1 1/2
inches by 2 1/2 inches in size, showing the head and shoulders of the
applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner.40
F. A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of a
crime, misdemeanor or disorderly conduct offense, where and when so
convicted, the nature of the offense and the penalty, if any.
G. The make, model, year, color and license plate number of automobiles
used by the applicant during the period of solicitation within the
borough and the number of his driver's license and the state of
issuance.
A. All circulars, samples or other matter shall be handed to an occupant of
the property or left in a secure place on the premises.
B. No person subject to the provisions of this article shall canvass, solicit
or distribute circulars or other matter except during the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Saturdays.
C. No person subject to the terms of this article shall enter or attempt to
enter the house or apartment of any resident in the Borough of
Collingswood without an express invitation from the occupant of the
house or apartment.
40.Editor's Note: Original § 47-4F, regarding days, dates and routes, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 2-18-1975 by Ord. No. 698.
41.Editor's Note: Original § 47-8, Disapproval of application; hearing, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed 2-18-1975 by Ord. No. 698.
§ 123-4 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 123-8
117:150
§ 123-9. Exemptions; identification of exempt parties.
§ 123-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-15-1994 by Ord. No.
1058]
Any person violating the terms of this article, whether as an individual,
principal or agent or employee of another, shall, upon conviction in the
Municipal Court of the Borough of Collingswood, be subject to a fine not
to exceed $1,000, imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed 90 days or
a period of community service not to exceed 90 days, or any combination
thereof, in the discretion of the Municipal Court.
D. No person subject to the terms of this article shall conduct himself in
such a manner as to become objectionable to or annoy any person while
soliciting within the borough limits.
E. No person subject to this article shall make any solicitation within the
borough limits where solicitors are notified by sign that soliciting is
prohibited.
A. Any person, organization or society or association of a charitable,
religious, patriotic, philanthropic or community nature, desiring to
solicit or have solicited in its name money, property or financial
assistance for which no merchandise, wares or services are required
shall be exempt from § 123-4 of this article, provided that there is filed
with the Chief of Police an application, in writing, giving the following
information:
(1) The names of solicitors and the purpose or cause for which
solicitation is being made.
(2) The names and addresses of the officers of the organization.
(3) The names and addresses of the agents or representatives who will
solicit, canvass or distribute literature in the Borough.
B. Each solicitor for such organization, society or association shall carry
proper identification and shall display the same upon request.
§ 123-8 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 123-10
117:151

ARTICLE II
Solicitation of Contributions in Roadways
[Adopted 6-2-2008 by Ord. No. 1447]
§ 123-11. Permission to solicit granted.
The Borough of Collingswood shall permit organizations, as such are
defined in N.J.S.A. 45:17A-20, to solicit contributions in roadways located in
the Borough of Collingswood in accordance with the provisions contained
herein.
§ 123-12. Application for permit.
All charitable organizations as defined in N.J.S.A. 45:17A-20 who desire to
solicit contributions in roadways located in the Borough of Collingswood
shall file an application for a permit with the Police Department on a form
prepared by the Borough, which shall include the following information:
§ 123-13. Review of application; issuance of permit.
Upon filing of a complete application in accordance with the provisions
of this Ordinance, following review by the Borough Chief of Police, his
designee and/or the Borough Administrator, the Police Chief shall be
authorized to grant or deny the applicant's request. In the event the
applicant's request is granted, a permit shall be issued to the applicant
which shall be subject to the representations contained in the applicant's
application and any conditions imposed by the Police Chief and/or Borough
Administrator.
§ 123-14. Enforcement.
The Police Chief, following consultation with the Borough Administrator
and the Borough's insurer, shall be authorized to impose conditions for the
motorist solicitation.
A. Name, address, telephone number and name of contact person.
B. Specific location or locations of proposed charitable solicitation.
C. Dates and times of proposed charitable solicitation.
D. A description of the manner in which the motorist solicitation will be
conducted.
E. Consent by an authorized representative of the charitable organization
that it shall comply with any conditions imposed by the Borough of
Collingswood during the time that the solicitation is conducted.
§ 123-11 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 123-15
117:153
§ 123-15. Compliance with state law and Borough procedures
required.
Any organization requesting authorization from the Borough of
Collingswood for solicitation shall comply with all of the terms and
conditions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-60, by P.L. 1997, Chapter 82, approved April 30,
1997, and any procedures required by the Borough of Collingswood.
§ 123-16. Rules and regulations.
Organizations must adhere to the following conditions:
A. All participants must wear orange or yellow safety vests while soliciting
in the roadway.
B. Participants in the roadways must be at least 16 years of age and be
accompanied by an adult.
C. Adequate adult supervision is required.
D. Organizations or groups must be based in the Borough and the
solicitation must benefit or promote a Collingswood activity.
E. Solicitations can only be conducted between the hours of 8: a.m. and
3:00 p.m.
F. Solicitations may only be conducted at the following intersections
unless approved by the Chief of Police and/or Borough Administrator:
(1) Haddon Avenue and Collings Avenue.
(2) Haddon Avenue and Browning Road.
(3) Park Avenue and Zane Avenue.
G. Solicitation activities shall not impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
§ 123-15 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 123-16
117:154
Chapter 131
CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 117.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 135.
Development regulations — See Ch. 141.
Rental property — See Ch. 237.
§ 131-1. Administrative fees.
§ 131-2. Appeals Board.
§ 131-3. Fee for appeal.
As a prerequisite to the filing of an appeal with the Appeals Board, each
applicant must pay a fee of two hundred dollars ($200.) to the municipality.
Chapter 135
A. The landlord/sponsor of each rental unit converted to a condominium or
cooperative after the effective date of the Senior Citizens and Disabled
Protected Tenancy Act42 shall pay a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.) per
rental unit to the Borough of Collingswood. Said fee shall be for the
purpose of offsetting the cost to the Borough of Collingswood of
administering this statute at the local level.
B. For those buildings or structures containing in excess of one hundred
(100) rental units, the fee due under Subsection A above shall be
twenty-five dollars ($25.) per rental unit for the first one hundred (100)
rental units and fifteen dollars ($15.) for each rental unit in excess
thereof.
C. The landlord/sponsor of each rental unit converted to a condominium or
cooperative prior to the effective date of the Senior Citizens and
Disabled Protected Tenancy Act who submits an application to the
administrative agent for determination pursuant to said statute shall
pay a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.).
A. The governing body hereby establishes an Appeals Board, which Board
shall hear and determine appeals from decisions rendered by the
administrative agent under and pursuant to the Senior Citizens and
Disabled Tenancy Act.
B. The Appeals Board shall be composed of three (3) persons chosen by
the Mayor. Said persons shall serve for one (1) calendar year.
42.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.22 et seq.
§ 123-16 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 131-3
131:155
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 117.
Condominium conversion — See Ch. 131.
Development regulations — See Ch. 141.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 163.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 167.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 211.
Private swimming pools — See Ch. 269.
§ 135-1. Local enforcing agency; subcode officials; on-site
inspection agency.
§ 135-2. Appeals.
The Board of Commissioners of the Borough of Collingswood establishes the
Camden County Board of Appeals to hear all appeals from decisions of the
enforcing agencies.
A. There is hereby established in the Borough of Collingswood a State
Uniform Construction Code enforcing agency, to be known as the
"Collingswood Construction Code Office," consisting of a Construction
Official, building subcode official, plumbing subcode official, fire
subcode official and electrical subcode official and such other subcode
official and electrical subcode official and such other subcode officials
for such additional subcodes as the Construction Commission of the
Department of Community Affairs, State of New Jersey, shall
hereinafter adopt as part of the State Uniform Construction Code. The
Construction Official shall be the chief administrator of the enforcing
agency.
B. Each official position created in Subsection A hereof shall be filled by a
person qualified for such position pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et
seq., and the regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, provided that,
in lieu of any particular subcode official, an on-site inspection agency
may be retained by contract pursuant to the aforementioned
regulations. More than one such official position may be held by the
same person, provided that such person is qualified pursuant to N.J.S.A.
52:27D-119 et seq. and the regulations promulgated thereunder, to
hold each such position.
C. The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency
at one office location except for emergencies and unforeseen or
unavoidable circumstances.
§ 131-3 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 135-3
131:156
§ 135-3. Adoption of fee schedule. [Amended 2-3-1997 by Ord. No.
1117; 3-5-2001 by Ord. No. 1248; 10-4-2004 by Ord. No. 1351;
7-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1539]
Item Fee
Construction Fees
Minimum fee $65
Building Fees
New construction, per cubic foot $0.40; minimum $250
Reconstruction up to $50,000, per $1,000 $32
Reconstruction from $50,000 to $100,000,
per $1,000
$25
Reconstruction over $100,000, per $1,000 $21
Item Fee
Plumbing Fees
Minimum fee $65
Total number of plumbing/gas/oil fixtures, per
fixture
$15
Total number of special devices, per device $85
Stacks (vents), per stack $15
Item Fee
Electrical Fees
Minimum fee $65
Receptacles and fixtures, first 50 $50
Increments of 25 additional receptacle and
fixtures, each 25
$10
Each motor, electrical device, transformer
or generator, plus per Dept. Community
Affairs List 1 hp; kw, kva to 10 hp; kw, kva,
each
$15
Greater than 10 hp; kw, kva to 50 hp; kw,
kva plus electrical equipment 20 amps to
225 amps, each
$65
Greater than 50 hp; kw, kva to 100 hp; kw,
kva plus electrical equipment greater than
225 to 1,000 amps, each
$120
Greater than 100 hp; kw, kva, plus
electrical equipment greater than 1,000
amps, each
$600 each
§ 135-3 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 135-3
131:157
Item Fee
Fire Protection and Hazardous
Equipment Fees
Minimum fee $65
Sprinkler heads 1 to 20 heads $85
21 to 100 heads $160
101 to 200 heads $289
201 to 400 heads $750
401 to 1,000 heads $1,050
Over 1,000 heads $1,350
Detectors: first detector No. count per Town $65/first 20
Detectors: each group of additional of
detector No. count per Town
$65 additional 80
Independent pre-engineered systems;
number of systems
x $120
Gas- or oil-fired appliance not connected to
plumbing system: number of appliances
x $62
Kitchen exhaust systems: number of systems x $62
Incinerators x $450
Crematoriums x $450
Standpipe, each $289
FEE CALCULATION BASE IS THE SUM OF
THE ABOVE ITEMS
Sum Total Above
PERMIT FEE 80% Above Total
Demolition or Removal Permit Fee
Under 5,000 square feet $90
All other $180
Item Fee
Sign Permit Fees $65
Minimum fee
Pylon signs
First 100 ft2, per ft2 $4
Next 400 ft2, per ft2 $4
Remaining ft2, per ft2 $4
Ground or wall signs
First 100 ft2, per ft2 $4
Next 400 ft2, per ft2 $4
§ 135-3 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 135-3
131:158
Item Fee
Remaining ft2, per ft2 $4
Certificate of occupancy fee or temporary
certificate of occupancy
$50
C.O. granted change use group or certificate
of continued occupancy
$151
Fee for swimming pool bonding and
grounding
$65
Item Fee
Fee for "Application for Variation"
Class 1 $594
Class 1 resubmission $229
Class 2 $120
Class 2 resubmission $65
Class 3 $25
Class 3 resubmission $25
Fee for annual backflow prevention testing,
per device
$10
§ 135-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of
up to $500 or imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed
90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, for each violation of
the provisions of this chapter, and each day the same is violated shall be
deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct offense.
§ 135-3 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 135-4
131:159
Chapter 141
DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental Commission — See Ch. 23.
Air pollution — See Ch. 89.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 113.
Condominium conversion — See Ch. 131.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 135.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 163.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 167.
Garage sales — See Ch. 173.
Payment of delinquent taxes and
assessments — See Ch. 193, Art. I.
Noise — See Ch. 207.
Poolrooms — See Ch. 223.
Sewers — See Ch. 247.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 265.
Private swimming pools — See Ch. 269.
Vehicle sales lots — See Ch. 289.
Water — See Ch. 301.
§ 135-4 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 135-4
131:160
ARTICLE I
Title; Purpose
§ 141-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Collingswood Development Regulations
Ordinance."
§ 141-2. Purposes; intent.
The purposes of this chapter are to establish a pattern for land use based
on the land use element of the Master Plan and to guide appropriate and
orderly development which will promote the public health, safety, morals
and general welfare. This chapter is intended to:
A. Regulate the use of land within zoning districts.
B. Secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other disasters.
C. Provide adequate light, air and open space.
D. Limit and restrict buildings and structures to specified districts
according to their type and the nature and extent of their use for trade,
industry, residence, open space or other purposes.
E. Regulate the bulk, height, number of stories and size of buildings and
other structures.
F. Avoid a conflict with neighboring municipalities and the county and the
state.
G. Establish appropriate population densities and concentrations
contributing to the well-being of persons, neighborhoods, communities
and regions and to the preservation of the environment.
H. Provide sufficient space for residential, recreational, commercial and
industrial uses and open space.
I. Encourage the location and design of transportation routes which will
promote the free flow of traffic while discouraging the location of such
facilities and routes which result in congestion or blight.
J. Promote a desirable visual environment through good civic design and
creative development techniques.
K. Promote the conservation of open space, valuable natural resources,
historic buildings, sites, districts, and areas. Prevent urban sprawl and
degradation of the environment currently occurring with the improper
use of land.
L. Encourage coordination of various public and private procedures and
activities shaping land development with a view of lessening the cost of
such development and to the more efficient use of land.
§ 141-1 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-2
131:161
M. Promote the maximum practicable recovery and recycling of recyclable
materials from municipal solid waste through the use of planning
practices designed to incorporate the State Recycling Plan goals and to
complement the Borough's municipal recycling goals as outlined in the
Master Plan.
N. Implement the goals and objectives of the Master Plan and its related
components.
O. To regulate alterations of existing buildings; to prevent such additions
to, and alterations or remodeling of, existing buildings or structures as
would not comply with the restrictions and limitations imposed
hereunder. [Added 8-1-2016 by Ord. No. 1601]
§ 141-2 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-2
131:162
ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 141-3. Use of terms defined by statute.
Words and phrases used in this chapter are used as defined in the Municipal
Land Use Law.43
§ 141-4. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, certain phrases and words are defined as
follows:
ACCESS — A way or means of approach to provide vehicular or pedestrian
physical entrance to a property.
ACCESSORY USE or STRUCTURE — A use or structure which:
ADAPTIVE REUSE — The development of a new use for an older building or
for a building originally designed for a special or specific purpose.
ADDITION — An extension or increase in the floor area or the height of a
building or structure.
ADJACENT or ADJOINING LOT — A lot or parcel of land that shares all or
part of a common lot line with another lot or parcel of land.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT USE — An establishment consisting of,
including, or having the characteristics of any or all of the following:
Is clearly incidental to and customarily found in connection with a
principal use or building;
A.
B. Is subordinate to and serves a principal building or principal use;
Is subordinate in area, extent, or purpose to the principal building or
principal use served;
C.
Contributes to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of the occupants,
business, or industry in the principal building or principal use served;
and
D.
E. Is located on the same lot as the principal building or use served.
ADULT ARCADE — An establishment where, for any form of
consideration, one or more motion picture or similar broadcast
machines for viewing by five or fewer people each are used to show
films, videos, or other photographic reproductions that are
characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
A.
ADULT BOOKSTORE OR RETAIL STORE — An establishment having
as a portion of its stock-in-trade books, magazines, other periodicals,
B.
43.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 141-3 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-4
131:163
ADVERSE EFFECT — An existing or proposed condition on a site proposed
for development or on off-tract property or facility that imposes, aggravates
or leads to inadequate, impractical, unsafe, unsatisfactory, unhealthy, or
noncomplying conditions, such as a layout inconsistent with the zoning
regulations; insufficient street width; unsuitable street grade; an unsuitable
street location; an inconvenient street system; inadequate utilities, such
as water, drainage, shade trees and sewerage; unsuitable size, shape and
location of any area reserved for public use or land for open space in
a planned development; infringement upon land designated as subject to
flooding; and the creation of conditions leading to soil erosion by wind or
water from excavation or grading, all as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38 and
measured against the design and performance standards of this chapter.
AGRICULTURAL MARKET — See "farm stand."
AISLE — The traveled way by which cars enter and depart parking spaces
ALLEY — A minor or service roadway which affords only a secondary means
of public access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic
circulation.
ALTER or ALTERATION — As applied to a building or structure, any change
in the appearance or rearrangement in the supporting members, structural
parts, doors, windows, means of ingress or egress of an existing building;
or an enlargement, whether horizontally or vertically; or the moving of a
building or structure from one location or position to another.[Amended
8-1-2016 by Ord. No. 1601]
motion pictures and other viewing materials which are distinguished
or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing
or relating to specified sexual activities, sexual conduct or specified
anatomical areas; or an establishment with a segment or section of
the premises devoted to the sale, rental or display of such material; or
an establishment having a segment or section of the premises devoted
to the sale, rental or display of instruments, devices, or paraphernalia
which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual
activities. [Amended 10-7-2002 by Ord. No. 1300; 7-3-2006 by
Ord. No. 1408]
ADULT CABARET — A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar
establishment that regularly features live performances that are
characterized by exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified
sexual activities, or films, motion pictures, videos, or other
photographic reproductions in which the substantial portion of the
total presentation time is devoted to the showing of material that is
characterized by an emphasis upon depiction or description of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
C.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — A building used for presenting
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters
depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities, sexual
conduct or specified anatomical areas for observations by patrons
therein.
D.
§ 141-4 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-4
131:164
ANTENNA — A devise used to transmit and/or receive radio,
electromagnetic, or digital signals between terrestrial and/or orbitally
based structures.
APARTMENT UNIT — One or more rooms with a private bath and kitchen
facilities comprising an independent, self-contained dwelling unit in a
building containing three or more such dwelling units.
APARTMENT UNIT, ACCESSORY — A single dwelling unit that has been
added onto or created within a single-family house or accessory structure
to a single-family house.
APPLICANT — A person submitting an application for development.
APPLICATION — An application form and all accompanying documentation
required by this chapter for approval of a site plan, subdivision, planned
development, conditional use, zoning variance, change in use, or direct
issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A 40:55D-34 and 40:55D-36.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — Any board, body, or another authority within
the Borough to approve or disapprove applications for development as
outlined in the Municipal Land Use Law and this chapter.
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES — See "senior citizen housing."
ATTIC — That part of the building that is immediately below and wholly or
partially within the roof framing.
AUTOMOTIVE GARAGE — Any premises, lot, building or structure used for
repairing or servicing of motor vehicles, including painting, body repair, and
oil changes.
AUTOMOTIVE SALES — The use of any building, land, or other premises
for the display and sales of new or used automobiles, panel trucks or vans,
including any preparation or repair work conducted as an accessory use
only. See also "Vehicle sales."
AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE STATION — Any building, land area, or other
premises used for the retail dispensing or sales of automobile fuels, which
activity may or may not be accompanied by accessory uses such as sales of
lubricants, tires, accessories, or supplies; minor repairing of automobiles;
or, a single-bay car wash. Automobile wrecking and storage, major repairing
of automobiles, automobile parking/storage for fee, and operation of more
than one towing vehicle are not considered accessory uses of an automotive
service station.
AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE STATION WITH CONVENIENCE STORE — An
automotive service station that includes a building, or part of a building,
of less than 1,000 square feet of area, for the sale of prepackaged food
products, sandwiches, household products and other goods, normally
associated with a convenience store.
AUTOMOTIVE WASH — Any building or premises which is devoted to the
business of washing automobiles for a fee, whether by automated cleaning
devises or otherwise.
§ 141-4 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-4
131:165
AUTOMOTIVE WRECKING — The dismantling or disassembling of motor
vehicles or trailers or the storage, sale, or dumping of dismantled, obsolete,
or wrecked vehicles or their parts.
BAR (PUB or TAVERN) — An establishment in which the primary use is
the retail sale and serving of alcoholic beverages to the general public and
where food and packaged goods may be served or sold only as an accessory
use.
BASEMENT — A story of a building, partially underground, having at least
1/2 its height above the average level of adjoining ground. A basement shall
be counted a story for the purpose of height measurement if the vertical
distance between the ceiling and the average level of the adjoining ground
is more than five feet or if used for business or dwelling purposes. See also
"cellar."
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — A owner- or operator-occupied house, or portion
thereof, where short-term, transient lodging rooms, meals (generally
breakfast), and parking are provided. The number of lodging rooms to be
occupied by guests shall not exceed five, and the maximum consecutive stay
for any guest shall be fourteen days.
BERM — A mound of earth used as a physical barrier to shield and buffer
uses and views, to control water drainage, or to act as a dam.
BILLBOARD — A sign that identifies or communicates an advertisement
related to an activity conducted, a service rendered, or a commodity sold at
a location other than where the sign is located.
BOARDINGHOUSE — An owner-occupied house with nontransient lodging
for two to five persons, where meals, personal, and financial service may be
offered for compensation.
BUFFER — An area on a site, generally located adjacent to or parallel with
the property line, consisting of existing vegetation to be supplemented by
or created with evergreen trees, deciduous trees, shrubs, fences, berms, or
walls, with the purpose of visibly separating and screening one land use
from another or to shield and block noise, lights, and other nuisances.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls
and intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of any individual, animal,
process, equipment, goods or materials of any kind.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — See "accessory use or structure."
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted the principal
use of the lot on which it is located.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The ratio of the horizontal area measured from
the exterior walls of the ground floor of all principal and accessory
structures on a lot to the total lot area.[Amended 11-3-2014 by Ord. No.
1557]
BUILDING ELEVATION — See "elevation drawing."
§ 141-4 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-4
131:166
BUILDING ENVELOPE — The three-dimensional space in which a structure
is permitted to be built on a lot, defined by the maximum height, minimum
yard setbacks, and any other applicable area and bulk requirements.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured to the highest point
of the building or structure from the average elevation of the finished grade
five feet from the foundation. Masts, flagpoles, monuments, chimneys,
church spires, clock towers, elevator bulkheads, radio and cellular towers,
water tanks, air-conditioning units or similar structures shall not be
considered in measuring building height unless they exceed, in aggregate,
25% of the roof area.
BUILDING LINE — A line parallel to the street line at a distance therefrom
and equal to the depth of the required front yard.
BUILDING FRONT — See "facade."
CALIPER — The diameter of a tree trunk, generally measured between six
and twelve inches from existing grade.
CARTWAY — The paved surface of a street, such as the portion between the
curbs, including travel lanes and parking areas, or the portion between the
edges of the paved width where there are no curbs. However, shoulders,
curbs, sidewalks, and swales are excluded.
CAR WASH — See "automotive wash."
CELLAR — A story of a building, located partially underground and having
more than 1/2 of its clear height below the average level of the adjoining
ground. A cellar shall not be considered in determining the permissible
number of stories.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS — A document that is issued by the
Historic Preservation Commission, following a prescribed series of hearings
and procedures, certifying that the proposed actions by an applicant are
found to be acceptable in terms of the review standards set forth in this
chapter relating to an individual historic site or historic district as a whole.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY (CO) — A document issued by a Borough
officer allowing the occupancy or use of a building and certifying that the
structure or use has been constructed and will be used in compliance with
all the applicable Borough codes and ordinances.
CHANGE IN USE — Any use which substantially differs from the previous
use of a building or land. A use shall be considered to be substantially
different if the first digit Standard Industrial Code (SIC) code for the
proposed use differs from the first digit SIC code for the previous use. All
changes for the proposed use require application to the Zoning Officer and/
or Planning Board or Zoning Board. A complete list of the SIC codes can be
found at the end of this chapter.[Amended 5-3-2004 by Ord. No. 1334]
CHILD-CARE CENTER — An establishment providing for the care,
supervision, and protection of children. See also "family day-care homes"
and "child-care center, licensed."
§ 141-4 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-4
131:167
CHILD-CARE CENTER, LICENSED — A building or structure in which
daytime instruction or supervision is given to more than 5 children outside
their home for more than three but less than 16 hours per day by an
individual, association, corporation, institution or agency, usually for
compensation. Such a center is licensed by the state and must meet all state
requirements
CHURCH — A building or structure, or groups of buildings or structures,
that by design and construction are primarily intended for conducting
organized religious services and associated accessory uses.
CLINIC — An ambulatory health care facility where patients are admitted
for examination and treatment on an outpatient basis by one or more
physicians, dentists, psychologists, social workers or medical or social work
professionals.
COMMERCIAL USE — Activity involving the sale of goods or services
carried out, generally, for profit.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle used for commercial
purposes, in interstate or intrastate commerce, for the transportation of
persons for hire, compensation or profit. The display of "commercial,"
"omnibus" or "constructor" registration plates on any motor vehicle shall,
for the purposes of this chapter, be prima facie evidence that the vehicle is
a commercial vehicle.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR THE DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED
(CRDD) — A residential facility, licensed by the state, providing food,
shelter, and personal guidance, with supervision, to not more than 15
developmentally disabled or mentally ill persons who require assistance,
temporarily or permanently, in order to live in the community. The term
shall include but not be limited to group homes, halfway houses,
intermediate care facilities, and supervised apartment living arrangements.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR PERSONS WITH HEAD INJURIES — A
community residential facility, licensed by the state, providing food, shelter,
and personal guidance, with supervision, to not more than 15 persons with
head injuries who require assistance, temporarily or permanently, in order
to live in the community. The term shall include but not be limited to
group homes, halfway houses, intermediate care facilities, and supervised
apartment living arrangements.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR THE TERMINALLY ILL — Any community
residential facility operated as a hospice program providing food, shelter,
personal guidance and health care services under such supervision as
required to not more than 15 terminally ill persons.
COMMUNITY RESIDENTIAL HOME — A dwelling unit licensed to serve
clients of an appropriate governmental department that provides a living
environment for unrelated residents who operate as the functional
equivalent of a family, including supervision and care of supportive staff as
may be necessary to meet the physical, emotional and social need of the
persons residing in such facility as defined in the appropriate statute.
§ 141-4 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-4
131:168
COMMUNITY SHELTER FOR VICTIMS OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE — A
residence providing food, shelter, medical care, legal assistance, personal
guidance, and other services to persons who have been victims of domestic
violence, including any children of such victims, who temporarily require
shelter and assistance in order to protect their physical or psychological
welfare.
COMPACT CAR — Any motor vehicle that does not exceed fifteen feet in
length, bumper to bumper, and does not exceed five feet, nine inches in
width.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district only
upon showing that such use in a specified location will comply with all the
conditions and standards for the location or operation of the use as specified
in this chapter and authorized by the approving agency.
CONVENIENCE or GENERAL STORE — The store, less than 5,000 square
feet in size, where the primary business is the sale of packaged goods
and/or groceries and a wide variety of sundries, including but not limited
to food, beverages, cigarettes, candy, confectionary items, film and film
processing, small appliances, clothing, toys, nonprescription medicines,
cards, pain relievers and pharmacy items purchased with or without
prescriptions, health, hygiene and medical aides and supplies, refrigerated
items, cosmetics, paper products, seasonal decorations and similar
items.[Added 3-3-2002 by Ord. No. 1306]
CUL-DE-SAC — A turnaround at the end of a dead-end street, often used to
describe the street itself, which is a street with one means of ingress and
egress and having a turnaround.
CURB CUT — The opening along the curb line at which point vehicles may
enter or leave the roadway.
DAY — A calendar day.
DAY CARE — Daytime instruction or supervision of three or more children
away from their home for more than three but less than 16 hours per day
by an individual, association, corporation, institution or agency, whether or
not for compensation or reward.
DAY-CARE CENTER — See "child-care center, licensed" or "family day-care
home."
DEAD-END STREET — A street with a single, common ingress and egress.
DECIDUOUS — Plants that annually drop their leaves prior to becoming
dormant for the winter months.
DECK — A structure attached or adjacent to a principal building and having
a roof or, in the absence of a roof, having at least a portion of the structure
more than one foot above mean finished grade. A deck shall comply with
the yard and building coverage requirements for a principal building. An
unenclosed structure less than or equal to 60 square feet in area and used
to serve a preexisting entrance into the main level of the principal residence
§ 141-4 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-4
131:169
is not considered a deck; these structures are to comply only with the
requirements of the building code44 for consideration of this type structure.
DEDICATION — The transfer of property by the owner to another party.
DEMOLITION — The partial or total razing or destruction of a primary
structure or improvement within the Borough of Collingswood.[Amended
3-4-2002 by Ord. No. 1286]
DENSITY — The number of families, individuals, dwelling units, households,
or housing structures per unit of land. For zoning purposes, this usually
refers to number of dwelling units per acre of land unless stated otherwise.
DENSITY, GROSS — Density calculation, including all the area within a
certain boundary, excluding nothing.
DENSITY, NET — Density calculation excluding certain areas, such as
streets, wetlands, easements, and water.
DETENTION BASIN — A facility for the temporary storage of stormwater
runoff. See also "retention basin."
DEVELOPMENT — The division of land into two or more parcels; the
construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation
or enlargement of any structure; any mining, excavation, landfill or land
disturbance; and the use, the extension of the use or the change of use of
any structure or land.
DEVELOPMENT, MAJOR — Any development not considered a minor
development
DEVELOPMENT, MINOR — Any development involving three or fewer lots
and/or involving a land area of less than five acres or not requiring a general
development plan or the extension or construction of any new streets to
other municipal or governmental facilities
DISTRICT — A part, zone, or geographic area within the Borough within
which certain zoning or development regulations apply.
Demolition of structures is hereby considered development. No
structure on any lot or lots shall be demolished without first having had
approval of a site plan for the lot or lots and/or the development thereon
after demolition. A plan must be approved by the Planning Board and
include the reuse of the site.
A.
Exemptions.
Accessory buildings shall be exempt from Planning Board approval;
however, all applicable permits must be obtained
(1)
In the interest of public safety, the Construction Official shall be
authorized to issue permits without Planning Board approval if he
determines that a structure is an immanent hazard.
(2)
B.
44.Editor's Note: See Ch. 135, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 141-4 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-4
131:170
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from lands by
drains, grading, or other means and includes control of runoff to minimize
erosion and sedimentation during and after construction or development
and means necessary for water supply preservation or prevention or
alleviation of flooding.
DRIPLINE — An imaginary ground line around a tree that defines the limits
of the tree canopy.
DRIVE-IN FACILITY — An establishment that by design, physical facilities,
service, or by packaging procedure encourages or permits customers to
receive services, products, goods or entertainment while remaining in their
automobiles.
DRIVEWAY — A private roadway providing access to and from a street.
DRUGSTORE — A store where the primary business is the filling of medical
prescriptions, under the supervision of a registered pharmacist, and the
sale of drugs, medical devices and supplies and nonprescription medicines,
but where nonmedicinal products such as toiletries, cards and stationery,
candies and cosmetics, are sold as well. See also "pharmacy."
DWELLING — A structure or portion thereof that is used exclusively for
human habitation.
DWELLING, CONDOMINIUM — A building or group of buildings in which
each individual single-family residential unit is individually owned, and the
structure, common areas, and facilities are owned by all the owners on a
proportional, undivided basis.
DWELLING, DUPLEX — A building, containing two single-family dwelling
units, totally separated by an unpierced wall extending from ground to roof.
DWELLING, EFFICIENCY — A dwelling unit containing not more than one
habitable room together with a kitchen or kitchenette and sanitary facilities.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A building or portion thereof containing
more than two dwelling units, including but not limited to:
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED — A dwelling unit in a row of
three or more dwelling units separated from each other by a common wall
extending from the foundation to the roof.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED — A dwelling designed for and
occupied by not more than one family unit and surrounded by open space
GARDEN APARTMENT — One or more two-story, multifamily
structures, generally built at a gross density of 10 to 15 dwelling units
per acre, with each structure containing four to twenty dwelling units
and related improvements such as parking, open space, and recreation.
A.
MID-RISE — An apartment building containing from three to seven
stories.
B.
HIGH-RISE — An apartment building containing more than eight
stories.
C.
§ 141-4 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-4
131:171
or yards and having no floor, roof, or wall in common with another dwelling
unit.
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE — A residential structure, of not more than
three stories, containing not less than three adjacent such structures, each
with its own front or side and rear entrance and physically separated from
another unit by vertical common fire-resistant walls. Each unit is intended
for its own separate sale.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A detached building containing two dwelling
units that may or may not share amenities, such as an entranceway or
driveway. See also "dwelling, duplex."
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms designed, arranged for, and
occupied by one or more individuals living together as a single family
maintaining a household, with exclusive cooking, living, sanitary and
sleeping facilities, fixed or portable. Each dwelling unit shall contain no
more than one kitchen or cooking facility.[Amended 5-3-2004 by Ord. No.
1334]
EASEMENT — A grant of one or more of the property rights by the property
owner to and/or for the use by the public, a corporation, and /or another
person or entity.
ELEVATION — A vertical distance above or below a fixed reference level
ELEVATION DRAWING — A fully dimensioned architectural rendering of
the front, rear, and sides of a building showing features such as windows,
doors, and relationship of grade to floor level.
ENLARGEMENT — An increase in the size of an existing structure or any
increase or expansion in the current use, including physical size of property,
building, parking, and other improvements.
EVERGREEN — A plant with foliage that remains green year round.
EXISTING USE — The use of a lot or structure at the time of the enactment
of the zoning ordinance or at the time of submission of a development
application
EXTENSION — An increase in the amount of existing floor area of an
existing structure
FACADE — The exterior walls of a building exposed to public view, usually
referencing the front of the structure, visible from the street.
FAMILY — One or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or
guardianship or any number of persons not so related occupying a dwelling
unit and living as a single housekeeping unit.
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOMES — The private, occupied residence of a family
day-care provider which is registered as a family day-care home pursuant
to the Family Day Care Provider Registration Act (N.J.S.A. 30:5B-16 et seq.).
Child-care services are provided to no less than three and no more than
five children, not including the provider's own children, for no less than 15
hours per week.
§ 141-4 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-4
131:172
FARM STAND — Any building or structure used for the display and sale of
farm and agricultural products.
FAST-FOOD RESTAURANT — See "restaurant, fast-food."
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION — Any corporation, foreign or domestic,
partnership, limited-liability company or any individual which engages
principally in the business of providing financial services such as investment
advice, the purchase and sale of investments and similar services.[Added
12-3-2007 by Ord. No. 1440]
FENCE — An artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination
of material erected to enclose, screen or separate areas.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The sum of gross horizontal areas of the several
floors of a building or structure from the exterior face of exterior walls
or from the center line of a wall separating two buildings. In residential
uses, the gross floor area shall exclude the areas of the garage, attic,
open porch or patio, cellar, utility areas, heating and cooling rooms and
all portions of floor areas which have a ceiling height above them of less
than 7.5 feet. In nonresidential structures, the gross floor area shall exclude
areas used for utility, heating, cooling and other mechanical equipment but
shall include all other areas, including cellars and warehousing and storage
areas, regardless of ceiling height.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The total gross floor area of all buildings or
structures on a lot divided by the total lot area.
FOOTCANDLE — A unit of illumination when the foot is the unit of length.
FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION — A group of people formally organized for a
common interest, usually cultural, religious, or entertainment, with regular
meetings, rituals, and formal written membership requirements.
FRONT YARD — see "yard, front."
FRONTAGE — The side of a lot abutting on a street. On corner lots, primary
frontage will be considered to be the side of the lot on which the main
building entrance is located. If a corner lot is undeveloped, frontage shall be
consistent with the orientation of other lots on the same side of the street.
"Secondary frontage" will be the side of the lot that fronts onto the other
street. Ingress and egress to and from the site may be provided from either
the primary or secondary frontage.
GARAGE — A deck, building, or parking structure, or portion thereof, used
or intended to be used for the parking and storage of vehicles.
GARAGE, REPAIR — See "automotive garage."
GARDEN APARTMENT — See "dwelling, multifamily."
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION — See "automotive service station."
GRADE — The percent rise or decent of a sloping surface
GRADE, EXISTING — The average elevation of the land around a building
or proposed building
§ 141-4 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-4
131:173
GROUND COVER — Low-lying grasses or plants grown to form a dense,
mat-like covering to prevent the growth of unwanted plants and to keep the
soil from being washed, blown or eroded away.
GROUP HOMES — see "community residential home" or "senior citizen
housing."
GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT — The combined weight of the vehicle and the
rated payload. For the purposes of this chapter, the gross weight as stated
on the vehicle's registration certificate shall be prima facie evidence of the
vehicle's gross vehicle weight.
HEALTH CARE FACILITY — A facility or institution, whether public or
private, principally engaged in providing services for health maintenance
and treatment of metal or physical conditions, including but not limited
to: hospitals, treatment or diagnostic centers, extended care facilities,
rehabilitation centers, outpatient clinics, and medical offices.
HEIGHT — See "building height."
HISTORIC DISTRICT — One or more historic sites and the intervening or
surrounding property significantly affecting or affected by the quality and
character of the historic site or sites.
HISTORIC SITE — Any real property, man-made structure, natural object
or configuration of any portion or group of the foregoing which has been
formally designated by ordinance of the Borough as being of historical,
archaeological, cultural, scenic or architectural significance.
HOME OCCUPATION — Any activity carried out for gain by a resident,
conducted as a customary, incidental, and accessory use in the resident's
dwelling unit and which does not alter the exterior of the property or affect
the residential character of the neighborhood.
HOME PERSONAL OFFICE — A business use within a dwelling used solely
by an inhabitant(s) thereof for the administration of business engaged in
other off-site offices or locations. Home personal offices shall be clearly
incidental to the use of the dwelling, shall not constitute more than 10% of
the building area, shall be for the use of the business owner or employee
dwelling in the residence and shall not be used by nonresident employees.
Retail sale of products is not permitted.
HOME PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — An office of a professional used as
the primary location for the operation and function of a home occupation,
contained solely within the residential dwelling or an accessory building,
but not both. A home professional office shall occupy less than 500 square
feet or the equivalent of 40% of the first floor, whichever is less. No more
than two persons who are not residents of the dwelling may be employed on
the premises at any one time.
HOTEL — A commercial facility, containing at least 20 individual sleeping
rooms, each having a private bath attached thereto, offering transient,
overnight lodging accommodations to the general public, with or without
meals, and in which ingress and egress to and from all rooms may be made
through an inside office or lobby. Additional services, such as restaurants,
§ 141-4 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-4
131:174
meeting rooms, entertainment, and recreational facilities may be provided.
See also "bed-and-breakfast."
HOUSEKEEPING UNIT — One or more persons living together in one
dwelling unit on a stable rather than transient basis, where the occupants
share the ordinary tasks of living in a dwelling unit such as but not limited
to cooking and eating together, sharing inside and outside chores and
performing other functional duties and otherwise exhibiting a kind of
stability, permanency and functional life-style which is equivalent to that of
a traditional family unit.
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE — The coverage of a lot by impervious surfaces,
including, but not limited to sidewalks, driveways, buildings, and other
paved surfaces or compact gravel surfaces.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any material that prevents absorption of water
into the ground.
IMPROVEMENT — Any permanent structure that becomes part of, placed
upon, or is affixed to a piece of property.
JUNKYARD — A lot, land, or structure or part thereof used for the purchase,
collection, storage, recycling, or sale of wastepaper, rags, scrap metal, or
other scrap or discarded goods, materials, machinery, or vehicles.
LAND — Ground, soil, or earth.
LANDSCAPE — Lawns, trees, plants and other natural materials such as
rock, wood chips, and decorative features, including sculpture, walks,
fountains and pools, which are a natural feature of the site or have been
installed to enhance a site.
LIMITED BREWERY — A commercial facility, which shall not sell or serve
food or operate a restaurant, which brews any malt alcoholic beverages in
quantities for which it is licensed by the Alcoholic Beverage Commission
and which sells the product at retail to consumers on the licensed premises
of the brewery for consumption on the premises but only in connection with
tours of the brewery, or for consumption off premises in a quantity of not
more than 15.5 fluid gallons per person, and to offer samples for sampling
purposes only. "Sampling" shall mean the selling at a nominal charge or
the gratuitous offering of an open container not exceeding four ounces of
any malt alcoholic beverage produced on the premises.[Added 8-3-2015
by Ord. No. 1577]
LOADING SPACE — An off-street space or berth on the same lot as the
building being served, used for the temporary parking of a vehicle while
loading or unloading materials and products.
LOCAL COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — Any antenna and any support
structure, together with any accessory facilities, which complies with the
standards in N.J.A.C. 7:50-5.4 and which is intended to serve a limited,
localized audience through point-to-point communications, including digital
and analog telephone cells, paging systems, and dispatch communication.
It does not include radio or television broadcasting facilities or microwave
transmitters.
§ 141-4 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-4
131:175
LODGE — A building or structure in which members of a local chapter
of an association or fraternal, religious, or cultural organization hold their
meetings and other events.
LONG-TERM CARE FACILITY — An institution or distinct part of an
institution that is licensed or approved to provide health care under medical
supervision for twenty-four or more consecutive hours to two or more
patients. Such facilities include skilled nursing facilities, nursing homes,
intermediate care facilities, extended care facilities, and hospices.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by plat or
otherwise permitted by law to be separately owned, used, developed, or
built upon as a unit.
LOT AREA — The size of a lot measured within the lot lines and not
including any portion of a street and is expressed in acres or square feet.
Where a portion of a lot must be dedicated for public right-of-way widening,
that dedicated area may be included in the calculation of the lot area.
LOT, CORNER — A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets.
In determining setbacks for corner lots, the primary frontage shall be the
portion of the lot to accommodate the front yard setback, therefore the
secondary frontage shall comply with the required side yard setback. See
also "frontage."
LOT COVERAGE — See "impervious coverage."
LOT DEPTH — The average or mean horizontal distance between the front
and rear lot lines measured perpendicular to the front lot line.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE — A lot having frontage on two nonintersecting
streets.
LOT LINE — A line of record bounding a lot that divides one lot from
another lot or from a public or private right-of-way or any other public
space.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The line drawn between the right-of-way and the
property boundary. On a corner lot, the line between the primary frontage
and the right-of way will be the front lot line. On a double-frontage lot, each
property boundary adjacent to the right-of-way shall be considered a front
lot line.
LOT LINE, REAR — That property boundary which is parallel to and the
most distant from the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line other than the front or rear.
LOT WIDTH — The distance between side lot lines, measured parallel to the
street line at the minimum building setback.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision.
MEDICAL PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — The office and associated
examination facilities of a licensed physician, dentist, osteopath,
chiropractor, podiatrist, or other licensed or accredited professional within
§ 141-4 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-4
131:176
the medical field. A medical testing laboratory shall be permitted under this
definition only if it is accessory to the office of a medical professional.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — See "subdivision, minor."
MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT — The development of a tract of land,
building, or structure with a variety of complementary and integrated uses
such as but not limited to, residential, office, manufacturing, retail, public,
or entertainment in a compact urban form.
MOTEL — A commercial establishment providing overnight
accommodations, containing 10 or more rooms, each having a private bath
attached thereto, with at least 25% of the rooms having direct access to
the outside without the necessity of passing through a main lobby of the
building.
NONCONFORMING LOT, STRUCTURE, or USE — A lot, structure, or use,
which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment of this
zoning chapter but which fails to meet the requirements of the zoning
district in which is located by reason of such adoption, revision or
amendment.
NURSERY SCHOOL — See "child-care center, licensed" or "family day-care
home."
NURSING HOME — See "senior citizen housing."
OCCUPANCY — The residing of an individual or individuals overnight in
a dwelling unit or the storage or use of equipment, merchandise, or
machinery in any public, commercial, or industrial building.
OCCUPATION — Gainful employment in which an individual engages to
earn compensation.
OFFICE — A room or group of rooms used for conducting the affairs
of a business, profession, service, industry, government, or like activity,
generally furnished with desks, chairs, files, and communication equipment,
but where no retail sales or goods are offered and where no manufacturing,
assembling or fabricating takes place.
OFF SITE — Located outside the lot lines of the lot under review but within
the property (of which that lot is a part) that is subject of a development
application or within a contiguous portion of a street or other right-of-way.
OFF-SITE and OFF-TRACT IMPROVEMENT — Improvements required to
be made off site or off tract, respectively, to accommodate conditions
generated by a proposed development, including but not limited to new
improvements and extensions and modifications of existing improvements.
See also "off site" and "off tract."
OFF TRACT — Not located on the property that is the subject of a
development application or on a contiguous portion of a street or other
right-of-way.
ON SITE — Located within the property boundaries of the lot in question.
§ 141-4 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-4
131:177
ORNAMENTAL TREE — A deciduous tree planted primarily for its
ornamental value or for screening purposes.
OUTDOOR STORAGE — The keeping of any goods, junk, material,
merchandise, or vehicles in an unenclosed area in the same place for more
than 24 hours.
PARCEL — Any quantity of land, consisting of one or more lots, that is
capable of being described with such definiteness, such as common
ownership, that its location and boundaries can be defined.
PARKING AREA — Any public or private area designed for parking motor
vehicles, including parking lots, garages, private driveways, and legally
designated areas of Borough streets.
PARKING AREA, SHARED — Joint use of a parking area by more than one
use, business, or facility.
PARKING BAY — The parking module consisting of one or two rows of
parking spaces and the aisle from which the motor vehicles enter and leave
the spaces.
PEDESTRIAN — An individual who travels on foot
PERMITTED USE — Any use of land or buildings permitted in a certain
district by this chapter and subject to the restriction applicable to that
district.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PHARMACY — An establishment where prescription and nonprescription
drugs are prepared and dispensed. See also "drugstore."
PLACE OF WORSHIP — See "church."
PLAT — A map of a subdivision or site plan.
PLAT, FINAL — The map of all or a portion of a development (subdivision or
site plan) which is submitted and presented to the approving authority for
final approval.
PLAT, INFORMAL — The concept, informal map of a proposed development
of sufficient accuracy which is submitted for purposes of nonbinding
discussion and clarification.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY — The map indicating the proposed layout of a
development (subdivision or site plan) which is submitted to the approving
authority for preliminary approval.
PORCH — A roofed, open structure, which may be screen, usually attached
to or part of and with direct access to or from a building.
PREMISES — A lot, parcel, tract or plot of land, together with the buildings
and structures thereon.
PRINCIPAL USE — The main purpose for which any lot and/or building is
used.
§ 141-4 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-4
131:178
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — The office of a member of a recognized
profession which shall be professional in character and require at least a
bachelor's degree from an accredited college or university and licensing,
training and experience as a condition for the practice thereof. The issuance
of New Jersey or local license for regulation of an occupation shall not
alone be deemed indicative of professional standing. When such office is
combined with a residence, the conditions of a home personal office or
home professional office shall apply.
PROPERTY — A lot, parcel, or tract of land, together with the building and
structures located thereon.
PROPERTY — See "lot line."
PUB — See "bar."
PUBLIC HEARING — A meeting announced and advertised in advance, in
accordance with all required laws, and open to the public, where the public
is given an opportunity to talk and participate.
PUBLIC NOTICE — The advertisement of a public hearing in a paper of
general circulation and through other media sources, indicating the time,
place and nature of the public hearing and where and when the application
and pertinent documentation may be inspected.
PUBLIC PURPOSE — The use of land and/or buildings by a municipal,
county, state or federal agency or authority.
QUORUM — A majority of the full authorized membership of a board or
agency.
RECYCLING — The process by which waste products are reduced to raw
materials and transformed into new and often different products.
REHABILITATION — The upgrading of a building previously in a dilapidated
or substandard condition for human habitation or use.
REMODEL — To construct an addition or alter the design or layout of a
building or make substantial repairs or alterations so that a change or
modification of the entrance facilities, toilet facilities, or vertical access
facilities is achieved.
RENT — A periodic payment made by a tenant to a landlord for the use of
land, buildings, structures, or other property, or portions thereof.
REPAIR — Any work done on an improvement which:
REPLACEMENT — Repairs for which a building permit is required.
RESIDENCE — A home, abode, or place where an individual is actually
living at a specific point in time.
A. Is not an addition to the improvement; and
Does not change the appearance of the exterior surface of any
improvement.
B.
§ 141-4 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-4
131:179
RESIDENTIAL DENSITY — The number of dwelling units per acre of
residential land.
RESTAURANT — A commercial establishment where food and drink are
prepared, served and consumed primarily on the premises. Take-out orders
for food and drink placed either in person, by telephone, fax, or e-mail may
be prepared and served to the customer directly for consumption off site if
this function is accessory to the primary use of a restaurant and no drivethrough
facilities are provided.
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD — A commercial establishment whose principal
business is the sale of foods or beverages in ready-to-consume individual
servings (usually served in paper, plastic, or other disposable containers)
either for carry-out or for consumption within the restaurant building whose
design and principal method of operation encourages high-turnover dining
and where either:
RESTORATION — The replication or reconstruction of a building's original
architectural features.
RETAIL BANK — A depository or similar institution chartered by the federal
government, the State of New Jersey or any other state and authorized to
do business in New Jersey which maintains hours of operation of no less
than six hours for five days each week and which engages principally in
the receipt of deposits of currency, checks or other items, the payment
of withdrawals from savings, checking or similar accounts, the cashing of
checks, drafts and other items, the receipt of monies due to the bank,
the issuance of cashiers’ checks, treasurers’ checks and money orders and
similar transactions.[Added 12-3-2007 by Ord. No. 1440]
RETENTION BASIN — A pond, pool, or basin used for the permanent
storage of water runoff.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, forced
dedication, prescription, or condemnation, and intended to be occupied by
a road, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission lines, oil or gas pipelines,
waterline, sanitary storm sewer and other similar uses.
ROOMING HOUSE — See "boarding house."
ROW HOUSE — See "dwelling, townhouse."
SADOMASOCHISTIC ABUSE — Flagellation or torture by or upon a human
being who is nude or clad in undergarments or in revealing or bizarre
costumes, or the condition of one who is nude or so clothed and is being
fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained.
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA — A saucer- or circular-shaped antenna
functioning as an antenna for reception of communications from a
transmitter or a transmitter relay located in planetary orbit. Such objects
Customers are not usually served their order by a restaurant employee
at the same table or counter where the items are consumed; or
A.
B. The establishment contains a drive-through facility.
§ 141-4 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-4
131:180
are also known as "satellite dishes," "satellite earth stations" and "home
video stations."
SCHOOL — Any building or part thereof which is designed, constructed, or
used for education or instruction in any branch of knowledge.
SCHOOL, PAROCHIAL — A school supported and controlled by a church or
religious organization. See also "school, private."
SCHOOL, PRIVATE — Any building or group of buildings, the use of which
meets New Jersey state requirements for elementary, secondary, or higher
education and which use does not secure the major part of its funding from
public sources.
SCREEN — A structure or planting providing a continuous view obstruction
within the site or property consisting of evergreen plants, fencing, wall,
berming, or any harmonious combination thereof, the purpose of which is to
reduce the impact of noise or unsightly visual intrusion.
SENIOR CITIZEN HOUSING — Multifamily housing designed for the
elderly. These types included but are not limited to:
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES — Residences for the elderly that
provide rooms, meals, personal care, and the supervision of selfadministered
medication. Other services such as recreation, financial
services, and transportation may be provided as well.
A.
CONGREGATE HOUSING — Apartments or other rental dwellings,
usually for elderly persons, designed to provide a supportive
environment with services such as dining, housekeeping, social and
recreational activities, and transportation but also to accommodate a
relatively independent lifestyle.
B.
CONTINUING CARE RETIREMENT COMMUNITY — An age-restricted
housing development that is planned, designed, and operated to
provide a full-range and continuum of accommodations and services
for older adults, including independent living, congregate housing, and
medical care. Services vary on the needs of the patient and are
contracted for in exchange for the payment of monthly fees and a
substantial entrance fee.
C.
LONG-TERM CARE FACILITY — An institution or distinct part of an
institution that is licensed or approved to provide health care under
medical supervision for twenty-four or more consecutive hours to two
or more patients. Such facilities include skilled nursing facilities,
nursing homes, intermediate care facilities, extended care facilities,
and hospices.
D.
RESIDENTIAL HEALTH CARE FACILITY — Residences usually
occupied by frail elderly that provide rooms, meals, personal care
and health monitoring services under the supervision of a professional
nurse that may provide other services such as recreational, social and
cultural activities, financial services and transportation. Residents must
E.
§ 141-4 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-4
131:181
SETBACK — The distance between a building and any lot line.
SETBACK, AVERAGE — The mean setback from a common street right-ofway
of all buildings within a specified distance of a specific lot.
SETBACK LINE — That line which is the required minimum distance from
any lot line and that establishes the building envelope within which the
principal structure must be erected or placed. The minimum yard
requirements shall be the minimum required setbacks. All setbacks from
public streets shall be measured from the either then existing right-of-way,
unless the proposed right-of-way as shown on the adopted Master Plan is
greater, in which case the proposed right-of-way should be used.
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Human masturbation, sexual intercourse or any
touching of the genitals, pubic areas or buttocks of the human male or
female or the breasts of the female, whether alone or between members
of the same or opposite sex or between humans and animals in an act of
apparent sexual stimulation or gratification.
SHADE TREE — A tree, usually deciduous, planted primarily for overhead
canopy.
SHARED DRIVEWAY — A single driveway serving two or more adjacent lots.
SHOPPING CENTER — A group of commercial establishments planned,
constructed, and managed as a total entity, with customer and employee
parking provided on site, provision for goods delivery separated from
customer access, aesthetic considerations and protection from the
elements, and landscaping and signage in accordance with an approved
plan.
SHOPPING CENTER, COMMUNITY — A shopping center that contains a
junior department store, contains approximately 150,000 square feet of
gross leasable area, and is ranged in site size from 10 acres to 25 acres. Its
clientele are within a ten-minute drive of the center.
SHOPPING CENTER, NEIGHBORHOOD — A shopping center that
generally offers goods necessary to meet daily needs, occupies no more
than 10 acres, and has up to 100,000 square feet of gross leasable area. Its
clientele are within a five-minute driving radius from the center.
SHOPPING CENTER, REGIONAL — A shopping center that contains a wide
range of retail and service establishments, occupies 50 to 100 acres of land,
and has at least one or more anchor stores, and contains a total of more
than 400,000 square feet of gross leasable area. Its clientele are drawn from
within a forty-five-minute driving radius.
SHOPPING CENTER, SPECIALTY — A shopping center whose shops cater
to a specific market and are linked together by an architectural, historic, or
geographic theme or by a commonality of goods and services. The specialty
shopping center is between 100,000 square feet and 200,000 square feet
consisting of small shops.
be ambulatory and free of communicable diseases. Rooms and baths
may be either private or shared.
§ 141-4 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-4
131:182
SHRUB — Any woody plant, deciduous or evergreen, generally
multistemmed, classified and sold by height or spread, measured in inches
or feet, and usually smaller than a tree.
SIDEWALK — A paved, surface, or leveled area, paralleling and usually
separated from the street, used as a pedestrian walkway.
SIGHT TRIANGLE — A triangular-shaped portion of land at the quadrants
of street intersections where unobstructed visibility is maintained along the
intersecting streets, usually through a sight easement.
SIGNS — See Article IX of this chapter for a complete list of sign definitions.
SITE — Any plot or parcel of land or combination of contiguous lots or
parcels of land.
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which is shown
the existing conditions of the lot such as topography, vegetation, drainage,
waterways; the proposed conditions of the lot such as buildings, drives,
parking areas, walkways, means of ingress and egress, landscaping,
lighting, drainage facilities, and screening; and any additional information
needed by the approving authority to make an informed decision on its
approval.
SITE PLAN, EXEMPT — A site plan approval shall not be required for singlefamily
detached or two-family dwellings unless such dwellings involve a
home occupation. Building alterations which do not involve a change in use,
additional parking or additional building area shall be exempt.
SITE PLAN, MAJOR — All site plans for new developments but not including
those site plans defined as "minor" or "exempt."
SITE PLAN, MINOR — A site plan that does not adversely affect the
development of the remainder of the tract or any adjoining property. It
involves fewer than five parking spaces, fewer than 500 additional square
feet of floor area, or an addition to the total lot coverage of less than 10%.
Also, it does not involve the creation of more than 2 lots, any new street or
any extension of the off-tract improvement.
SITE PLAN REVIEW — The examination of the specific development plans
for a lot. The term "site plan approval" means a requirement that the minor
or major site plan be approved by the approving authority prior to the
issuance of a building permit or a certificate of occupancy.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREA: —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY: —
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttock or female breast below a point immediately above the
top of the areola.
A.
B. Human genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if covered.
A. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
B. Any act of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy.
§ 141-4 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-4
131:183
STORY — The part of any building comprised between the level of one
finished floor and the level of the next higher finished floor or, if there is no
higher finished floor, then that part between the highest finished floor and
the top of the roof beams.
STORY, HALF — Any space partially within the roof framing where the clear
height of not more than 75% of such space between the top of the floor
beams and the structural ceiling is seven feet, six inches or more.
STREET — Any vehicle way which is an existing state, county, or municipal
roadway or is shown on a plat hereto approved pursuant to law or is
approved by official action pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. or is shown
upon a plat that was duly filed and recorded in the office of the County
Clerk prior to the appointment of a Planning Board and the granting to such
Board of the power to review the plats. Further, the street includes the land
between the right-of-way lines, whether improved or not, and may comprise
pavements, shoulders, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking areas and other
areas within the right-of-way lines.
STREET LINE — The edge of the existing or future street right-of-way,
whichever is wider, as shown on an adopted Master Plan or Official Map
or as required by this chapter, forming the dividing line between the street
right-of-way and the lot.
STREET TREE — A deciduous tree planted primarily to provide shade and
visual harmony along a roadway with minimum installation size of 13 feet
in height, two and one half inch caliper and limbed to a minimum height of
seven feet.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use, or ornamentation having a fixed location on, above, or
below the surface of land or attached to something having a fixed location
on, above, or below the surface of land.
STRUCTURE HEIGHT — See "building height."
STUDIO — The workshop of an artist, sculptor, photographer, or
craftsperson.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two or
more lots, tracts, or parcels or other divisions of land for sale, development,
lease, or preservation. The following are not considered subdivisions:
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttock or female breasts.
C.
Divisions of land for agricultural purposes where resulting parcels are
five acres or larger in size;
A.
B. Divisions of property by testamentary or interstate provisions;
Divisions of property upon court order, including but not limited to
judgments of foreclosure; and
C.
D. Conveyance so as to combine existing lots by deed or other instrument.
§ 141-4 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-4
131:184
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR — A subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR — A subdivision of land that does not adversely
affect the development of the remainder of the tract or any adjoining
property and does not involve:
TAVERN — See "bar."
TEMPORARY USE — A use established for a limited time duration with
the intent to discontinue such use upon expiration of the time period.
Such uses do not involve the construction or alteration of any permanent
building or structure. Unless a use is expressly permitted or permissible as
a permanent use in a district pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the
temporary use is not permitted.
TERRACE — A level, landscaped and/or surfaced area adjacent to a
principal building at or within one foot of the mean finished grade and not
covered by a permanent roof nor used to park any motor or recreational
vehicles.
THEATER — A building or portion thereof devoted to showing motion
pictures or for dramatic, musical, or other live performances. Seating shall
be provided for all patrons in an auditorium manner. All sitting areas shall
be visible and unobstructed.
THOROUGHFARE — Any public or private street, alley, walkway or parking
facility accessible to the public.
TOT-LOT — An improved and equipped play area for small children usually
up to elementary school age.
TRACT — An area, parcel, site, piece of land, or property that is the subject
of a development application.
TREE — Any large, woody plant, deciduous or evergreen, having one or
more self-supporting stems or trunks and numerous branches.
USE — The purpose or activity for which land or buildings are designed,
arranged, or intended or for which the land or buildings are occupied or
maintained.
UTILITY — Services, including but not limited to sewage treatment, water
supply, gas, electric, telephone and cable television.
VACANCY — Any unoccupied land, structure, or part thereof that is
available and suitable for occupancy.
VARIANCE — Permission to depart from the literal requirements of a zoning
ordinance.
A. The creating of more than two lots;
B. A planned development;
C. Any new street; or
D. The extension of any off-tract improvements.
§ 141-4 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-4
131:185
VEGETATION — Any plant material, including grasses, shrubs, and trees.
VEHICLE SALES — The use of any building, land, or other premises for
the display and sales of new or used trailers, recreational vehicles, off-road
vehicles, including any vehicle preparation or repair work conducted as an
accessory use only. See also "automobile sales."
WAIVER — Permission to depart from the requirements of an ordinance
with respect to submission or required documentation or minor design
elements.
YARD — An open space extending between the closest point of any building
and any lot line. The minimum required yard as set forth in this chapter is
unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward. All yard dimensions
shall be measured horizontally and at right angles to either a straight street
line, lot line or building facade or perpendicular to the point of tangent of
curved lines and facades.
YARD, FRONT — The area extending across the full width of the lot between
the street lot line and a line parallel to the street line through the nearest
point of the principal building to the street lot line. No residential accessory
uses are permitted within the front yard.
YARD, REAR — The open space extending across the full width of the lot
between the rear lot line and a line parallel to the rear lot line through the
nearest point of the principal building to the rear lot line. All residential
accessory uses must be located in the rear or side yard.
YARD, REQUIRED — The open space between a lot line and the yard line
within which no structure shall be located except as provided in this chapter
.
YARD, SIDE — An open space extending from the front yard to the rear
yard and lying between each side lot line and the building, measured
perpendicular from the side lot line to the nearest point of the principal
building. All residential accessory uses must be located in the rear or side
yard.
ZERO LOT LINE — The location of a building on a lot in such a manner that
one or more of the building's sides rest directly on a lot line.
ZONING PERMIT — A document signed by the Borough's Zoning Officer, as
required in this chapter, as a condition precedent to the commencement of
a use or the erection, construction, reconstruction, restoration, alteration,
conversion, or installation of a structure, sign, or building that
acknowledges that such use, structure, sign, or building complies with the
provisions of this chapter or authorized variance.
§ 141-4 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-4
131:186
ARTICLE III
Administration and Enforcement
§ 141-5. Interpretation of provisions; provisions to be minimum
standards.
These rules, regulations and standards shall be considered the minimum
requirements for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare
of the citizens of the Borough. Any action taken under the terms of this
chapter shall give primary consideration to the welfare of the entire
community.
§ 141-6. Planning Board.
A. Establishment. A Planning Board is hereby established pursuant to the
provisions of the New Jersey Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-23 et seq.
B. Membership. The Planning Board shall consist of nine regular
members, plus two alternate members. All members, except the Class II
member, shall be residents of the Borough. The two alternate members
must meet the qualifications of Class IV members. The members of the
Board shall be appointed by the Mayor, except that the Class III
member shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners. The classes
are defined as:
(1) Class I. The Mayor or the Mayor's designee in the absence of the
Mayor.
(2) Class II. One of the officials of the municipality other than a
member of the Board of Commissioners or a member of the
Environmental Commission in the event that among the Class IV
members there is both a member of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment or Historic Preservation Commission and the Board of
Education.45
(3) Class III. A member of the Board of Commissioners.
(4) Class IV. Other citizens of the Borough who hold no other municipal
office, except one member may be a member of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment or Historic Preservation Commission. Also, one
member may be a member of the Board of Education.
C. Terms of office.
(1) The terms of the regular members of the Planning Board shall be as
follows:
(a) Class I. The term for this member shall correspond to the
Mayor's official tenure.
45.Editor's Note: In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23 and 40:56A-1.
§ 141-5 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-6
131:187
(b) Class II. One year or upon completion of their respective terms
of office, whichever occurs first, except the member who is also
a member of the Environmental Commission, which shall be
three years or upon completion of the term of office as a
member of the Environmental Commission.
(c) Class III. One year or upon completion of their respective
terms of office, whichever occurs first.
(d) Class IV. Four years, except that upon the adoption of this
chapter, the present members of the Planning Board now
holding office shall continue therein until present terms expire.
For members who are also a member of the Board of
Adjustment or Board of Education, their term shall end when
either the membership on the other Board expires or their
Planing Board term ends, whichever is first.
(2) Any regular Planning Board member, except a Class I member, may
be removed by the Board of Commissioners, after a public hearing
at his/her request, for just cause.
(3) Vacancies of Planning Board members shall be filled as provided for
above for the unexpired term.
D. Alternate members. Alternate members shall be designated as
"Alternate No.1" and "Alternate No. 2" at the time of appointment. A
vacancy occurring otherwise than by term of office, shall be filled for
the unexpired term only. Alternate members may participate in
discussions or proceedings but may only vote in the absence or
disqualification of a regular member of any class. A vote shall not be
delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of an
alternate member. In the event that a choice should be made as to
which alternate member shall vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
E. Zoning Board of Adjustment as temporary members. If the Planning
Board lacks a quorum because any of its regular or alternate members
are prohibited by § 141-8A of this chapter from acting on a matter due
to personal or financial interest therein, regular members of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall be called to serve, for that matter only, as
temporary members of the Planning Board, in order of seniority of
continuous service to the Board of Adjustment, until there are a
minimum number of members necessary to constitute a quorum. If a
choice has to be made between regular members of equal seniority, the
Chairman of the Board of Adjustment shall make the decision.
F. Rules and organization.
(1) The Planning Board shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from
the Class IV members.
§ 141-6 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-6
131:188
(2) A Secretary and an Assistant Secretary, who may or may not be a
member or alternate member of the Planning Board or a Borough
employee, shall be selected.
(3) The Planning Board may employ or contract for and fix the
compensation of or agree upon the rate of compensation for a
Planning Board Attorney, who shall be an attorney other than the
Municipal Attorney, a civil engineer, a planning consultant and any
other staff, services and experts it may deem necessary, not
exceeding, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by
the Board of Commissioners for such purpose.
G. Powers and duties. The Planning Board shall adopt such rules and
regulations as are necessary to carry out its duties as well as the
provision and purposes of this chapter. The Board shall also have the
following powers and duties:
(1) To make, adopt, and amend a Master Plan for the physical
development of the Borough in accordance with provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
(2) To administer the provisions of this chapter.
(3) To review conditional use applications in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67.
(4) To participate in the preparation and review of programs and plans
required by state or federal law and regulation.
(5) To assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuing
planning process.
(6) To annually prepare a program of municipal capital improvement
projects, projected over a term of six years, and amendments
thereto, and recommend the same to the Board of Commissioners.
(7) To consider and make a report to the Board of Commissioners
within 35 days after referral as to any proposed development
regulations submitted to it pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-26a and also pass upon other matters specifically referred
to the Planning Board by the Board of Commissioners pursuant to
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26b
(8) When reviewing applications for approval of subdivision plats, site
plans, or conditional uses, to grant to the same extent and subject
to the same restrictions as the Zoning Board of Adjustment:
(a) Variances pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c.
(b) Direction pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 for issuance of a
permit for a building or structure in the bed of a mapped street
or public drainageway, flood control basin, or public area
preserved pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32
§ 141-6 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-6
131:189
§ 141-7. Zoning Board of Adjustment; appeals procedure.
(c) Direction pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36 for the issuance of a
permit for a building or structure not related to a street.
(9) Whenever relief is requested pursuant to this subsection, to include
on the notice for a hearing on the application for development a
reference to the request for a variance or direction for issuance of a
permit.
(10) To perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by
ordinance or resolution of the Board of Commissioners for aid and
assistance of the Board of Commissioners or other agencies or
officers.
H. Citizens' Advisory Committee. The Mayor may appoint one or more
persons as a Citizens' Advisory Committee to assist or collaborate with
the Planning Board in its duties, but such person(s) shall not have the
power to vote or take other action required of the Board.
I. Environmental Commission. Whenever the Environmental Commission
has prepared and submitted to the Planning Board an index of the
natural resources of the Borough, the Planning Board shall make
available to the Environmental Commission an informational copy of
every application for development to the Planning Board. Failure of the
Planning Board to make such an informational copy available to the
Environmental Commission shall not invalidate any hearing or
proceeding.
A. Establishment. A Zoning Board of Adjustment, also referred to as the
"Board of Adjustment," is hereby established, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-69 et seq.
B. Membership. The Board of Adjustment shall consist of seven persons,
plus two alternates, all of whom shall be residents of the Borough and
appointed by the Mayor.
C. Terms of office. The members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall
serve for terms of four years. Nothing in this section shall be construed
to effect the term of current members of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, all of whom shall continue in office until present terms
expire. The following also are applicable to all members of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment.
(1) No member of the Board of Adjustment may hold any elective office
or position in the Borough.
(2) Any regular Zoning Board of Adjustment member may be removed
by the Board of Commissioners, after a public hearing at his/her
request, for just cause.
§ 141-6 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-7
131:190
(3) A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be
filled for the unexpired term only.
D. Alternate members. Alternate members shall be designated as
"Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2" at the time of appointment. The
term of each alternate member is two years. A vacancy occurring
otherwise than by term of office shall be filled for the unexpired term
only. Alternate members may participate in discussions or proceedings
but may only vote in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member
may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice
should be made as to which alternate member shall vote, Alternate No.
1 shall vote.
E. Planning Board as temporary members. If the Zoning Board of
Adjustment lacks a quorum because any of its regular or alternate
members are prohibited by § 141-8A of this chapter from acting on a
matter due to personal or financial interest therein, Class IV members
of the Planning Board shall be called to serve, for that matter only, as
temporary members of the Board of Adjustment, in order of seniority of
continuous service to the Board of Adjustment, until there are a
minimum number of members necessary to constitute a quorum. If a
choice has to be made between Class IV members of equal seniority, the
Chairman of the Planning Board shall make the decision.
F. Rules and organization.
(1) The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall elect a Chairman and Vice
Chairman from its membership
(2) A Secretary and an Assistant Secretary, who may or may not be a
member or alternate member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment or
a Borough employee, shall be selected.
(3) The Zoning Board of Adjustment may employ or contract for, and fix
the compensation of or agree upon the rate of compensation for a
Zoning Board of Adjustment Attorney, who shall be an attorney
other than the Municipal Attorney, a civil engineer, a planning
consultant and any other staff, services and experts it may deem
necessary, not exceeding, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount
appropriated by the Board of Commissioners for such purpose.
G. Powers and duties. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall adopt such
rules and regulations as are necessary to carry out its duties as well as
the provision and purposes of this chapter. The Board of Adjustment
shall follow the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 et seq., including:
(1) To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that
there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or refusal
made by an administrative officer based on or made in enforcement
of the zoning provisions of this chapter.
§ 141-7 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-7
131:191
(2) To hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, requests for interpretation of the Zoning Map or zoning
provisions of this chapter or for decisions upon other special
questions which such Board is authorized to pass by any other
zoning provisions of this chapter.
(3) Hardship and flexible variances.
(a) Where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or
shape of a specific piece of property or by reason of exceptional
topographic conditions or physical features uniquely affecting
a specific piece of property or by reason of an extraordinary
and exceptional situation uniquely affecting a specific piece of
property or the structures lawfully existing thereon the strict
application of any regulation pursuant to the zoning provisions
of this chapter would result in peculiar and exceptional
practical difficulties to or exceptional and undue hardship upon
the developer of such property, to grant, upon an application or
an appeal relating to such property, a variance from such strict
application of such regulation so as to relieve such difficulties
or hardship.
(b) Where, in an application or appeal relating to a specific piece
of property the purposes of this chapter would be advanced by
a deviation from the zoning requirements and the benefits of
the deviation would substantially outweigh any detriment, to
grant a variance to allow departure from regulations pursuant
to the zoning provisions of this chapter; provided, however,
that no variance from those departures enumerated in
Subsection G(4) of this section shall be granted under this
subsection; and provided, further, that the proposed
development does not require approval by the Planning Board
of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use in conjunction with
which the Planning Board has power to review a request for a
variance pursuant to § 141-6G(8).
(4) Use variances.
(a) In particular cases and for special reasons, to grant a variance
to allow departure from regulations pursuant to this chapter to
permit: a use or principal structure in a district restricted
against such use or principal structure; an expansion of a
nonconforming use; deviation from a specification or standard
pertaining solely to a conditional use; an increase in the
permitted floor area ratio as defined in this chapter; an
increase in the permitted density, except as applied to the
required lot area for a lot or lots for detached one- or twodwelling-
unit buildings, which lot or lots are either an isolated
undersized lot or lots resulting from a minor subdivision; or a
height of a principal structure which exceeds by 10 feet or 10%
the maximum height permitted in the district for a principal
§ 141-7 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-7
131:192
structure. A variance under this subsection shall be granted
only by affirmative vote of at least five members of the Board
of Adjustment.
(b) If an application for development requests one or more
variances but not a variance for a purpose enumerated in
Subsection G(4)(a) of this section, the decision on the
requested variance or variances shall be rendered under
§ 141-7G(3).
(c) No variance or other relief may be granted under the terms of
this Subsection G(4) or the preceding Subsection G(3) unless
such variance or other relief can be granted without
substantial detriment to the public good and will not
substantially impair the intent and the purpose of the zone plan
and zoning provisions of this chapter.
(5) The Zoning Board of Adjustment, when hearing appeals and
reviewing applications, shall have the power, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-76, to:
(a) Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 for a
building or a structure in the bed of a mapped street or public
drainageway, flood control basin, or public area preserved
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32.
(b) Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36 for a
building or structure not related to a street.
(6) The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the power to grant, to
the same extent and subject to the same restrictions as the
Planning Board, subdivision, site plan approval or conditional use
approval whenever the Board of Adjustment is reviewing an
application for approval of a use variance.
(7) The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the power to grant
nonconforming use certifications pursuant to the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-68.
H. Appeals and applications.
(1) Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any interested
party within 20 days of the action by the officer from whom the
appeal was taken. Three copies of the notice shall be filed with the
Borough Clerk specifying the grounds for the appeal. The officer
from whom the appeal is taken shall transmit to the Board all the
papers constituting the record.
(2) Applications to the Board of Adjustment without prior application
to an administrative officer shall be filed with the Borough Clerk.
Three copies of the application shall be filed, along with all plot
§ 141-7 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-7
131:193
§ 141-8. Administrative procedures for Planning Board and the
Board of Adjustment.
plans, maps or other papers required by this chapter or any rule of
the Board of Adjustment.
(3) An appeal stays all proceedings unless the officer from whom the
appeal is taken certifies to the Board of Adjustment that, by reason
of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause
imminent peril to life or property. In such cases, proceedings shall
not be stayed otherwise than by restraining order, which may be
granted by the Board of Adjustment or by the Superior Court of
New Jersey on application or notice to the officer from whom the
appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
(4) Any application may be referred to any person or agency for its
report, provided that such reference shall not extend the period of
time within which the Board of Adjustment shall act.
I. Power to reverse or modify decisions. The Board of Adjustment may
reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the order, requirement,
decision or determination appealed from and make such other
requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made and to that
end have all the powers of the administrative officer from whom the
appeal was taken.
J. Time for decision. The Board of Adjustment shall render its decision not
later than 120 days after the date an appeal is taken from the decision
of an administrative officer or not later than 120 days after the
submission of a complete application for development without prior
application to the administrative officer. Failure of the Board to render a
decision within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant shall constitute a decision favorable to the applicant.
K. Expiration of variance. In the granting of bulk and use variances, a time
limit of one year from the date of the variance approval shall be set,
within which time the owner shall secure a building permit; otherwise,
the variance granted shall be null and void. The approving authority
may, for good cause shown, extend the period for securing a building
permit for an additional period not exceeding six months.
A. Conflicts of interest. No member of the Planning Board or Zoning Board
of Adjustment shall act on any matter in which he or she has, either
directly or indirectly, any personal or financial interest. Whenever any
member shall disqualify himself from acting on a particular matter, he
or she shall not continue to sit with the Board on the hearing of such
matter or participate in any discussion or decision relating thereto.
B. Meetings.
§ 141-7 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-8
131:194
(1) Meetings for both Boards shall be scheduled no less than once a
month, and any meeting shall be held as scheduled unless canceled
for lack of applications for development to process.
(2) Special meetings may be called by the Chairman or on request of
any two Board members, provided that there is notice to the
members and public in accordance with all applicable legal
requirements.
(3) No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being
present. All actions shall be by majority vote of a quorum, except
where a specified portion of the full authorized membership is
required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26, 40:55D-34 and 40:55D-70d.
(4) All meetings shall be open to the public. Notice of meetings shall be
given in accordance with the Open Public Meetings Law, P.L. 1975,
c. 231.5.46
C. Minutes. Minutes of regular and special meetings shall be kept and
shall include the names of persons appearing and addressing the Board
and of persons appearing by attorney, the action taken, the findings, if
any, and the reasons therefor. The minutes shall be made available for
public inspection during normal business hours at the office of the
Borough Clerk. Any interested party shall have the right to compel
production of the minutes and shall be charged a fee for their
reproduction.
D. Hearings.
(1) Rules. The Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment shall
make rules governing the conduct of hearings before such bodies,
which rules shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq. or of this chapter.
(2) Oaths. The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as he
may designate shall have the power to administer oaths and issue
subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the
production of relevant evidence, including witnesses and
documents presented by the parties, and the provisions of the
County and Municipal Investigations Law, P.L. 1953, c. 38 (N.J.S.A.
2A:67A-1 et seq.), shall apply.
(3) Testimony. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application
for development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the
presiding officer, and the right of cross examination shall be
permitted to all interested parties through their attorneys, if
represented, or directly, if not represented, subject to the
discretion of the presiding officer and to reasonable limitations as
to time and number of witnesses.
46.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 141-8 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-8
131:195
(4) Evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the
hearing, but the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or
unduly repetitious evidence.
(5) Records. Each Board shall provide for the verbatim recording of
the proceedings by either stenographic, mechanical or electronic
means. The Board shall furnish a transcript or duplicate recording
in lieu thereof on request to any interested party at his expense.
E. Notice requirements for hearings. Whenever a hearing is required: on
an application for development pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-et seq.; on
an appeal or application to the Zoning Board of Adjustment under the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70a or b; pursuant to the determination of
the municipal agency in question; or for nonconforming use
certifications pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-68, the
applicant shall give notice thereof as follows:
(1) Public notice shall be given by publication in the official newspaper
of the Borough at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing.
(2) Notice shall be given to the owners of all real property, as shown on
the current tax duplicate or duplicates, located in the state and
within 200 feet in all directions of the property which is the subject
of such hearing and whether located within or without the
municipality in which the applicant's land is located. Such notice
shall be given by serving a copy thereof on the owner as shown on
the said current tax duplicate or his agent in charge of the property
or by mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to the property owner
at his address shown on the current tax duplicate. A return receipt
is not required. Notice to a partnership owner may be made by
service upon any partner. Notice to a corporate owner may be
made by service upon its president, vice president, secretary or
other persons authorized by appointment or by law to accept
service on behalf of the corporation, provided that this requirement
shall be deemed satisfied by notice to the condominium association,
in the case of any unit owner whose unit has a unit above or below
it, or horizontal property regime, in the case of any co-owner whose
apartment has an apartment above or below it. Notice to a
condominium association, horizontal property regime, community
trust or homeowners' association because of its ownership of
common elements or areas located within 200 feet of the property
which is the subject of the hearing may be made in the same
manner as to a corporation without further notice to unit owners,
co-owners or homeowners on account of such common elements or
areas.
(3) Notice of all hearings on applications for development involving
property located within 200 feet of an adjoining municipality shall
be given by personal service or by certified mail to the Clerk of
such municipality, which notice shall be in addition to the notice
required to be given pursuant to Subsection (2) of this section to
§ 141-8 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-8
131:196
the owners of lands in such adjoining municipality which are
located within 200 feet of the subject premises.
(4) Notice shall be given by personal service or by certified mail to the
County Planning Board of a hearing on an application for
development of property adjacent to an existing county road or
proposed road, shown on the Official County Map or on the County
Master Plan, adjoining other county land or situate within 200 feet
of a municipal boundary.
(5) Notice shall be given by personal service or by certified mail to the
Commissioner of Transportation of a hearing on an application for
development of property adjacent to a state highway.
(6) Notice shall be given by personal service or by certified mail to the
Director of the Division of State and Regional Planning in the
Department of Community Affairs of a hearing on an application for
development of property which exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling
units. Such notice shall include a copy of any maps or documents
required to be on file with the Borough Clerk pursuant to Section
6b of P.L. 1975, c. 291.11.
(7) All notices herein above specified in this section shall be given at
least 10 days prior to the date fixed for the hearing, and the
applicant shall file an affidavit of proof of service with the Board
holding the hearing on the application for development.
(8) Any notice made by certified mail as herein above required shall be
deemed to be complete upon mailing in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-14.
(9) Form of notice. All notices required to be given pursuant to the
terms of this chapter shall state the date, time and place of the
hearing; the nature of the matters to be considered; the
identification of the property proposed for development by street
address, if any, or by reference to lot and block numbers as shown
on the current tax duplicate in the Borough Tax Assessor's office;
and the location and times at which any maps and documents for
which approval is sought are available as required by law.
F. List of property owners furnished. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-12c, the appropriate administrative officer of the municipality,
being the Borough Assessor or his or her designee, shall, within seven
days after receipt of a request therefor and upon receipt of payment of
a fee not to exceed $0.25 per name or $10, whichever is greater, make
and certify a list from the current tax duplicate of the names and
addresses of owners to whom the applicant is required to give notice
pursuant to Subsection E(2) of this section of this section.
G. Decisions.
§ 141-8 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-8
131:197
(1) Each decision on any application for development shall be set forth
in writing as a resolution of the Board, which resolution shall
include findings of fact and legal conclusions based thereon.
(2) A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the Board, within 10 days
of the date of decision, to the applicant or, if represented, then to
his attorney, without separate charge. A copy of the decision shall
also be mailed to all persons who have requested it and who have
paid the fee prescribed by the Board for such service. A copy of the
decision shall also be filed in the office of the Borough Clerk, who
shall make a copy of such filed decision available to any interested
party upon payment of a fee calculated in the same manner as
those fees established for copies of other public documents in the
municipality.
H. Publication of decisions. A brief notice of every final decision shall be
published in the official newspaper of the municipality. Such publication
shall be arranged by the Secretary of the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, without separate charge to
the applicant. Said notice shall be sent to the official newspaper for
publication within 10 days of the date of any such decision.
I. Payment of taxes. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39 and
40:55D-65, every application for development submitted to the
Planning Board or to the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be
accompanied by proof that no taxes or assessments for local
improvements are due or delinquent on the property which is the
subject of such application; or if it is shown that taxes or assessments
are delinquent on said property, the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, in its sole discretion, may elect to proceed with the
application, and any approvals or other relief granted by either Board
shall be conditioned upon either the prompt payment of such taxes or
assessments or the making of adequate provision for the payment
thereof in such manner that the municipality will be adequately
protected.
J. Appeals. All appeals of any final decision of the Board of Adjustment or
the Planning Board on any class of application for development shall be
made to the New Jersey Superior Court.
§ 141-8 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-8
131:198
ARTICLE IV
Enforcement and Review by Other Agencies
§ 141-9. Effect on outstanding permits, approvals and variances.
Nothing in this chapter shall require any change in a building permit or
zoning variance which was approved before the enactment of this chapter,
provided that construction shall have been started within six months from
the effective date of this chapter and that the project shall be continuously
pursued to completion; otherwise said approvals and permits shall be void.
§ 141-10. Zoning Officer to enforce; compliance required prior to
issuance of zoning permit and certificate of occupancy.
§ 141-11. Violations and penalties; civil actions.
§ 141-12. Compliance required; effect of County Planning Board
approval.
The applicant shall comply with reasonable conditions laid down by the
approving authority for design, dedication, improvements and the use of
A. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to administer and enforce the
zoning provisions of this chapter.
B. All requirements of this chapter shall be met at the time of any erection,
enlargement, moving or change in use. All developments resulting from
approved subdivision plats, approved site plans or variances granted by
the approving authority shall comply with all the design and
performance standards, including conditions imposed by the approving
authority as shown on the approved plat or included in the resolution
adopted by the approving authority. No certificate of occupancy for the
new occupant shall be issued until a zoning permit has been issued
indicating compliance with this provision.
A. Except as may be provided in New Jersey statute, any person or
persons, partnership or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000,
imprisonment in the county jail for a term not to exceed 90 days or a
period of community service not to exceed 90 days, or any combination
thereof, in the discretion of the court. Each day on which any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
B. In addition, the Borough may institute and maintain a civil action for
injunctive relief to, inter alia, restrain any violation of this chapter, to
correct or abate the same, to prevent occupancy of land in violation
thereof, to prevent a conveyance in violation thereof or prevent any act
in violation thereof or to set aside and invalidate any conveyance made
without compliance with this chapter. The Borough shall also have all of
the remedies afforded by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-55.
§ 141-9 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-12
131:199
the land to conform to the physical and economical development of the
municipality and to the safety and general welfare of the future residents/
owners in the development and the community at large. Where County
Planning Board review or approval is required on a subdivision or site
plan, the approving authority shall condition any approval it grants upon
either timely receipt of a favorable report by the County Planning Board
or approval by the County Planning Board due to its failure to submit a
report within the required time period. If the county's report is negative
or attaches conditions, the original action by the municipal approving
authority shall be null and void and a new resolution shall be adopted which
considers the County Planning Board's report.
§ 141-12 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-12
131:200
ARTICLE V
Schedule of Fees, Escrows, and Guarantees
§ 141-13. Fees; escrow.
The developer shall, at the time of filing a submission, pay the following
nonrefundable fees to the Borough. For proposals involving more than one
use, a fee shall be paid equaling the sum of the fees for the component
elements of the plat. For proposals requiring a combination of approvals,
such as subdivision, site plan and/or a variance, a fee shall be paid totaling
the full fee of the approval with the highest fee, plus 1/2 the fee of the next
highest approval required and nothing for additional approvals.
A. Subdivision.
(1) An informal plat: $50, plus $30 per lot, up to 20 lots.
(2) A preliminary plat: $200, plus $30 per lot.
(3) A final plat: $50, plus $10 per lot.
B. Site plan.
(1) An informal plat: 1/2 the preliminary site plan fee.
(2) A preliminary site plan:
(a) Residential:
[1] Ten dollars per unit.
[2] The minimum fee: $100.
[3] The maximum fee: $1,000.
(b) Commercial/industrial and other: [Amended 3-3-2002 by
Ord. No. 1306]
[1] The minimum fee: $500.
(c) Freestanding or lighted signs not included in other site plans:
$25.
(3) A final site plan: 1/2 the preliminary site plan fee.
C. Variances and other appeals.
(1) To hear and decide appeals: $100. [Amended 3-3-2002 by Ord.
No. 1306]
(2) Conditional uses: $150.
(3) Interpretation of the Zoning Map: $25.
(4) Variance from outdoor cafe, merchandise/planting requirements:
$50.
§ 141-13 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-13
131:201
(5) A hardship variance: $50.
(6) A use variance:
(a) Residential: $100 per dwelling unit. [Amended 3-3-2002 by
Ord. No. 1306]
(b) Other uses: $20 per acre, with a minimum of $100 and a
maximum of $1,000.
(7) A building permit in conflict with the Official Map or a building
permit for a lot not related to a street: $50.
D. A minor subdivision application: $100, plus $15 per lot. [Amended
3-3-2002 by Ord. No. 1306]
E. A zoning permit: [Amended 8-10-2009 by Ord. No. 1468]
(1) Residential: $10.
(2) Commercial: $25.
F. Outdoor cafe application fee: $50.
G. Professional escrows.
(1) Generally, this section of this chapter includes all escrow sums
required in connection with any application under this chapter.
These escrow sums are in addition to the fees required by
Subsections A, B and C above which are designed to cover the
administrative costs incurred by the Borough in processing
applications. These escrow sums are also in addition to the
inspection fees and guaranty requirements contained in § 141-11 of
this article. Both the above stated fees and the escrow sums
required by this section are nonrefundable in nature. The escrow
sums are designed to pay the cost of professional review by the
engineer, solicitor or other professionals employed by the
reviewing agency to review and make recommendations on an
applicant's application for development. At the time of submitting
his application and plans to the administrative officer, the applicant
shall be required to execute an escrow agreement between the
applicant and the reviewing agency to cover the costs of technical
and professional review of the application for development. Said
escrow agreement shall be in the form approved by the Solicitor of
the Borough of Collingswood. The escrow agreement shall provide
that the applicant pay all necessary and reasonable costs incurred
by the technical and professional staff employed by the reviewing
agency for review of the applicant's application for development.
The sums specified below are estimates which shall be posted prior
to consideration by the reviewing agency or its staff of that stage of
the applicant's review process indicated. In the event that more
than the sums specified below are required to pay the reasonable
cost incurred, the applicant shall, prior to being permitted to take
§ 141-13 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-13
131:202
the next step in the approval procedure or in any element of his
project, pay all additional sums required. In the event that the
escrow sums posted are more than those required, the excess
funds shall be returned to the applicant within 14 days of the
issuance of an occupancy permit for any element of the project.
Prior to issuance of an occupancy permit for any element of the
project seeking approval under this chapter, the administrative
officer shall determine from the professional staff employed by the
reviewing agency in the review of the applicant's application for
development whether there are any additional sums required to
be paid from the escrow fund established. In the event that there
are, the administrative officer shall so notify the Borough Treasurer
of the amounts to be held in that account. The administrative
officer shall determine the position of all escrow accounts, and
where additional funds are required, it shall be the obligation of
the administrative officer to so notify the applicant of the amounts
needed and to properly make all payments required to be made
under this section of this chapter. In addition to these terms, the
escrow agreement may require any other additional terms which
are agreed to by the applicant and the reviewing agency.
(2) Schedule of escrow sums.
(a) A minor subdivision, escrow fee: $1,250. [Amended 3-7-2005
by Ord. No. 1373]
(b) A minor site plan, escrow fee: $1,250. [Amended 3-7-2005 by
Ord. No. 1373]
(c) A preliminary major subdivision, escrow fee: $1,500.
(d) A preliminary major site plan, escrow fee: $1,200.
(e) A final major subdivision, escrow fee: $750.
(f) A final major site plan, escrow fee: $750.
(g) Appeals to the Zoning Board and requests for interpretation:
$250. [Amended 10-1-2018 by Ord. No. 1648]
(h) Use variances, escrow fees. [Amended 10-1-2018 by Ord.
No. 1648]
[1] Residential: $250.
[2] Commercial: $750.
[3] Industrial: $750.
(i) Bulk variances, escrow fees. [Amended 10-1-2018 by Ord.
No. 1648]
[1] Residential: $175.
§ 141-13 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-13
131:203
§ 141-14. Performance and maintenance guaranties; inspections.
[2] Commercial: $250.
[3] Industrial: $250.
(j) Conditional use, escrow fee: $250. [Amended 10-1-2018 by
Ord. No. 1648]
(k) Rezoning, escrow fee: $1,000.
(l) Vacant property extension application: $25.
(m) Nonconforming use certifications: $250. [Amended
10-1-2018 by Ord. No. 1648]
(3) Revised site plan or subdivision. The applicant will be required for
each refiling of plans not requiring a new application to post an
additional sum equal to 1/4 of the escrow fee normally established
for the proposal as set forth above.
(4) Rules of construction.
(a) Cumulative sum. Where an applicant submits an application
involving a combination of approvals, i.e., a subdivision
application submitted, together with a variance request, the
fees and escrow sums provided in Subsection F(2) of this
section for each category of approval sought shall be posted.
Therefore, the fees and escrow sums under this section shall
be deemed cumulative in nature.
(b) Waiver. The reviewing board shall have the power in
appropriate cases to compromise or waive the escrow sums
required in Subsection F(2) of this section where an applicant
shall present to the reviewing board sufficient proof that the
cost incurred by the Borough would not necessitate posting of
the specified sums.
A. Before the recording of final subdivision plats or as a condition of final
site plan approval or as a condition to the issuance of a zoning permit
pursuant to Section 52d of this Act,47 the approving authority may
require and shall accept, in accordance with the standards adopted by
ordinance for the purpose of assuring the installation and maintenance
of on-tract improvements:
(1) The furnishing of a performance guaranty in favor of the
municipality in an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of
installation for improvements it may deem necessary or
appropriate, including streets, grading, pavement, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, streetlighting, surveyor's monuments as shown on the
final map and required by the Map Filing Law, P.L. 1960, c.141
47.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65.
§ 141-13 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-14
131:204
(N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.), water mains, culverts, storm sewers,
sanitary sewers or other means of sewage disposal, drainage
structures, erosion control and sedimentation control devices and
public improvements of open space.
(2) Provision for a maintenance guaranty to be posted with the
governing body for a period not to exceed two years after final
acceptance of the improvement, in an amount not to exceed 15% of
the cost of the improvement. In the event that other governmental
agencies or public utilities to be installed or the improvements are
covered by a performance or maintenance guaranty to another
governmental agency, no performance or maintenance guaranty, as
the case may be, shall be required by the municipality for such
utilities or improvements.
B. The provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53b, c, d, e, f and g shall be applicable
to such performance and maintenance guaranties.
C. Prior to construction of any of the improvements referred to in
Subsection A(1) of this section, the developer shall arrange for a
preconstruction conference between the developer, the contractor and
the Municipal Engineer. The Municipal Engineer shall be notified, by
certified mail, by the developer at least 72 hours in advance of the start
of construction. The cost of inspections shall be the responsibility of the
developer, who shall reimburse the Borough for all reasonable
inspection fees by submitting a certified check or bank money order to
the Borough Clerk. This fee shall be in addition to the amount of the
performance guaranty and all application fees, as outlined above, and
shall be deposited initially in accordance with the following schedule.
The funds shall be deposited in an interest-bearing escrow account.
Upon completion of the development and all inspections, the developer
shall receive an accounting of the expended funds. Any unspent funds
shall be returned to the developer. Should the initial deposit be
insufficient to cover inspection costs, the developer shall deposit
additional sums upon notice from the Borough Clerk, each additional
deposit being in amounts not to exceed 50% of the initial deposit:
Estimated Construction Cost Inspection Fee
Under $5,000 $350.00
$5,000 to $10,000 $350.00, plus 5% of the excess
over $5,000
$10,000 to $50,000 $600.00, plus 4 1/2% of the excess
over $10,000
$50,000 to $75,000 $2,400.00, plus 4% of the excess
over $50,000
$75,000 to $100,000 $3,400.00, plus 3 1/2% of the
excess over $75,000
§ 141-14 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-14
131:205
Estimated Construction Cost Inspection Fee
Over $100,000 $4,275.00, plus 3% of the excess
over $100,000
D. The provisions of Subsection C above shall not be applicable to
municipal, county, state or federal uses.
E. No construction referred to in Subsection C above shall be done
without permission from and inspection by the Municipal Engineer. No
underground installation shall be covered until inspected and
approved. The Municipal Engineer's office shall be notified after each of
the following phases of the work has been completed so that he may
inspect the work: road subgrade; curb and gutter forms; curbs and
gutters; road paving (after each coat in the case of priming and
sealing); drainage pipes and other drainage structures before
backfilling; shade trees and planting strips; street name signs and
monuments.
F. No utility installations installed by utility companies shall be subject to
the inspection requirements or to bonding.
G. Occupancy permits will be issued only when required fire alarms,
curbs, utilities, functioning water supply and sewage treatment
facilities, gutters and other necessary storm drainage of the lot and
surrounding land, rough grading of lots, soil stabilization, base course
for the street and driveway and sidewalks are installed to serve the lot
and structure for which the permit is requested. Streets shall not
receive surface course paving until all heavy construction is completed.
Shade trees shall not be planted until all grading and earthmoving is
completed. Seeding of grass areas shall be the final operation.
§ 141-14 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-14
131:206
ARTICLE VI
Zoning District Boundaries
§ 141-15. Zoning Map; interpretation of boundaries.
§ 141-15.1. Prohibited uses. [Amended 3-3-2002 by Ord. No. 1306;
4-6-2015 by Ord. No. 1565; 8-3-2015 by Ord. No. 1575; 9-6-2016 by
Ord. No. 1604; 5-1-2017 by Ord. No. 1615]
All uses not expressly permitted as either a principal use, an accessory
use or as a conditional use by this chapter are prohibited. In addition,
the following uses are also prohibited: ice or roller skating rinks,
establishments that show films or videos of any kind, massage or tattoo
parlors, establishments utilizing either plenary retail consumption or
distribution licenses pursuant to N.J.S.A. 33:1-12, establishments utilizing
either limited or restricted licenses pursuant to N.J.S.A. 33:1-10, except
limited breweries, which do not sell or serve food or operate a restaurant, as
defined under Article II, § 141-4, bowling alleys or electronic or mechanical
games of any kind but not limited to pool, billiards or bingo, flea markets,
discos and nightclubs, accessory apartments, boarding homes and
community residential houses, fortune telling, tarot card and psychic
readings and similar or related services.
§ 141-16. Single-Family, Detached Residential District One (SF-D1).
A. The boundaries of zoning districts shall be as shown upon the map
attached to and made part hereof this chapter, entitled "Borough of
Collingswood Zoning Map, November 1999."48
B. The following rules shall govern interpretations of the Zoning Map:
(1) The boundaries between districts are, unless otherwise indicated,
the center lines of streets, alleys or railroad rights-of-way, or follow
property lines or extensions thereof.
(2) The Board of Adjustment shall determine the location of any
disputed zoning district boundary line.
A. Purpose. The Single-Family Residential District recognizes mature
neighborhoods that contain significant single-family, owner-occupied
single-family units on larger lots.
B. Permitted principal uses shall be as follows:
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Parks and playgrounds.
48.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 141-15 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-16
131:207
§ 141-17. Single-Family, Detached Residential District Two (SF-D2).
(3) Private or parochial schools consisting of kindergarten, elementary
or high school grades meeting the curriculum requirements of the
New Jersey Department of Education. (See § 141-80.)
(4) Family day-care homes. (See § 141-63.)
C. Permitted accessory uses shall be as follows:
(1) Private garages up to two cars in size.
(2) Utility sheds.
(3) Home personal offices. (See § 141-67.)
D. Conditional uses shall be as follows:
(1) Home professional offices. (See § 141-68.)
(2) Churches, chapels or other houses of worship. (See § 141-55.)
(3) Utility structures and facilities needed to provide the direct service
of gas, electricity, telephone, water, sewerage and cable television
excluding offices, garages, warehouses, maintenance areas or
similar commercially or industrially related operations of such
companies or utilities. (See § 141-89.)49
E. For bulk and area requirements, see the Schedule of District
Regulations of this chapter.50
F. Nonconforming uses: hours of operation. Any nonconforming use
located in such zone shall not conduct business between the hours of
1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. [Added 12-6-2010 by Ord. No. 1488]
A. Purpose. This district recognizes mature neighborhoods that contain
significant single-family, owner-occupied single-family units on smaller
lots.
B. Permitted principal uses shall be as follows:
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Parks and playgrounds.
(3) Private or parochial schools consisting of kindergarten, elementary
or high school grades meeting the curriculum requirements of the
New Jersey Department of Education. (See § 141-80.)
(4) Family day-care homes. (See § 141-63.)
49.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(4), Community residential homes, which subsection
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 3-3-2002 by Ord. No. 1306.
50.Editor's Note: The Schedule of District Regulations is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 141-16 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-17
131:208
§ 141-18. Single-Family, Detached and Semidetached Residential
District Three (SF-D3). [Amended 3-3-2002 by Ord. No. 1306]
C. Permitted accessory uses shall be as follows:
(1) Private garages up to two cars in size.
(2) Utility sheds.
(3) Home personal offices. (See § 141-67.)
D. Conditional uses shall be as follows:
(1) Home professional offices. (See § 141-68.)
(2) Churches, chapels or other houses of worship. (See § 141-55.)
(3) Utility structures and facilities needed to provide the direct service
of gas, electricity, telephone, water, sewerage and cable television
excluding offices, garages, warehouses, maintenance areas or
similar commercially or industrially related operations of such
companies or utilities. (See § 141-82.)
(4) Community residential homes. (See § 141-56.)
E. For bulk and area requirements, see the Schedule of District
Regulations of this chapter.51
F. Nonconforming uses: hours of operation. Any nonconforming use
located in such zone shall not conduct business between the hours of
1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. [Added 12-6-2010 by Ord. No. 1488]
A. Purpose. This district recognizes the transitional single-family
residential neighborhoods that have walkable access to the Borough's
business districts. It promotes alternative living arrangements in
stable, owner-occupied homes.
B. Permitted principal uses shall be as follows:
(1) Single-family detached and semidetached dwellings.
(2) Parks and playgrounds.
(3) Private or parochial schools consisting of kindergarten, elementary
or high school grades meeting the curriculum requirements of the
New Jersey Department of Education. (§ 141-80.)
(4) Family day-care homes. (See § 141-63.)
C. Permitted accessory uses shall be as follows:
(1) Private garages up to two cars in size.
51.Editor's Note: The Schedule of District Regulations is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 141-17 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-18
131:209
§ 141-19. Single-Family, Attached Residential District (SF-A).
(2) Utility sheds.
(3) Home personal offices. (See § 141-67.)
D. Conditional uses shall be as follows:
(1) Home professional offices. (See § 141-68.)
(2) Churches, chapels or other houses of worship. (See § 141-55.)
(3) Utility structures and facilities needed to provide the direct service
of gas, electricity, telephone, water, sewerage and cable television
excluding offices, garages, warehouses, maintenance areas or
similar commercially or industrially related operations of such
companies or utilities. (See § 141-82.)
(4) Bed-and-breakfast facilities. (See § 141-52.)
E. For bulk and area requirements, see the Schedule of District
Regulations of this chapter.52
F. Nonconforming uses: hours of operation. Any nonconforming use
located in such zone shall not conduct business between the hours of
1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. [Added 12-6-2010 by Ord. No. 1488]
A. Purpose. This district recognizes the mature residential neighborhoods
that consist of original row-homes and similar, attached single-family
homes. It further promotes their upkeep and restoration as owneroccupied
units.
B. Permitted principal uses shall be as follows:
(1) Single-family detached units.
(2) Single-family attached units.
(3) Parks and playgrounds.
(4) Private or parochial schools consisting of kindergarten, elementary
or high school grades meeting the curriculum requirements of the
New Jersey Department of Education. (See § 141-80.)
C. Permitted accessory uses shall be as follows:
(1) Private garages up to two cars in size.
(2) Utility sheds.
(3) Family day-care homes. (See § 141-63.)
D. Conditional uses shall be as follows:
52.Editor's Note: The Schedule of District Regulations is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 141-18 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-19
131:210
§ 141-20. Multifamily Residential District (MF).
(1) Home personal offices. (See § 141-67.)
(2) Churches, chapels or other houses of worship. (See § 141-55.)
(3) Utility structures and facilities needed to provide the direct service
of gas, electricity, telephone, water, sewerage and cable television
excluding offices, garages, warehouses, maintenance areas or
similar commercially or industrially related operations of such
companies or utilities. (See § 141-82.)
(4) Community residential homes. (See § 141-56.)
E. For bulk and area requirements, see the Schedule of District
Regulations of this chapter.53
F. Nonconforming uses: hours of operation. Any nonconforming use
located in such zone shall not conduct business between the hours of
1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. [Added 12-6-2010 by Ord. No. 1488]
A. Purpose. This district recognizes and promotes multifamily housing in
proximity to commercial opportunities within the Borough.
B. Permitted principal uses shall be as follows:
(1) All uses permitted in the SF-A District.
(2) Garden apartments.
(3) Mid-rise apartment buildings.
(4) High-rise apartment building.
C. Permitted accessory uses shall be as follows:
(1) Single-car garages.
(2) Parking lots or garages. (See § 141-76.)
(3) Office or service retail on ground floor of high-rise apartment
buildings only.
D. Conditional uses shall be as follows:
(1) Home personal offices. (See § 141-67.)
(2) Family day-care homes. (See § 141-63.)
(3) Churches, chapels or other houses of worship. (See § 141-55.)
(4) Utility structures and facilities needed to provide the direct service
of gas, electricity, telephone, water, sewerage and cable television
53.Editor's Note: The Schedule of District Regulations is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 141-19 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-20
131:211
§ 141-21. Central Business District (CBD).
excluding offices, garages, warehouses, maintenance areas or
similar commercially or industrially related operations of such
companies or utilities. (See § 141-82.)
(5) Senior citizen housing.
(6) Community residential homes. (See § 141-56.)
E. For bulk and area requirements, see the Schedule of District
Regulations of this chapter.54
F. Nonconforming uses: hours of operation. Any nonconforming use
located in such zone shall not conduct business between the hours of
1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. [Added 12-6-2010 by Ord. No. 1488]
A. Purpose. This district recognizes and encourages the traditional
downtown shopping and service opportunities within the Borough. It
supports creative infill and redevelopment opportunities to supplement
strong, existing businesses.
B. Permitted principal uses shall be as follows:
(1) Retail stores and service establishments, excluding convenience
stores.
(2) Retail banks. [Amended 12-3-2007 by Ord. No. 1440]
(3) Restaurants, excluding fast-food restaurants.
(4) Travel agencies, real estate offices and opticians.
(5) Funeral homes.
(6) Commercial and public parking lots. (See§ 141-76.)
(7) Drugstores and pharmacies.
(8) Libraries.
(9) Limited breweries, which do not serve or sell food or operate a
restaurant, as defined under Article II, § 141-4, of the Collingswood
Development Regulations Ordinance. [Added 8-3-2015 by Ord.
No. 1576]
C. Permitted accessory uses shall be as follows:
(1) Uses customarily incidental to the permitted principal uses.
(2) Parking in accordance with § 141-76.
54.Editor's Note: The Schedule of District Regulations is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 141-20 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-21
131:212
§ 141-22. Professional Office District (POD).
(3) Residential uses within the same building as a permitted
commercial use. Such residential use must be located on the
second or third floor of the commercial building located on Haddon
Avenue or Collings Avenue.
(4) Office, professional office and medical professional office uses
within the second or third floor of the same building as a permitted
commercial use.
(5) Office, professional office and medical professional office uses,
except that such uses shall not be permitted on the first floor along
Haddon Avenue or Collings Avenue.
D. Conditional uses shall be as follows:
(1) Convenience stores. (See § 141-58.)
(2) Specialty shopping centers.
(3) Licensed child-care centers. (See § 141-70.)
(4) Outdoor cafes (See § 141-76.1.)
E. For bulk and area requirements, see the Schedule of District
Regulations of this chapter.55
F. Hours of operation. The permitted principal uses set forth above in
Subsection B and such other businesses located in such zone shall not
conduct business between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
A. Purpose. This district recognizes the existing significant buildings
within the district, while supporting conversion of existing singlefamily,
detached residential homes to professional offices and culturaloriented
business without changing the architectural features of the
area.
B. Permitted principal uses shall be as follows:
(1) Single-family, detached homes.
(2) Bed-and-breakfast facilities. (See § 141-52.)
(3) Home personal offices. (See § 141-67.)
(4) Home professional offices. (See § 141-68.)
(5) Offices, professional offices, medical professional offices and
financial institutions. [Amended 12-3-2007 by Ord. No. 1440]
(6) Funeral homes.
55.Editor's Note: The Schedule of District Regulations is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 141-21 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-22
131:213
§ 141-23. Highway Business District (HBD).
(7) Clubs, lodges, and community centers.
(8) Studios.
(9) Public buildings.
C. Permitted accessory uses shall be as follows:
(1) Uses customarily incidental to the permitted principal uses.
(2) Private garages, for up to two cars.
D. Conditional uses shall be as follows:
(1) Restaurants, excluding fast-food restaurants.
(2) Theaters.
(3) Convenience stores. (See § 141-58.)
(4) Licensed child-care centers. (See § 141-70.)
E. Bulk and area requirements. See the Schedule of District Regulations of
this chapter.56
F. Hours of operation. The permitted principal uses set forth above in
Subsection B and such other businesses located in such zone shall not
conduct business between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
A. Purpose. This district serves to recognize and promote highwayoriented
development along the Route 130 corridor that will serve as a
gateway for the Borough with appropriate landscaping, buffering,
signage, and architectural treatments.
B. Permitted principal uses shall be as follows:
(1) Retail stores and service establishments.
(2) Retail banks. [Amended 12-3-2007 by Ord. No. 1440]
(3) Restaurants.
(4) Fast-food restaurants. (See § 141-64.)
(5) Offices, professional offices and medical professional offices.
(6) Funeral homes.
(7) Convenience stores. (See § 141-58.)
(8) Drugstores and pharmacies.
56.Editor's Note: The Schedule of District Regulations is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 141-22 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-23
131:214
§ 141-24. Highway Industrial District (HID).
(9) Shopping centers.
(10) Limited breweries, which do not serve or sell food or operate a
restaurant, as defined under Article II, § 141-4, of the Collingswood
Development Regulations Ordinance. [Added 8-3-2015 by Ord.
No. 1576]
C. Permitted accessory uses shall be as follows:
(1) Uses customarily incidental to the permitted principal uses.
(2) Public and commercial parking lots.
D. Conditional uses shall be as follows:
(1) Automotive garages. (See § 141-49.)
(2) Automotive service stations, including those with convenience
stores. (See § 141-51.)
(3) Automotive sales of new or used cars. (See § 141-50.)
(4) Adult entertainment use. (See § 141-46.)
(5) Licensed child-care centers. (See § 141-70.)
E. For bulk and area requirements, see the Schedule of District
Regulations of this chapter.57
F. Hours of operation. The permitted principal uses set forth above in
Subsection B and such other businesses located in such zone shall not
conduct business between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
A. Permitted principal uses shall be as follows:
(1) Professional and medical offices.
(2) Wholesale business.
(3) Scientific and research laboratories.
(4) Industry, processing and manufacturing for such uses but not
limited to beverages, food items, pharmaceuticals, printing and
publishing, confections, clothing, electrical goods, furniture,
specialty manufacturing, professional and scientific instruments,
and electronics.
(5) Industrial research.
(6) Warehouses.
57.Editor's Note: The Schedule of District Regulations is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 141-23 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-24
131:215
(7) Vehicle sales.
B. Permitted accessory uses shall be as follows:
(1) Uses customarily incidental to the permitted principal uses.
(2) Offices, in conjunction with a permitted industrial use.
C. Conditional uses shall be as follows:
(1) Retail sales of goods and services, financial institutions and
restaurants shall be permitted in up to 25% of the HID District,
provided that the following criteria are complied with:
(a) There shall be a minimum lot size of three acres.
(b) There shall be a minimum of 25,000 square feet of building
area.
(c) There should be a maximum of three conditional uses within
any building. [Amended 8-7-2006 by Ord. No. 1410]
(d) Parking shall be one car per 200 square feet gross area of the
building.
(e) Parking, loading and landscaping layouts shall be in
accordance with § 141-69.
(f) Sign performance standards shall be in accordance with
Article IX.
(g) Those performance standards set forth in § 141-77 shall be
met.
(h) There shall be no significant adverse impact caused by storm
drainage from the property in question to any other property
within the drainage area.
D. In addition to the uses prohibited throughout the Borough under
Section § 141-15.1, the following shall not be permitted uses or
permitted conditional uses for the purposes of this section:
(1) Funeral parlors or crematoriums.
(2) Gasoline filling stations and automobile repair and service centers.
(3) Convenience stores.
(4) Supermarkets.
E. For bulk and area requirements, see the Schedule of District
Regulations of this chapter.58
58.Editor's Note: The Schedule of District Regulations is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 141-24 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-24.1
131:216
§ 141-24.1. Affordable Housing Overlay District. [Added 8-1-2016 by
Ord. No. 1599]
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Affordable Housing Overlay District is to
establish an area for capturing the Borough's unmet need from its Third
Round Fair Share Affordable Housing obligations, in conformance with
the requirements of the New Jersey Fair Housing Act of 1985.
B. Applicability.
(1) Affordable Housing Overlay District shall be applied to the lands
known as Block 38, Lots 12, 12.01, 12.02, and 12.03; Block 60, Lots
2, 3, 4, 5, 5.01. and 5.02; Block 63, Lots 1, 1.01, 2, 3, 6.01, and 6.07;
and Block 97, Lots 4.02, 5, 5.01, 5.02, and 8 on the Collingswood
Tax Map.
(2) The Official Zoning Map of the Borough of Collingswood is hereby
amended in accordance with the foregoing and is further
incorporated by reference.59
C. Permitted use; permitted density.
(1) The development of multifamily dwellings shall be permitted in the
Affordable Housing Overlay District.
(2) Residential density permitted in the Affordable Housing Overlay
District shall be as follows:
(a) Block 38, Lots 12, 12.01, 12.02, and 12.03: 10 dwelling units
per acre;
(b) Block 60, Lots 2, 3, 4, 5, 5.01, and 5.02: 16 dwelling units per
acre;
(c) Block 63, Lots 1, 1.01, 2, 3, 6.01, and 6.07: 13.91 dwelling units
per acre; and
(d) Block 97, Lots 4.02, 5, 5.01, 5.02, and 8: 14 dwelling units per
acre.
D. Affordable housing set-aside. A fifteen-percent set-aside for affordable
housing for all development applications consisting of five or more
residential units within the areas described in Subsection B(1) above is
required.
E. Compliance with other regulations and ordinances.
(1) All multifamily dwellings developed within the Affordable Housing
Overlay District shall comply with all development regulations
applicable to the Multifamily Residential District.
59.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 141-24.1 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-24.1
131:217
§ 141-25. Change in zoning use; approval required.
(2) All other development regulations applicable to the underlying
zones for each property located within Affordable Housing Overlay
District shall remain in full force and effect unless in conflict with
this section.
(3) All affordable units constructed within this overlay zones shall also
comply with Chapter 85 of this Code.
A. Any change in use, as listed below, shall require application to be made
to the Zoning Officer. It shall be unlawful to undertake any of these
changes unless the Zoning Officer has signified, in writing, that the
provisions of this subsection and chapter have been met.
(1) A change, in whole or in part, of the use being made of any
structure.
(2) The new use of a structure theretofore unused.
(3) A change, in whole or in part, of the use being made of land.
(4) The new use of land theretofore unused.
B. Application for such change in use approval shall be made to the Zoning
Administrative Officer in writing. The application shall contain all
information necessary for the Officer to ascertain whether the proposed
change is use complies with this chapter or shall appear before the
Planning Board for approval. The application shall include a drawing, to
scale, which shows the following information:
(1) The dimensions and shape of the lot in question.
(2) The exact size and locations of all existing and any proposed
structures.
(3) Current and proposed utilities, access to rights-of-way, and on-site
circulation
(4) Current and proposed use, including a project description of the
proposed use with number of employees, parking stalls, and
bedrooms (if a residential use), and square footage of impervious
coverage.
(5) The SIC codes for the current and proposed use. (See list at the end
of this chapter.)
C. The Zoning Officer shall have 45 days in which to review the proposed
change in use.
(1) Should the change in use be deemed insignificant by the Zoning
Officer, have the same division and major group classification
within the SIC system, as signified by the first digit in the SIC code,
or not involve any outside construction, written approval shall be
§ 141-24.1 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-25
131:218
§ 141-26. Redevelopment plans.
Under the authority granted by the Local Redevelopment and Housing
Law,60 those geographic areas that have been designated as areas in need
of rehabilitation may be utilized in a manner not inconsistent with the intent
and purpose of a duly authorized redevelopment plan and shall not be
subject to the requirements of the zone in which the area is located.
granted as mentioned in Subsection A. [Amended 4-5-2004 by
Ord. No. 1329]
(2) Where the construction or alteration of a structure is involved, a
zoning permit shall be applied for. If the Zoning Administrative
Officer deems the change in use insignificant and that the
requirements contained within this chapter have been met, he shall
issue a zoning permit.
(3) If the division and major group classification within the SIC system,
as signified by the first digit in the SIC code of the proposed use
varies from the current use, the Zoning Officer shall forward the
application to the Planning Board for the appropriate review. The
applicant may proceed with an informal plat review to determine
classification of the application. Approval by the Planning Board of
a site plan or subdivision shall constitute the equivalent of written
approval by the Zoning Officer, and upon completion of all required
conditions of any Planning Board approval, a zoning permit shall be
issued and the change of use may proceed. [Amended 4-5-2004
by Ord. No. 1329]
D. It shall be unlawful to convert any single-family attached or singlefamily
detached dwelling into a two-or-more-family dwelling. Accessory
apartments are conditional uses in certain residential zones and must
meet the requirements outlined in § 141-44.
E. Any property in the Borough of Collingswood that is currently zoned for
nonresidential uses and that is subsequently rezoned for residential
purposes or receives a zoning change or a use variance to permit
residential development, or receives a zoning change or a density
variance to permit higher density residential development, and
provided such residential development provides a sufficient
compensatory benefit in terms of the density of development permitted,
shall provide an affordable housing set-aside as set forth in § 85-6E(3).
The determination of a "sufficient compensatory benefit" shall be a
density that is above the presumptive density pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:93-5.6. [Added 8-1-2016 by Ord. No. 1599]
60.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq.
§ 141-25 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-26
131:219

ARTICLE VII
Subdivision, Site Plan, and Conditional Use Review and Approval
§ 141-27. Hardship variances from the requirements of
development approval.
The approving authority, when acting upon applications for preliminary or
minor subdivision approval or for preliminary or minor site plan approval,
shall have the power to grant such exceptions from the requirements of
subdivision approval or site plan approval, as the case may be, as may
be reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of the provisions
for subdivision/site plan review and approval if the literal enforcement of
one or more provisions of this chapter is impracticable or will exact undue
hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question.
§ 141-28. Site plan approval required unless exempt.
Site plan approval is required for all site plans not defined herein as exempt.
§ 141-29. Exemption for certain minor and exempt subdivisions and
site plans.
The approving authority may waive required notices and hearings for minor
and exempt subdivisions and site plans, except where a variance or
conditional use is part of the application. Divisions of land not considered a
subdivision under the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-7 shall be exempt from
compliance with the subdivision requirements of this chapter.
§ 141-30. Simultaneous review.
The approving authority shall have the power to act upon subdivisions,
conditional uses or site plans simultaneously without the developer making
further application or the approving authority holding further hearings. The
longest time period for action by the approving authority, whether it is for
subdivision, conditional use or site plan approval, shall apply. Whenever
approval of a conditional use is requested by the developer in conjunction
with a site plan or subdivision, notice of the hearing on the plat shall include
reference to the request for such conditional use.
§ 141-31. Informal plat review.
A. An informal plat submission is optional. The purpose of an informal
review is for the Planning Board, their professionals and the applicant
to review concepts and assist the applicant in the preparation of
subsequent plans and submissions. Other than classification, no
decisions will be made, no hearings held and no formal action taken.
B. Filing procedure. The developer shall file with the Planning Board
Secretary, at least 21 days prior to the meeting of the approving
authority, fifteen black-on-white copies of the informal plat, two
§ 141-27 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-31
131:221
completed copies of the application form, two completed copies of the
informal plat checklist and the applicable fee.
C. Sketch plan for subdivisions. The informal subdivision plat submitted
for review by the approving authority shall be clearly and legibly drawn,
shall be at a graphic scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet and
shall contain, at a minimum, the following:
(1) The Tax Map sheet; block and lot numbers for the tract and all
adjacent lots; a title, including the words "Informal Plat for Review
and Classification"; the North arrow; scale; space for the
application number; the date of the original drawing; and the date
and substance of each revision.
(2) Zoning district(s) of proposed lot(s).
(3) The names, addresses, signatures and phone numbers of the owner,
the developer and the person preparing the plat.
(4) A key map showing the entire development and its relation to
surrounding areas.
(5) The existing and proposed lot and street layout showing that
portion proposed for development in relation to the entire tract.
(6) The existing lot lines to be eliminated.
(7) The area of the original tract and of the proposed lots.
(8) The basic intent for water and sewerage treatment.
(9) Location and size of any existing structures and associates uses.
(10) The location and, if applicable, direction of flow of all natural
features, including wooded areas, waterways, wetlands, and
slopes. Percolation tests and soil logs are not required. However,
where the slope and soil conditions indicate that problems may be
encountered, percolation tests and soil logs, as required for the
preliminary plat, may be advisable.
(11) Existing and proposed rights-of-way within and adjoining the tract.
Proposed access points and parking areas shall be included if in
conjunction with a site plan.
(12) All required yard and setback lines.
(13) All existing and proposed easements or land reserved for
dedication to the public.
D. Sketch plan for minor and major site plans. The informal site plan plat
submitted for review by the approving authority shall be clearly and
legibly drawn, shall be at a graphic scale of not less than one inch
equals 100 feet and shall contain, at a minimum, the following:
§ 141-31 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-31
131:222
(1) The Tax Map sheet; block and lot numbers for the tract and all
adjacent lots; a title, including the words "Informal Plat for Review
and Classification"; the North arrow; scale; space for the
application number; the date of the original drawing; and the date
and substance of each revision.
(2) Zoning district(s) of proposed lot(s).
(3) The names, addresses, signatures and phone numbers of the owner,
the developer and the person preparing the plat.
(4) A key map showing the entire development and its relation to
surrounding areas.
(5) The existing and proposed lot and street layout showing that
portion proposed for development in relation to the entire tract.
(6) The approximate on-site or on-tract stormwater detention facilities,
water and sewer service, and any other available utility locations.
(7) Location and size of any existing and proposed structures and
associates uses.
(8) The location and, if applicable, direction of flow of all natural
features, including wooded areas, waterways, wetlands, and
slopes. Percolation tests and soil logs are not required. However,
where the slope and soil conditions indicate that problems may be
encountered, percolation tests and soil logs, as required for the
preliminary plat, may be advisable.
(9) Existing and proposed rights-of-way within and adjoining the tract.
(10) Proposed access points, parking, and loading areas.
(11) Location and details of proposed lighting, signage, and
landscaping.
(12) All required yard and setback lines.
(13) All existing and proposed easements or land reserved for
dedication to the public.
E. Action by approving authority.
(1) The approving authority shall classify the application as a minor or
major development within 45 days of the date of submission or such
further time as may be consented to by the applicant. If the
approving authority suggests any changes to be included in the
preliminary or final plat, such changes and/or conditions shall be in
writing and shall be sent to the applicant.
(2) If the approving authority determines that the development may,
directly or indirectly, create an adverse effect on either the
property being developed or nearby property, the approving
§ 141-31 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-31
131:223
§ 141-32. Filing of application for conditional use, minor and major
subdivision, minor and major site plan approval.
§ 141-33. Minor subdivisions.
authority may require the developer to revise the plan and
incorporate such revisions in the preliminary or final plat. Where
any remaining portion of the original tract is sufficient to be
developed or subdivided further, the developer may be required
to indicate a feasible plan whereby the proposed development,
together with subsequent development, will not create, impose,
aggravate or lead to any such adverse effect(s).
A. Forms for filing applications for development and information
regarding the steps to be taken, as well as the regular meeting dates of
the Planning Board, shall be obtained by the applicant from either the
Planning Board Secretary or the Zoning Officer.
B. Applications for minor and major site plan review approval, major
subdivision approval, conditional use approval, or any other
development within the jurisdiction of the Planning Board shall be
submitted for filing with the Planning Board Secretary at least 21 days
prior to a work meeting of the Planning Board
C. The applicant shall submit for filing 15 copies of all plats, maps, plans,
and other information as required for a complete application, and the
applicant shall inform the Planning Board Secretary within 48 hours of
the filing. In the case of applications for final approval of a major
subdivision, the application shall include the originals and processed
tracings as required by the Map Filing Law, N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
Any amended application, together with any amended plats, maps or
other plans, shall be submitted for filing in the same manner as the
original application.
D. Conditional use applications require submission of a site plan and shall
be filed in conjunction with the site plan submission. Conditional use
applications are subject to the provisions in § 141-57 of this chapter.
A. The following regulations shall apply to the applications for the
approval of minor subdivisions as defined by this chapter:
(1) A complete application for preliminary approval shall be consistent
with § 141-32 of this chapter and shall be accompanied by the
following materials, where applicable:
(a) Copies of the completed Borough application form.
(b) Copies of the completed checklist.
(c) Copies of the Camden County Planning Board application form.
§ 141-31 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-33
131:224
(d) A certificate from the Borough Tax Collector that no taxes or
assessments are due or delinquent (tax search).
(e) A copy of the deed, including the text of any easements,
protective covenants and deed restrictions applying to the land
being subdivided.
(f) The appropriate application fees.
(g) One translucent tracing on cloth or plastic film and 15 paper
copies of the minor subdivision plat.
(2) The minor subdivision plat shall be a certified survey of the tract,
signed and sealed by a licensed land surveyor, be clearly drawn at a
scale no less than one inch equals 100 fee, to show existing and
proposed conditions of the proposed site and shall contain the
following information:
(a) A key map showing the entire subdivision in relation to the
surrounding area and roadway system. This map shall be taken
from the Borough Zoning Map.
(b) All existing structures and significant natural features on the
proposed site and within 200 feet of the subject property.
(c) The current zoning and use of the tract.
(d) The name and address of the owner of record, the tract name
and the name and address of the subdivider/applicant, if
different from the owner.
(e) Name, address, seal, and signature of the person preparing the
plat.
(f) The tax plate, block, lot numbers.
(g) Address of the property.
(h) The North arrow with reference used, scale (not greater that
one inch equals 100 feet), and date of creation and revisions, if
applicable.
(i) The point of beginning and metes and bounds of the property
in question as well as the dimensions of all proposed lot lines
being created and parcels being retained. Any lot lines to be
eliminated shall be clearly indicated. All measurements shall
be in feet and decimals of a foot.
(j) Property corner markers, both found and set, or the relation of
existing markers to the property corner.
(k) Streets and street names and widths where such streets abut
or adjoin the property in question. If the street is not open, the
plat should indicate this fact.
§ 141-33 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-33
131:225
(l) All fences, tree rows, hedges, streams, ditches, building
location, any physical occupation influencing property line
determination, driveways and site improvements.
(m) The location of proposed or existing easements and the
purpose served by the easement.
(n) The minimum front, side and rear building setback lines for
each lot.
(o) The acreage of the tract to be subdivided and the number of
resultant lots and acreage each to the nearest tenth of an acre.
(p) The block, lot, and the owners' names of adjoining properties
within 200 feet of the subject property.
(q) Soil types shall be plotted on the plat as determined from Soil
Conservation Service Soil Survey Maps.
(r) The location of all proposed utilities and existing or proposed
facilities to provide water for use and consumption of
occupants of all buildings and sanitary facilities which will
serve the proposed development.
(s) The following certifications shall appear on the subdivision
plat:
It is hereby certified that the lands subdivided by this map are
owned by title of record and that consent to the approval of
said map is given.
DATE NAME OF PROPERTY OWNER
I hereby certify that this map and survey have been made
under my supervision and comply with the provisions of the
Map Filing Law.
DATE LICENSED LAND SURVEYOR
NJ
I certify that the public streets or other ways shown hereon
have been approved as to location and width and names by
the proper authority.
DATE BOROUGH CLERK
I have carefully examined this map and find that it conforms
to the provisions of the Map Filing Law and the municipal
ordinances and requirements applicable thereto.
DATE MUNICIPAL ENGINEER
This map is hereby approved by the Planning Board of the
Borough of Collingswood.
DATE PLANNING BOARD
CHAIRPERSON
§ 141-33 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-33
131:226
It is hereby certified that the lands subdivided by this map are
owned by title of record and that consent to the approval of
said map is given.
DATE NAME OF PROPERTY OWNER
I certify that this map was duly approved by resolution of the
Planning Board at an official meeting held on _______________
and shall be titled on or before _______________ .
I hereby certify that the Planning Board is the constituted
proper authority.
DATE SECRETARY OF PLANNING
BOARD
This map has been reviewed as prescribed by N.J.S.A.
40:27-6.2 and has been approved as required by N.J.S.A.
40:27-6.3 on _______________ for the Camden County Planning
Board.
DATE PLANNING DIRECTOR
B. The Planning Board may waive notice and public hearing for an
application for development if it finds that the application for
development conforms to the definition of minor subdivisions set forth
in this chapter. Minor subdivision approval shall be deemed to be final
approval of the subdivision by the Board, provided that the Board may
condition such approval on terms ensuring the provision of
improvements pursuant to this chapter.
C. Minor subdivision approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days of
the date of submission of a complete application or within such further
time as may be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the Planning
Board to act within the period prescribed shall constitute minor
subdivision approval, and a certificate of the Secretary of the Planning
Board as to the failure of the Planning Board to act shall be issued on
request of the applicant, and it shall be sufficient in lieu of the written
endorsement or other evidence of approval herein required and shall be
so accepted by the County Clerk for purposes of filing subdivision plats.
D. Except as provided in Subsection F of this section, approval of a minor
subdivision shall expire 190 days from the date on which the resolution
of municipal approval is adopted unless, within such period, a plat in
conformity with such approval and the provisions of the Map Filing Law,
N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq., or a deed clearly describing the approved
minor subdivision is filed by the developer with the county recording
officer, the Borough Engineer and the Borough Tax Assessor. Any such
plat or deed accepted for such filing shall have been signed by the
Chairman and Secretary of the Planning Board. In reviewing the
application for development for a proposed minor subdivision, the
Planning Board may accept a plat not in conformity with the Map Filing
Act, provided that, if the developer chooses to file the minor subdivision
§ 141-33 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-33
131:227
§ 141-34. Minor site plans.
as provided herein by plat rather than deed, such plat shall conform to
the provisions of said Act.
E. The zoning district requirements and general terms and conditions,
whether conditional or otherwise, upon which minor subdivision
approval was granted, shall not be changed for a period of two years
after the date on which the resolution of minor subdivision approval is
adopted, provided that the approved minor subdivision shall have been
duly recorded as provided herein.
F. The Planning Board may extend the one-hundred-ninety-day period for
filing a minor subdivision plat or deed pursuant to Subsection E of this
section if the developer proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the
Planning Board that the developer was barred or prevented, directly or
indirectly, from filing because of delays in obtaining legally required
approvals from other governmental or quasi-governmental entities and
that the developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued the
required approvals. The length of the extension shall be equal to the
period of delay caused by the wait for the required approvals, as
determined by the Planning Board. The developer may apply for the
extension either before or after what would otherwise be the expiration
date.
G. The Planning Board shall grant an extension of minor subdivision
approval for a period determined by the Board but not exceeding one
year from what would otherwise be the expiration date, if the developer
proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board that the developer
was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding with
the development because of delays in obtaining legally required
approvals from other governmental entities and that the developer
applied promptly for and diligently pursued the required approvals. A
developer shall apply for the extension before what would otherwise be
the expiration date of minor subdivision approval or before the 91st day
after the developer receives the last legally required approval from
other governmental entities, whichever occurs later.
A. The following regulations shall apply to the applications for the
approval of minor site plans as defined by this chapter:
(1) A complete application for preliminary approval shall be consistent
with § 141-32 of this chapter and shall be accompanied by the
following materials, where applicable:
(a) Copies of the completed Borough application form.
(b) Copies of the completed checklist.
(c) Copies of the Camden County Planning Board application form.
§ 141-33 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-34
131:228
(d) A certificate from the Borough Tax Collector that no taxes or
assessments are due or delinquent (tax search).
(e) A copy of the deed, including the text of any easements,
protective covenants and deed restrictions applying to the land
in question.
(f) The appropriate application fees.
(g) 15 copies of the minor site plan.
(2) The minor site plan plat shall be clearly drawn at a scale no less
than one inch equals 100 feet, to show existing and proposed
conditions of the proposed site, be drawn by the appropriate
professionals as outlined in N.J.S.A. 13:40-7.1, and shall contain the
following information:
(a) A key map showing the entire subdivision in relation to the
surrounding area and roadway system. This map shall be taken
from the Borough Zoning Map.
(b) All existing structures and significant natural features on the
proposed site and within 200 feet of the subject property.
(c) The current zoning and use of the tract.
(d) The name and address of the owner of record, the project name
and address and the name and address of the applicant, if
different from the owner.
(e) Name, address, seal, and signature of the person preparing the
plat.
(f) The tax plate, block, lot numbers.
(g) The North arrow with reference used, scale, and date of
creation and revisions, if applicable.
(h) All measurements shall be in feet and decimals of a foot.
Dimensions should be based on a certified survey prepared by
a licensed land surveyor.
(i) Existing and proposed street right-of-way locations, names,
widths where such streets abut or adjoin or are planned for the
property in question.
(j) All existing and proposed natural features, including but not
limited to topography, water bodies, wooded areas, and
landscaping.
(k) The location of proposed or existing easements and the
purpose served by the easement.
§ 141-34 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-34
131:229
(l) The minimum front, side and rear building setback lines for
each lot.
(m) The block, lot, and the owners' names of adjoining properties
within 200 feet of the subject property.
(n) The location and design of any off-street parking and loading
areas, showing the number of bays, aisles, barriers,
pedestrianways, and driveways.
(o) Location of all existing and proposed utilities, including
stormwater facilities, potable water, sewer, gas, electricity.
(p) Architectural elevations and floor plans.
(q) Location and details of all signage, lighting, screening, and
solid waste disposal.
(r) Listing of other required permits and approvals from outside
agencies.
B. The Planning Board may waive notice and public hearing for an
application for development if it finds that the application for
development conforms to the definition of minor site plan set forth in
this chapter. Minor site plan approval shall be deemed to be final
approval of the site plan by the Board, provided that the Board may
condition such approval on terms ensuring the provision of
improvements pursuant to this chapter.
C. Minor site plan approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days of
the date of submission of a complete application or within such further
time as may be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the Planning
Board to act within the period prescribed shall constitute minor site
plan approval, and a certificate of the Secretary of the Planning Board
as to the failure of the Planning Board to act shall be issued on request
of the applicant
D. Whenever review or approval of the application by the County Planning
Board is required, the Municipal Planning Board shall condition any
approval that it grants upon timely receipt of a favorable report on the
application by the County Planning Bard or approval by the County
Planning Board by its failure to act within 30 days of the date of
submission.
E. The zoning district requirements and general terms and conditions,
whether conditional or otherwise, upon which minor site plan approval
was granted, shall not be changed for a period of two years after the
date on which minor site plan approval is granted. The Planning Board
shall grant an extension of minor site plan approval for a period
determined by the Board but not exceeding one year from what would
otherwise be the expiration date, if the developer proves to the
reasonable satisfaction of the Board that the developer was barred or
§ 141-34 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-34
131:230
§ 141-35. Application for preliminary approval of a major
subdivision and major site plan.
§ 141-36. Application for final approval of a major subdivision and
major site plan.
prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding with the development
because of delays in obtaining legally required approvals from other
governmental entities and that the developer applied promptly for and
diligently pursued the required approvals. A developer shall apply for
the extension before what would otherwise be the expiration date of
minor site plan approval or before the 91st day after the developer
receives the last legally required approval from other governmental
entities, whichever occurs later.
A. A complete application for preliminary approval shall be consistent with
§ 141-32 of this chapter and shall be accompanied by the following
materials, where applicable:
(1) Preliminary plat.
(2) Completed copies of the application form.
(3) Completed copies of the plat checklist.
(4) Copies of any protective covenants, deed restrictions and
easements applying to the land being developed.
(5) Copies of the drainage calculations and soil erosion and sediment
control data as required in this chapter.
(6) The applicable fee(s).
(7) Certification by the Tax Collector that all taxes are paid to date.
(8) A complete environmental impact statement (see § 141-62) or a
written request for a waiver of any or all of its requirements. If a
waiver is requested, the approving agency shall either approve,
approve in part or disapprove the request at the first regular
meeting at which the application is heard. The applicant shall
provide any required data within 21 days or at least 21 days prior to
the date the approving authority is required to act, whichever
comes first.
A. A complete application for final approval shall consist of the following,
where applicable:
(1) A properly completed final subdivision or site plan approval form;
(2) The required fee or fees;.
(3) A site plan in final form, including all the information shown on the
preliminary plat and the conditions of preliminary approval;
§ 141-34 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-36
131:231
§ 141-37. Submission and preliminary and final plat details for
major subdivisions.
(4) A subdivision plat conforming to the Map Filing Law, N.J.S.A.
46:23-9.9 et seq.;
(5) The performance guaranty approved by the governing body,
including off-tract improvements, if any; and
(6) Any maintenance guaranties.
B. The reviewing board shall grant final approval if the detailed drawings,
specifications and estimates of the application for final approval
conform to the standards established by this chapter for final approval,
the conditions of preliminary approval and, in the case of a major
subdivision, the standards prescribed by the Map Filing Law, N.J.S.A.
46:23-9.9 et seq., provided that, in the case of a planned development,
the reviewing body may permit minimal deviations from the conditions
of preliminary approval necessitated by change of condition beyond the
control of the developer since the date of preliminary approval without
the developer's being required to submit another application for
development for preliminary approval.
C. Final approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days after
submission of a complete application or within such further time as may
be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the reviewing board to act
within the period prescribed shall constitute final approval of the
application as submitted.
A. Plat conformity. All applications shall be submitted in plat form, and all
plats shall conform to the submission requirements. All plats shall be
drawn by a land surveyor, and all drawings of improvements shall be
prepared by a professional engineer; and all such drawings shall bear
the signature, embossed seal, license number and address of the
preparer.
B. Preliminary subdivision plat. The preliminary subdivision plat shall be
clearly and legibly drawn, shall be at a graphic scale of not less than
one inch equals 100 feet, shall be based on a certified boundary survey
and shall be on sheet sizes of 24 inches by 36 inches or 15 inches by 21
inches. If more than one sheet is required to show the entire
subdivision, one composite map shall show the entire subdivision, with
reference to the sheets on which the various sections are shown. The
preliminary subdivision plat shall contain the following:
(1) A key map with the North arrow, showing the entire subdivision in
relation to surrounding areas, including the names of principal
roads, and at a scale of not less than one inch equals 2,000 feet.
(2) Title block, with the name and address of the subdivision; the Tax
Map sheet; block and lot numbers; the date of preparation and
most recent revision; the reference meridian; the North arrow; a
§ 141-36 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-37
131:232
graphic scale; the names, addresses, phone numbers and
signatures of the owner, the developer and the person(s) who
prepared the plat(s), including the seal of the latter; and space for
the application number.
(3) The names and addresses of all property owners within 200 feet of
the limits of the development, as disclosed on the most recent
municipal tax records.
(4) The tract acreage to the nearest 1/1,000 of an acre; the number of
new lots; each lot line dimension scaled to the nearest tenth of a
foot; and each lot area to the nearest square foot.
(5) The existing and proposed contours at two-foot intervals. All
elevations shall be related to a bench mark noted on the plan and,
wherever possible, be based on United States Geological Survey
mean sea level data.
(6) The location of existing natural features, such as soil types, slopes
exceeding 12%, wooded areas, the view within the development
and the location of individual trees outside wooded areas having a
diameter of four inches or more measured five feet above ground
level. Soil types shall be based on United States Soil Conservation
Service data.
(7) The existing and proposed streams, lakes and marsh areas
accompanied by the following maps and drawings:
(a) When a running stream is proposed for alteration or when a
structure or fill is proposed in or along such a stream, approval
of the New Jersey Division of Water Resources shall accompany
the plat.
(b) Cross sections and profiles of watercourses at an appropriate
scale showing the extent of the flood fringe area, top of bank,
normal water level and bottom elevations of the following
locations:
[1] Where a watercourse crosses a lot line (profile and cross
sections) and at one-hundred-foot intervals, but at no
fewer than two locations, along each watercourse which
runs through or adjacent to the development (cross
sections).
[2] At fifty-foot intervals for a distance of 300 feet upstream
and downstream of any existing or proposed culvert or
bridge within the development (cross sections).
[3] When watercourses are to be altered, the method of
controlling erosion and siltation during construction as
well as typical ditch sections and profiles shall be shown
on the plan or shall accompany it.
§ 141-37 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-37
131:233
(c) The total upstream acreage in the drainage basin of any
watercourse running through or adjacent to a development,
including a small-scale watershed map developed from United
States Geological Survey sheets.
(d) The total acreage in the drainage basin to the nearest
downstream drainage structure and the acreage in that portion
of the development which drains to the structure.
(e) All existing or proposed drainage and conservation easements
and flood hazard areas.
(f) The location, extent and water level elevation of all existing or
proposed lakes or ponds within or no farther than 300 feet
from the development.
(g) Plans and computations for any storm drainage systems,
including the following:
[1] Existing or proposed storm sewer lines within or adjacent
to the development and all required off-site and off-tract
drainage improvements showing the size, profile and slope
of the lines, the direction of flow and the location of each
catch basin, inlet, manhole, culvert and headwall.
[2] The location and extent of any proposed dry wells,
groundwater recharge basins, detention basins, flood
control devices, sedimentation basins or other water
conservation devices.
(8) Plans, cross sections, center-line profiles, tentative grades and
details of proposed and existing utilities and all improvements
within street rights-of-way in the tract, including the type and
width of street pavement, curbs, sidewalks, bike routes, shade
trees and plantings; all utilities, including water, sewer, gas,
electric, telephone and cable television; and facilities such as storm
drainage facilities, detention ponds and erosion control. At
intersections, the sight triangles, radii or curblines, crosswalks,
curb ramps and street sign locations shall be shown. Final street
naming may be deferred.
(9) The names, locations, widths and purpose(s) of existing and
proposed easements, streets and other rights-of-way in the
development. The text of any deed restriction or dedications shall
be included.
(10) The locations and descriptions of all monuments, existing and
proposed.
(11) All lot lines that exist and will remain, those proposed and those to
be eliminated. All setback lines with dimensions and municipal
boundaries, if within 200 feet, shall be shown. Any lot(s) and/or
§ 141-37 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-37
131:234
rights-of-way to be reserved or dedicated to public use shall be
identified. Each block shall be numbered, and the lots within each
block shall be numbered as assigned by the Borough Tax Assessor.
(12) The locations of all existing structures, drainage and parking areas
in the tract and within 200 feet, showing existing and proposed
front, rear and side yard setbacks, structures of historic
significance and an indication of existing structures and uses to be
retained and those to be removed.
(13) Utility plans showing feasible connections to any existing or
proposed utility systems. If private utilities are proposed, they shall
comply fully with all Borough, county and state regulations. If
service will be provided by an existing utility company, a letter from
that company shall be submitted stating that service will be
available before occupancy of any proposed structures.
(14) Zoning district(s) and zoning district lines.
(15) A list of other agencies requiring their approval and the status of
the application of these agencies.
(16) An itemization of all improvements to be made on site, off site, on
tract and off tract, in accordance with the standards specified in
Article V.
C. Final subdivision plat. The final subdivision plat shall be clearly and
legibly drawn in ink on translucent tracing cloth or its equivalent at a
graphic scale of not less than one inch equals 50 feet unless a larger
scale is approved by the Municipal Engineer that is large enough to
contain legibly written data on dimensions, bearings and all other
details of the boundaries. The plat shall be drawn on sheet sizes of 24
inches by 36 inches or 15 inches by 21 inches. If more than one sheet is
required to show the entire subdivision, a separate composite map shall
be drawn showing the entire subdivision on one sheet and the sheets on
which the various sections are shown. The plat shall comply with all the
provisions of the Map Filing Law, N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq. The final plat
shall show or be accompanied by only that information and those details
specified in the Map Filing Law or in the following list:
(1) The date, location and name of the subdivision, name of the
owners, graphic scale and reference meridian.
(2) Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, street names,
easements and other rights-of-way, land to be reserved or
dedicated to public use, lot lines and other site lines, all with
accurate dimensions, bearings or deflection angles, and the radii,
arcs and central angles of all curves. Distances and bearings shall
be on the North American Datum of 1927 or North American
Datum of 1983, as specified by the Borough Engineer.
§ 141-37 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-37
131:235
(3) The purpose of any easement or land reserved or dedicated to
public use shall be designated, and the proposed use of sites other
than residential shall be noted.
(4) All natural and artificial watercourses, streams, water boundaries
and encroachment lines shall be shown. Final stormwater outfalls
in retention basins or other receiving bodies of water shall be
identified by coordinates based on the datum specified in
Subsection B(2) above.
(5) Each block shall be numbered and the lots within each block shall
be numbered as directed by the Tax Assessor.
(6) Minimum building setback lines on all lots and other sites.
(7) The location and description of all monuments.
(8) The names of owners of adjoining land parcels.
(9) Certification by a licensed land surveyor as to the accuracy of
details of the plat.
(10) Certification that the applicant is the owner or equitable owner of
the land, or a representative thereof, or that the owner has given
consent under an option agreement.
(11) As updated certification from the Tax Collector shall show there are
no delinquent taxes or other assessments charged to the property
involved in the subdivision.
(12) The preliminary plat, engineering details, cross sections and
profiles of streets and plan and profiles of storm drainage systems,
approved by the Borough Engineer, shall be required to accompany
the final plat, with all conditions of preliminary approval met and
reviewed by the Engineer prior to final plat submission.
(13) If applicable, plans and profiles of sanitary sewers and water
mains, approved by the Municipal Sewage Authority, will be
required to accompany the final plat.
(14) When approval of a plat is required by an officer or body of the
municipality, county or state, approval shall be certified on the plat
prior to its filing in the office of the County Clerk.
(15) All approvals and permits from other agencies.
(16) Performance guaranties, approved by the Borough Solicitor as to
form and the Municipal Engineer as to amount, sufficient to ensure
the satisfactory completion of improvements and facilities as
required by the resolution of the Planning Board granting
preliminary approval. The developer's engineer shall submit a
detailed engineer's estimate for review and approval by the
Municipal Engineer.
§ 141-37 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-38
131:236
§ 141-38. Plat design standards for major site plans.
In cases requiring site plan review and approval, applications for
development shall be in accordance with the provisions of § 141-32 of
this chapter and shall be accompanied by information and documentation
specified in this section.
A. Preliminary site plan submission requirements. Site plans submitted for
conventional developments shall include materials that clearly show
conditions on the site at the time of the application, the features of the
site which are to be incorporated into the proposed development and
the appearance and function of the proposed development. The various
elements of the site plan shall be prepared by the professionals as
required in N.J.S.A. 13:40-7.1 licensed to practice in the State of New
Jersey according to the following instructions and including the
following information and data:
(1) Site plans shall be drawn to a scale of not less than 100 feet to the
inch. All distances shall be in decimals of a foot, and all bearings
shall be given to the nearest tenth-second, and the error of closure
of the tract shall be one in 10,000 and certified by a licensed land
surveyor. Distances and bearings shall be on the North American
Datum of 1927 or North American Datum of 1983, as specified by
the Borough Engineer.
(2) Site plans shall be submitted on one of the following standard sheet
sizes: 15 inches by 21 inches or 24 inches by 36 inches. If one sheet
is not sufficient to contain the entire territory, one composite map
shall show the entire development with reference to the sheets on
which the various sections are shown.
(3) A key map showing the entire parcel to be developed and its
relation to the surrounding area, based on the Borough of
Collingswood Zoning Map.
(4) The title of the development, North arrow, scale, name and address
of the record owner as well as the applicant and persons preparing
the site development plan with their seal and signature affixed to
said plan.
(5) The name of the owners of record of all adjacent properties and the
block and lot numbers of such adjacent properties.
(6) All existing school, zoning and special district boundaries located
on or adjacent to the property involved. Such boundaries shall be
shown on the key map accompanying the detailed site plan.
(7) The boundaries of the property involved, building or setback lines
and lines of existing streets, lots, reservations, easements and
other areas dedicated to public use.
§ 141-38 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-38
131:237
(8) The location of existing buildings and all other structures, such as
but not limited to signs, culverts, bridges (with spot elevations of
such structures), walls, fences, roadways and sidewalks.
(9) The size, height, location, arrangement and use of all proposed
areas, buildings, structures (including fences, roadways and
sidewalks) and special sites for individual uses, all including
proposed grades.
(10) The location and design of any off-street parking or loading areas,
showing size and location of bays, aisleways, barriers, pedestrian
access, vehicular access and number of parking or loading spaces.
(11) All means of vehicle access and egress proposed for the site,
showing size and location of driveways and driveway or curb
openings to existing public streets. Shall include access streets by
name; acceleration and deceleration lanes; curbs; sight triangles;
traffic channelization; traffic signs; fire lanes; pedestrian walks;
bikeways; and sidewalks.
(12) The location of all storm drainage pipes, structures and
watercourses, whether publicly or privately owned, with pipe sizes,
grades and direction of flow, whether existing or proposed, and also
whether above or below the ground surface. Final stormwater
outfalls in streams, swales, retention basins or other receiving
bodies of water shall be identified by coordinates based on the
datum specified above.
(13) Existing and proposed topography with a contour interval of one
foot where slopes are 3% or less, two feet where slopes are more
than 3% but less than 15% and five feet where slopes are greater
than 15%, referenced to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum,
1929, and indicated by a dashed line. Where any regrading is
proposed, finished grade contours should be shown in solid lines.
(14) The location of existing high points, depressions, ponds, marshes,
wooded areas and other significant existing natural features.
(15) An environmental impact statement.
(16) A certified survey prepared by a land surveyor licensed in the State
of New Jersey shall accompany site plans and shall show the
boundaries of the parcel and the limits of all proposed streets and
other property to be dedicated to public use or to common open
space. In the case of new commercial, industrial or public
buildings, the site plan shall be accompanied by preliminary
architectural floor plans and elevations, with the name, address,
professional number and seal of the architect involved. In
apartment, townhouse, or other residential projects, the number of
dwelling units, by type, shall be shown.
§ 141-38 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-38
131:238
(17) All proposed street profiles and cross sections shall be shown,
indicating width of roadway, location and width of sidewalks and
location and size of utility lines according to standards and
specifications of the Borough. Such features are to be shown on a
separate map when necessary.
(18) The location of all proposed utilities, including but not limited to
electrical, natural gas, telephone, cable, solid waste disposal,
sewer and water lines, valves, hydrants and other appurtenances in
conformance with applicable standards of the appropriate
Borough, county and state agencies.
(19) The proposed positioning, direction, illumination, wattage and
periods of operation of all proposed outdoor lighting to be used
anywhere on the site or in connection with any proposed building
or structure, including signs, thereon. Standards are outlined in
§ 141-71 of this chapter.
(20) The location of all proposed signs, their size, nature of
construction, height and orientation, including all identification
signs, traffic and directional signs and freestanding and facade
signs, together with the nature and time control of sign lighting.
(21) Proposed screening and landscaping, to include existing
vegetation, buffer areas, screening devices or structures, seeded or
sodded areas, ground covers, retaining walls and fencing as
outlined in §§ 141-54 and 141-69.
(22) A copy of any covenants or deed restrictions that are intended to
cover all or any part of the tract.
(23) An internal surface drainage plan designed to produce no greater
volume of surface runoff from the site subsequent to development
than that existing prior to development.
(24) A written description of the proposed use(s) of nonresidential
buildings, including the number of employees; the proposed
number of shifts to be worked and the maximum number of
employees on each shift; expected truck and tractor-trailer traffic.
(25) A listing of other required permits from agencies having
jurisdiction and the status of each permit required.
(26) Such other information or data as may be required by the Planning
Board, as set forth in its rules of procedure, in order to determine
that the proposed development is in accord with the Borough
Master Plan and all applicable ordinances of the Borough.
B. Final submission requirements. Site plans shall be submitted for final
approval in accordance with the provisions of § 141-32 of this chapter
and shall contain or be accompanied by the following:
§ 141-38 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-38
131:239
§ 141-39. Action and decisions for major subdivision and major site
plan approval.
(1) Information and data contained in the submission for preliminary
approval. Final site plans shall be drawn to a scale of not less than
50 feet to the inch.
(2) Any site plan revisions, additional data or revised documentation
required by the Planning Board in its resolution granting
preliminary approval.
(3) Offer of dedication of streets or other public ways and deed for any
public open space resulting from preliminary development
approval.
(4) Performance guaranties, approved by the Borough Solicitor as to
form and the Borough Engineer as to amount, sufficient to ensure
the satisfactory completion of improvements and facilities as
required by the resolution of the Planning Board granting
preliminary approval. The developer's engineer shall submit a
detailed engineer's estimate to review and approval by the Borough
Engineer.
(5) A statement from the Borough Engineer that adequate construction
plans for all streets, drainage and other facilities covered by the
Borough's standards are adequate and comply with Borough's
standards.
(6) All approvals from other agencies having jurisdiction.
A. Completeness of applications. The approving authority shall accept or
reject the submission as a complete application within 45 days of
submission to the Planning Board Secretary and, if rejected, notify the
applicant within the same 45 days. If the Planning Board or designated
authority does not notify the applicant within 45 days, the application is
considered complete.
B. Public hearing. If the submission is accepted as a complete application,
a public hearing shall be set and proper notice given.
C. Upon submission of a plat, the Secretary of the Planning Board shall
submit one copy of the plat and supporting data to the County Planning
Board, the Municipal Engineer, the Environmental Commission and any
other agency or person, as directed by the approving authority, for
review and action. Each shall have not more than 30 days from receipt
of the plat to report to the approving authority. In the event of
disapproval, such report shall state the reasons therefor. If any agency
or person fails to submit a report within 30 days, the plat shall be
deemed to have been approved by it or him. Upon mutual agreement
between the County Planning Board and the approving authority, with
approval of the developer, the thirty-day period for a County Planning
Board report may be extended for an additional 30 days; and any
§ 141-38 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-39
131:240
extension shall so extend the time within which the approving authority
is required to act.
D. Time periods for approvals.
(1) Site plans.
(a) Upon the submission of a complete application for a site plan
which involves 10 acres of land or less or 10 dwelling units or
fewer, the Planning Board shall grant or deny preliminary
approval within 45 days of the date of such submission or
within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant.
(b) Upon the submission of a complete application for a site plan
which involves more than 10 acres or more than 10 dwelling
units, the Planning Board shall grant or deny preliminary
approval within 95 days of the date of such submission or
within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant.
(c) Final approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days after
submission of a complete application to the Planning Board
Secretary or within such further time as may be consented to
by the applicant.
(2) Conditional uses. Upon the submission of a complete application,
including a site plan, for a conditional use, the Planning Board shall
grant or deny preliminary approval of it within 95 days of the date
of such submission or within such further time as may be consented
to by the applicant.
(3) Subdivisions.
(a) Upon the submission of a complete application for a
subdivision of 10 or fewer lots, other than a minor subdivision,
the Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 45
days of the date of such submission or within such further time
as may be consented to by the applicant, except that if the
application for subdivision approval also involves an
application for a variance, the Board shall grant or deny
preliminary approval within 95 days of the date of such
submission of a complete application or within such further
time as may be consented to by the applicant.
(b) Upon the submission of a complete application for a
subdivision of more than 10 lots, the Planning Board shall
grant or deny preliminary approval within 95 days of the date
of such submission or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant.
§ 141-39 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-39
131:241
§ 141-40. Filing of subdivision plats.
(c) Final approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days after
submission of a complete application to the Planning Board
Secretary or within such further time as may be consented to
by the applicant.
E. Failure of the Planning Board to reach a decision within the specified
time periods or extensions thereof shall result in the approval of the
subdivision, site plan or conditional use as submitted.
F. The approving authority may approve, disapprove or approve with
conditions the preliminary application, including action on the
environmental impact report. If the Planning Board requires any
substantial amendments in the layout of improvements proposed by the
developer that have been the subject of a hearing, an amended
application for development shall be submitted and shall proceed as in
the case of the original application for development.
G. The approving authority shall grant final approval if the application
conforms to the standards of this chapter, the conditions of preliminary
approval and, in the case of a major subdivision, the standards
prescribed by the Map Filing Law (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.). In the
case of a minor or exempt subdivision or site plan where there has been
no previous submission of an informal or preliminary plat, the
approving authority may waive the required notices and hearing.
Minimal deviations shall not require the developer to submit another
application. Whenever review or approval of the application by the
County Planning Board is required by N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3 or 40:27-6.6,
the approving authority shall condition any approval that it grants upon
timely receipt of a favorable report from the County Planning Board or
upon its failure to submit a report within the required time period.
H. An approved final plat shall be signed by the Chairman and the
Secretary of the approving authority (or the Vice Chairman or the
Assistant Secretary in their absence, respectively).
I. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the right of a developer to
submit a sketch plat to the Planning Board for an informal review, and
neither the Planning Board nor the developer shall be bound by any
discussions or statements during such review, provided that the right of
the developer at any time to submit a complete application for
subdivision or site plan approval shall not be limited to submission of a
sketch plat, and the time for Planning Board decision shall not begin to
run until the submission of a complete application.
J. The Planning Board will not provide any professional review, outside
the Planning Board meetings, to applicants without the payment of a
required escrow fee for review costs.
§ 141-39 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-40
131:242
§ 141-41. Rights conferred by preliminary approval for a major
subdivision and major site plan.
A. Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95 days from the
signing of the plat unless, within such period, the plat shall have been
duly filed by the developer with the County Clerk. The approving
authority may, for good cause shown, extend the period for recording
for an additional period not to exceed 190 days from the date of signing
of the plat. The Planning Board may extend the ninety-five- or onehundred-
ninety-day signing period if the developer proves to the
reasonable satisfaction of the Board that the developer was barred or
prevented, directly or indirectly, from filing because of delays in
obtaining legally required approvals from other governmental agencies
and that the developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued the
required approvals. The length of extension shall be equal to the period
of delay caused by the wait for the required approvals, as determined
by the Planning Board. The developer may apply for an extension either
before or after the original expiration date.
B. No subdivision plat shall be accepted for filing by the county recording
officer until it has been approved by the Planning Board as indicated on
the instrument of signature of the Chairman and the Secretary of the
approving authority or a certificate has been issued pursuant to
Sections 35, 38, 44, 48, 54, or 63 of P.L. 1975, c. 291. The signatures of
the Chairman and Secretary of the approving authority shall not be
affixed until the applicant has posted the appropriate guarantees.
A. Preliminary approval of a major subdivision or major site plan, except
as provided in Subsection B of this section, shall confer upon the
applicant the following rights for a three-year period from the date on
which the resolution of preliminary approval is adopted:
(1) That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary
approval was granted should not be changed, including but not
limited to use requirements; layout and design standards for
streets, curbs and sidewalks, if any; lot size; yard dimensions and
off-tract improvements; and in the case of a site plan, existing
natural resources to be preserved on the site; vehicular and
pedestrian circulation, parking and loading; screening, landscaping
and location of structures; and exterior lighting both for safety
reasons and streetlighting; except that nothing herein shall be
construed to prevent the Borough from modifying by ordinance
such general terms and conditions of preliminary approval as relate
to public health and safety.
(2) That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or a section or
sections of the preliminary subdivision plat or site plan.
(3) That the applicant may apply for and the reviewing board may
grant extensions of such preliminary approval for additional
§ 141-40 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-41
131:243
§ 141-42. Effect of final approval of a major subdivision, minor and
major site plan.
periods of at least one year, but not to exceed a total extension of
two years, provided that, if the design standards have been revised
by ordinance, such revised standards may govern.
B. Whenever the Planning Board grants an extension of preliminary
approval pursuant to Subsection A(3) of this section and preliminary
approval has expired before the date on which the extension is granted,
the extension shall begin on what would otherwise be the expiration
date. The developer may apply for the extension either before or after
what would otherwise be the expiration date.
C. The Planning Board shall grant an extension of preliminary approval for
a period determined by the Board but not exceeding one year from what
would otherwise be the expiration date, if the developer proves to the
reasonable satisfaction of the Board that the developer was barred or
prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding with the development
because of delays in obtaining legally required approvals from other
governmental entities and that the developer applied promptly for and
diligently pursued the required approvals. A developer shall apply for
the extension before what would otherwise be the expiration date of
preliminary approval or before the 91st day after the developer
receives the last legally required approval from other governmental
entities, whichever occurs later. An extension granted pursuant to this
subsection shall not preclude the Planning Board from granting an
extension to Subsection A(3) of this section.
A. Requirements applicable to the preliminary approval first granted and
all other rights conferred upon the developer pursuant to this chapter,
whether conditionally or otherwise, shall not be changed for a period of
two years after the date on which the resolution of final approval is
adopted, provided that, in the case of major subdivisions, the rights
conferred by this section shall expire if the plat has not been duly
recorded within the time period provided in this chapter. If the
developer has followed the standards prescribed for final approval and,
in the case of a subdivision, has duly recorded the plat as required in
this chapter, the reviewing board may extend such period of protection
for extensions of one year, but not to exceed three extensions.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the granting of
final approval terminates the time period of preliminary approval
pursuant to this chapter for the section granted final approval.
B. Whenever the Planning Board grants an extension of final approval
pursuant to Subsection A of this section and final approval has expired
before the date on which the extension is granted, the extension shall
begin on what would otherwise be the expiration date. The developer
may apply for the extension either before or after what would otherwise
be the expiration date.
§ 141-41 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-42
131:244
C. The Planning Board shall grant an extension of final approval for a
period determined by the Board but not exceeding one year from what
would otherwise be the expiration date if the developer proves to the
reasonable satisfaction of the Board that the developer was barred or
prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding with the development
because of delays in obtaining legally required approvals from other
governmental entities and that the developer applied promptly for and
diligently pursued these approvals. A developer shall apply for the
extension before what would otherwise be the expiration date of final
approval or before the 91st day after the developer receives the last
legally required approval from other governmental entities, whichever
occurs later. An extension granted pursuant to this subsection shall not
preclude the Planning Board from granting an extension pursuant to
Subsection A of this section.
§ 141-42 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-42
131:245

ARTICLE VIII
Design and Performance Standards
§ 141-43. Compliance required.
All developments shall conform to design standards encouraging sound
development patterns within the Borough. In cases of conflicting
requirements in the Code, the more stringent sections of the Code would
apply in all cases.
§ 141-44. (Reserved)61
§ 141-45. Accessory structures.
§ 141-46. Adult entertainment uses.
A. Any accessory building attached to a principal building is part of the
principal building and shall adhere to the yard requirements for the
principal building.
B. The minimum distance of any accessory building to a property line shall
be five feet and to any building on the same lot shall be 10 feet.
C. Accessory buildings shall not exceed 15 feet in height and on residential
lots shall not exceed 500 square feet in floor area. The coverage of an
accessory building shall count toward the total building coverage on the
lot.
D. An accessory building may be erected in the side or rear yard only. If
erected on a corner lot, it shall be set back from the side street to
comply with the setback line applying to the principal building.
E. No barn, building or structure of a temporary nature, garage,
outbuilding or shack shall be placed, erected or permitted to be used,
either temporarily or permanently, on any lot or parcel of land for living
or sleeping purposes in any district, except as permitted as an
accessory apartment. (Refer to § 141-44). No tent shall be placed,
erected or permitted to be used, either temporarily or permanently, on
any lot or parcel of land for living or sleeping purposes in any district,
except that the placing of a tent in the rear yard of a premises for
sleeping purposes on an occasional basis during summer months shall
not be deemed a violation of this section.
A. Statutory authorization; findings of fact; purpose and objectives.
(1) Statutory authorization. The Legislature of the State of New Jersey
has delegated the responsibility to the local governmental units to
adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and
61.Editor's Note: Former § 141-44, Accessory apartments, was repealed 3-3-2002 by Ord. No.
1306.
§ 141-43 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-46
131:247
general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Borough of
Collingswood and State of New Jersey does ordain as follows.
(2) Findings of fact. Adult entertainment and sexually oriented
businesses have a deleterious effect on both the existing businesses
around them and the surrounding residential areas adjacent to
them; cause increased crime, especially prostitution; adversely
affect property values; create an atmosphere which is inimical to
the values of a significant segment of the Borough's population;
and encourage residents and businesses to move elsewhere. It is
further recognized that sexually oriented businesses, when located
in close proximity to each other, contribute to urban blight and
downgrade the quality of life in the adjacent areas.
(3) Purpose and objectives. It is the purpose of this section to regulate
sexually oriented businesses to minimize and control the adverse
effects recognized in Subsection A(2) and to promote the public
health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the Borough. It
is not the purpose of this section to restrict or deny access by adults
to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment
nor will this section have the effect of restricting or denying such
access.
B. Location of adult entertainment uses.
(1) A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be
operated an adult entertainment use:
(a) Within 1,000 feet of a place of worship.
(b) Within 1,000 feet of any school, whether public or private, or
within 1,000 feet of any bus stop.
(c) Within 1,000 feet of any public area as defined by this chapter.
(d) Within 1,000 feet of any other adult entertainment use.
(e) Within 1,000 feet of any residential district.
(f) Within 500 feet of a specific residential use.
(2) Measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the
building or structure used as a part of the premises where a
sexually oriented business is conducted to the nearest property line
of the premises of a place of worship, a school, a public area, a lot
devoted to residential use, a residential district, or another adult
entertainment use.
(3) An adult entertainment business lawfully operating as a
conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the
location, subsequent to the establishment of the sexually oriented
business, of a place of worship, school, public area, residential
§ 141-46 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-46
131:248
§ 141-47. Apartments.
Apartments shall have site plan approval and a central water supply and
sanitary sewer system approved by appropriate state and local agencies.
district or residential lot within 1,000 feet of the sexually oriented
business.
(4) Adult entertainment uses shall conform to the location and
development requirements established in this chapter.
C. Prohibition against commercial display of obscene materials or acts. A
person is in violation of this chapter if he knowingly conducts or
maintains any premises, place or resort as a place where obscene
material, as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:34-2 and N.J.S.A. 2C:34-3, is sold,
photographed, manufactured, exhibited or otherwise prepared or
shown in violation of N.J.S.A. 2C:34-2, N.J.S.A. 2C:34-3 and N.J.S.A.
2C:34-4.
D. Enforcement.
(1) Any person violating any provision of this section, upon conviction,
is punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both. In no event shall any
person violating this section, upon conviction, receive a fine below
the amount of $100.
(2) Each day an adult entertainment business is operating in violation
of Subsection B of this section shall constitute a separate offense
under this section.
(3) Each separate film, videocassette or other visual reproduction or
each showing of live entertainment which is displayed to another in
violation of Subsection C of this section is a separate offense under
this section.
A. Each overall development shall have a compatible architectural and
landscaping theme.
B. No structure shall have a complete dwelling unit lower than the
finished grade along the front of the structure.
C. Usable recreation areas. For any apartment building or group of such
buildings containing a total of more than 24 dwelling units, there shall
be reserved and improved, in addition to the minimum space between
buildings and the off-street parking space herein required, a minimum
open space equivalent to 15% of the site area within the garden
apartment house site for usable recreation space, provided that no
single contiguous usable recreation space shall be smaller than one
acre except where a smaller area shall be approved for limited purposes
by the Planning Board; and no building containing dwelling units shall
be more than 500 feet from the nearest usable recreation space. Usable
§ 141-46 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-47
131:249
§ 141-48. Appliances and recreational equipment: placement of in
yards and open areas.
No major appliance or recreational equipment, including but not limited
to a refrigerator, stove, washing machine, clothes dryer or fixture, a hot
water heater, bathtub, spa, toilet, lavatory, stationary tubs, swing sets,
jungle gyms, sandboxes or play stations, shall be placed, either temporarily
or permanently, in any required yard setback area, and none of the
aforementioned items, excepting recreational equipment, shall be placed
temporarily or permanently in any open area on any lot or parcel of land,
except that such an appliance or fixture may be placed at the curb for
collection by the trash collecting contractors or agents of the Borough
of Collingswood in accordance with such regulations as the Borough may
impose or with such contractual agreement as the Borough may have for
the collection of the same. The placing of such an appliance or fixture
by a merchant whose business establishment is located in a business or
industrial district and who is engaged in the business of selling such
appliances or fixtures in an open area of his business establishment shall
not be deemed a violation of this section, but this sentence shall not be
deemed to allow such placing if such action is otherwise prohibited by any
other provision of this chapter or any other ordinance or statute.
§ 141-49. Automotive garages.
recreation space shall be approved for such use by the Planning Board
incidental to site plan approval, as hereinafter provided. In no case
shall swampy or poorly drained land be approved for such purpose,
nor shall any part of any recreation area to be devoted to and used
for baseball or football fields, swimming pools, children's playgrounds
and the like be within 200 feet of any public street line or within 100
feet of the boundary of any abutting property zoned for residential use.
Swimming pools, ball fields, play courts and other recreation facilities
shall be confined to these approved recreation areas. All lighting
fixtures shall be so designed, located and shielded that light radiating
therefrom shall be reasonably confined to the recreation areas.
D. Solid waste disposal. Such disposal shall be provided for within a
permanently enclosed area for each building of an apartment site.
Provision shall be made for the private disposal of the same, other than
by incineration at the site or by disposition by the Borough's
contractors or agents. If disposition by the Borough's contractors or
agents is contemplated, the applicant shall agree to be bound by any
and all rules and regulations made by the Borough or its contractors for
such disposition.
A. Purpose. Automobile service stations and repair garages shall be
permitted, provided that the minimum requirements listed herewith in
are met.
B. Minimum requirements shall be as follows:
§ 141-47 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-49
131:250
§ 141-50. Automotive sales.
(1) Such facility shall have a minimum site size of 20,000 square feet,
with a minimum width of 125 feet.
(2) The height of any garage or structure shall not exceed one story or
25 feet.
(3) There shall be a front yard setback of a minimum of 25 feet; one
side yard setback of at least 20 feet for each side yard; and a rear
yard setback of at least 35 feet.
(4) The means of vehicular access and egress as well as internal
circulation at the facility must be clearly defined and controlled to
ensure safe and efficient operation of the facility and to assure safe
integration of automotive traffic with other vehicular and
pedestrian traffic.
(5) Exterior lighting shall be arranged so that it is deflected away from
adjacent land uses and should be arranged so as not to obstruct or
deter the visibility of drivers or pedestrians. No blinking or flashing
lighting system shall be permitted.
(6) Parking shall be provided at the rate of four parking spaces for
each service bay. Such spaces shall be located in the rear or side
yard of the site.
(7) Except for changing of tires and other similar minor automobile
servicing, all other repair work shall be carried on in fully enclosed
structures and all repair or service apparatus shall be located
within the building. Outdoor storage of equipment or parts shall
not be permitted.
(8) Signs, pennants, flags and all other advertising displays visible or
audible from any public right-of-way are prohibited, except as
allowed under Article IX of this chapter
(9) Floor drains shall be connected to a grease interceptor device.
(10)No motor vehicles shall be sold or displayed for sale on the
premises. Only registered motor vehicles shall be stored on the
premises awaiting repair, and the maximum storage time shall be
30 days.
A. Purpose. Automobile sales shall be permitted as a conditional use,
provided that they meet the following requirements.
B. Minimum requirements shall be as follows:
(1) No automobile or vehicle shall be displayed closer than 15 feet to
the street line.
§ 141-49 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-50
131:251
§ 141-51. Automotive service stations.
(2) Customer parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements set forth in § 141-76, and the customer parking
spaces shall be clearly identified on the site. No vehicle display
shall be permitted in the customer parking spaces.
(3) The use of bare light bulbs or strings of lights shall not be
permitted nor shall banners, flags, movable signs, flashing lights,
rotating devices or similar devices be permitted. Signs shall
conform to the requirements of Article IX.
(4) In order to avoid undue distractions to the traveling public,
automobile prices or the year of manufacture shall not be boldly
displayed on the automobile in a manner which would be legible
from the street.
(5) Any service activity related to the car sales shall be fully enclosed,
shall be located to the rear of the site, and shall be accessory in
nature.
A. Purpose. It is found and declared that the location and operation of
gasoline service stations shall be subject to regulation under the police
power. The business of storing and handling flammable and explosive
liquids and the noxious odors, noise and traffic hazards that emanate
from such a business make the regulation of its location and operation
necessary and reasonable to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare.
B. Permit required. No gasoline service station shall be built, altered or
enlarged without first obtaining a conditional use permit from the
appropriate administrative approving authority.
C. Site plan requirements. A site plan indicating the dimensions of the site,
the relative locations of all buildings, pump islands, tanks, tank size, a
schematic showing tank location, signs, screening, accessways, lighting
and landscaping shall be submitted with the application for a
conditional use permit.
D. Location and site requirements.
(1) Location.
(a) Gasoline service stations shall be located in Highway Business
and Highway Industrial Districts as a conditional use according
to the provisions set forth in the zoning regulations.
(b) There shall be a minimum distance of 500 feet measured from
the nearest points of lot boundaries between a proposed
gasoline service station and any existing gasoline service
station or between a proposed gasoline service station and any
lot occupied by a church, hospital, school or other place of
§ 141-50 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-51
131:252
public assembly, as defined by the State Uniform Construction
Code.62
(2) Site requirements.
(a) Minimum frontage and area. The minimum frontage shall be
100 feet, and the minimum lot area shall be 10,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum setback. The gasoline service station building shall
be set back a minimum of 30 feet from the property line.
(c) Accessways. No driveway approach shall be located within 10
feet of an adjoining property line or within 25 feet of a street
intersection.
(d) Curb cuts. The width of curb openings shall not exceed 35 feet
and shall not be permitted at locations that will tend to create
traffic hazards.
(e) Screening. Screening shall be constructed on any lot line
which abuts a residential zone. The screening shall consist of a
concrete or masonry wall which shall comply with other
requirements of the Borough of Collingswood.
E. Design standards. In addition to design standards set forth in any other
applicable codes, all gasoline service stations shall be designed and
constructed in conformity with the following design standards:
(1) Fire-resistant materials. Gasoline service stations, including
canopies and supports over pumps, shall be of noncombustible,
fire-resistive construction in accordance with the standards of the
State Uniform Construction Code.
(2) Floor surfaces. Floor surfaces shall be on noncombustible,
nonabsorbent materials. Driveways, service areas and parking
areas may be surfaced with asphaltic pavement or portland cement
binder. There shall be a concrete area of sufficient dimension to
allow vehicles obtaining gasoline to rest on concrete, surrounding
the islands whereupon the gas pumps are located.
(3) Floor drains. Floors shall drain to approved oil or gasoline
separators or traps discharging to a sewer installed in accordance
with the Uniform Construction Code.
(4) Ventilation and light. Windows shall have glazed openings of clear
glass of an area not less than 1/10 of the total floor area. Exhaust
ventilation shall be provided, sufficient to produce four air changes
per hour unless the building is supplied with unobstructed
openings to the outer air which are sufficient to provide the
necessary ventilation.
62.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 141-51 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-51
131:253
(5) Basements. Service station buildings shall not contain basements
or rooms below grade. No pits will be permitted.
(6) Rest rooms. Rest room facilities shall be located either in the
service station building or conveniently in an adjacent building.
Separate facilities shall be provided for each sex, and all rest room
entrances shall be screened from view of adjacent properties or
street rights-of-way.
F. Dispensing devices.
(1) Pump island location. Pump island(s) shall be a minimum of 15 feet
from the right-of-way-line or the property line and a minimum of 20
feet from any building on the lot.
(2) Pump island platform. All pumps must be securely anchored on a
concrete base of a minimum of six inches in height and have a
minimum of 12 inches beyond the dispenser in any direction.
(3) Approval of equipment. Pumps, electrical equipment, piping
systems, base, nozzles and other integral parts of the dispensing
device shall be approved in accordance with the standards of the
State Uniform Construction Code.
(4) Pumps. Motor vehicle fuel shall be transferred from underground
tanks by means of fixed pumps, so designed and equipped as to
allow control of the flow and to prevent leakage of accidental
discharge.
(5) Nozzles. Automatic nozzles with latch-open devices shall not be
permitted.
(6) Controls. Dispensers shall be equipped with remote master control
devices to shut off all pumps in the event of an emergency. Signs
identifying the pump shutoff controls shall be labeled "Emergency
Pump Shutoff."
(7) Indicators.
(a) Price per gallon. Every dispensing device shall be equipped
with a price per gallon, half gallon or liter indicator.
(b) Total price indicator. Every dispensing device shall be
equipped with an indicator which shall record the total price
computed on the basis of the posted price and numbers of
gallons, half gallons or liters delivered.
G. Fuel storage tanks. Flammable and combustible liquids (including Class
I and II liquids) used or intended to be used as motor vehicle or home
heating fuel shall be stored in underground tanks.
(1) Location. Underground storage tanks shall be located at least five
feet from any wall, foundation or property line.
§ 141-51 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-51
131:254
(2) Underground tanks. All underground storage tanks shall be
installed in accordance with existing NFiPA Standard No. 30.
H. Firesafety requirements.
(1) Ignition sources. The attendant shall require and the driver of any
motor vehicle shall shut off the motor of any vehicle during the
fueling operation. Smoking shall not be permitted in areas where
motor vehicles are being fueled.
(2) Fire extinguishers. There shall be at least one extinguisher for
every four dispensing devices and shall be located no further than
75 feet from any dispensing device. The extinguishers shall be AMultipurpose
A.B.C. with a 4A-40 B:C rating.
(3) Portable containers. Motor vehicle fuel may be transferred into
closed portable containers. The containers shall be approved by
either the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., the American
Petroleum Institute or the American Society of Mechanical
Engineers and shall have a maximum capacity of six gallons.
I. Storage and display of merchandise.
(1) The display of automotive merchandise for sale shall be permitted
in enclosed buildings or on pump islands and within three feet of
the station building. No more than one display rack for each type of
item is permitted at each pump island.
(2) The storage and sale of non-automotive-related merchandise,
except by means of coin-operated devices, shall be prohibited.
J. Storage and vehicles on property.
(1) Trash and refuse shall be stored in an enclosed or walled area and
shall not be visible from the exterior boundaries of the property.
Refuse storage areas shall be at least 100 square feet in area and at
least five feet in height.
(2) No large commercial vehicles (other than those owned by the
owner, operator, lessee or licensee) shall be parked or stored on the
gasoline service station premises. There shall be no tank trucks
parked or stored on the gasoline service station property.
(3) The leasing of motor vehicles shall not be permitted on any
gasoline service station premises.
K. Lighting. Lights to illuminate the service site shall be directed toward
the site, and the light standard for such lights shall not exceed 20 feet in
height. All exterior lighting shall be so arranged as to reflect the light
away from adjacent premises and shall also be so arranged as to not
affect driver visibility adversely on adjacent thoroughfares. There shall
be no flashing or revolving lights.
§ 141-51 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-51
131:255
L. Attendants.
(1) Every service station shall have at least one competent attendant
on duty during all hours of its operation.
(2) The station operator shall be responsible for instructing attendants
as to fire code provisions for the dispensing of motor vehicle fuels
and for the operation of dispensing devices and fire extinguishers
to the satisfaction of the fire protection subcode official.
M. Signs.
(1) A sign shall be posted on every dispensing device, at least 12 inches
in height and 12 inches in width, stating clearly and legibly the
price per gallon, half gallon or liter; the breakdown of applicable
federal, state and local taxes; and the octane rating of the fuel.
(2) A sign, in block letters at least four inches in height, shall be
conspicuously posted on each pump island indicating whether the
island is self-service or full-service.
(3) Signs shall be posted on every self-service dispensing device, in
block letters at least 1/2 inch in height, giving instructions as to the
use of self-service devices.
(4) At least one sign shall be posted on the premises, clearly visible and
readable from all traffic lanes in each direction on such street or
streets, indicating thereon the actual price per gallon, half gallon
or liter; the applicable federal, state and local taxes; each grade of
motor vehicle fuel which is currently being offered for sale, sold or
otherwise dispensed; and the maximum or minimum purchase
limits, if any. The size of such sign shall be a minimum of 12 square
feet, in lettering no smaller than six inches in height and in
numerals no smaller than 10 inches in height.
(5) Signs, in block letters at least two inches in height, shall be
conspicuously posted at each pump island warning of fire code
provisions prohibiting the dispensing of gasoline into containers
other than safety cans or the fuel tanks of motor vehicles,
prohibiting smoking in the area of the islands and requiring the
motors of all vehicles to be shut off during fueling.
(6) Banners, flags and other signs or attention-attracting devices shall
not be permitted, except during the first 15 days of the opening of a
station, provided that this limitation shall not apply to the display of
official flags or colored flags required to be displayed during
gasoline shortage.
N. Landscaping. Landscaping shall cover a minimum of 5% of that portion
of the site not occupied by buildings or pump islands. The installation of
landscaping shall be indicated on the site plan. Adequate and proper
§ 141-51 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-51
131:256
§ 141-52. Bed-and-breakfast accommodations.
§ 141-53. (Reserved)63
maintenance of such landscaping shall be the responsibility of the
station operator.
O. Repairs. Only minor repairs shall be permitted upon the premises of a
gasoline service station. "Minor repairs" shall be defined as those
repairs involving work on no more than three vehicles at any one time
inside the building or structure and on not more than one vehicle on the
outside premises during operating hours. No vehicles shall be left
outside the building or structure in a state of disrepair during
nonoperating hours.
A. Purpose. Bed-and-breakfasts (B&B) offer an opportunity for the
Borough to provide transient accommodations for guests in a
residential and architecturally compatible setting within the Borough.
B. Bed-and-breakfast accommodations are permitted within the
Professional Office Districts but are conditional uses within the Single-
Family, Detached Residential District Three. In either district, the
facilities shall meet the following requirements:
(1) B&B shall be permitted only in single-family, detached dwellings,
with a minimum of 2,000 square feet of living space.
(2) The B&B or an approved accessory apartment on the same lot shall
be the primary residence of either the owner or property manager.
(3) All B&B facilities shall be registered in accordance with state and
local laws.
(4) A maximum of five guest rooms within each B&B shall be rented at
one time.
(5) The maximum consecutive stay for any guest shall be limited to 14
days.
(6) Any meal provided, usually breakfast, shall be provided for the
registered guests only. Adequate parking shall be provided on site,
at a minimum of one space per guest room, plus two spaces for the
residents of the dwelling, and one space per employee who does
not reside in the dwelling. Parking shall not be permitted in the
front yard, and adequate buffers shall be provided to any adjacent
residential use.
63.Editor's Note: Former § 141-53, Boardinghouses, was repealed 3-3-2002 by Ord. No. 1306.
§ 141-51 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-54
131:257
§ 141-54. Buffers.
Within any zone where a nonresidential development abuts a residential
zone or where off-street parking and loading for six or more vehicles abuts
a residential zone or where the Planning Board deems necessary due to site
conditions, the following buffer area and landscaping requirements shall
apply:
§ 141-55. Churches and places of worship.
A. Buffer areas shall be located on the nonresidential lot along the
abutting residential property lines where a nonresidential use abuts a
residential use. They shall be 10% of the average width and depth of the
nonresidential abutting property and shall be of uniform width. The
width of the buffer shall not exceed 50 feet.
B. Buffer areas shall be maintained and kept clean of all debris, rubbish,
weeds and tall grass. Any screen planting shall be maintained
permanently, and any plant material which does not live shall be
replaced within one year or one growing season.
C. No structure, activity, storage of materials or parking of vehicles shall
be permitted in the buffer area, except access drives from public
streets, one unlighted directional sign per each direction of traffic per
access drive and permitted signs as specified in the district regulations.
D. Requirements for planting in buffer area.
(1) A solid and continuous landscaped screen shall be planted and
maintained. The landscaped screen shall consist of evergreen
trees. Trees shall be planted in an area five feet to 20 feet from the
residential line in a zigzag pattern and not more than 10 feet apart,
except where otherwise authorized by the approving authority.
They shall not be less than five feet high when planted, and the
lowest branches shall be not more than one foot above the ground.
(2) In addition to the landscaped screen, shade trees shall be planted
by the applicant at a distance of not more than 40 feet from each
other.
(3) Shrubs shall be planted in clumps, so as not to produce a hedge, to
supplement any open spaces within the buffer.
E. The approving authority shall have the power to waive any or all of the
buffer requirements to the extent that it determines compliance with
the same to be impracticable or unnecessary. In making the foregoing
determination, the approving authority shall review the proposed plat,
considering the size of the lot; the use being made or contemplated of
the lot; the location of the buildings, parking areas and outdoor
illumination; the topographic features of the area; the adequacy and
location of existing green areas and buffer areas; the surrounding area
and uses; and similar features.
§ 141-54 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-55
131:258
§ 141-56. (Reserved)64
§ 141-57. Conditional uses.
A. Churches are considered conditional uses and shall be permitted in any
residential district, provided that the following controls shall apply.
B. Minimum requirements.
(1) Churches and places of worship shall be permitted only on lots
which are a minimum of one acre in size, located on a major street,
and have a minimum site frontage of 150 feet.
(2) On-site parking shall be provided in accordance with the standard
for churches as set forth in § 141-76 of this chapter. Parking shall
not be permitted in the front yard.
(3) Appropriate buffers shall be provided between the parking area
and adjoining residences.
(4) No building or part thereof shall be erected nearer than a distance
of 50 feet to any property line.
(5) All accessory buildings shall be located on the same lot as the
principal structure. The building coverage shall not exceed 30% of
the lot area.
A. Before any permit shall be issued for a conditional use, applications
shall be made to the approving authority, who shall grant or deny the
application after public hearing within 95 days of submission of a
complete application to the administrative officer or within such further
time as may be consented to by the applicant. Notice of the hearing
shall include reference to all matters being heard, including site plan
and/or subdivision, and the approving authority shall review and
approve or deny the subdivision or site plan simultaneously with the
conditional use application. Failure of the approving authority to act
within the required time period shall constitute approval of the
application.
B. In reviewing the application, the approving authority shall review the
specific requirements set forth in this chapter and shall give due
consideration to elements which would affect the public health, welfare,
safety, comfort and convenience, such as but not limited to the
proposed use(s), the character of the area, vehicular travel patterns and
access, pedestrianways, landscaping, lighting, signs, drainage, sewage
treatment, potable water supply, utilities and structural location(s) and
orientation(s).
64.Editor's Note: Former § 141-56, Community residential homes, was repealed 3-3-2002 by
Ord. No. 1306.
§ 141-55 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-57
131:259
§ 141-58. Convenience stores.
C. Each conditional use shall be considered as an individual case. In all
requests for approval of conditional uses, the burden of proof shall be
on the applicant even though a conditional use shall be a permitted use
in the district in which it is located. All conditional uses shall require
site plan approval and follow the procedures for applications as stated
in § 141-32.
A. Convenience stores shall be permitted as principal uses in the Highway
Business District and as a conditional use in the Central Business and
Professional Office Districts. All convenience stores shall meet the
following standards:
(1) Area and bulk standards. Compliance with the area and bulk
standards of the base zoning district as specified in this chapter.
(2) Exterior building treatment. The building facade and architectural
treatment shall be compatible with the existing facades in the area
and subject to review by the Planning Board and its professionals.
(3) Display windows. Display windows shall be provided along the
street consistent with the architectural character of the area. It
shall be the design intent of this component to create showcase
windows which are professionally designed and decorated and
seasonally changed.
(4) Lighting design.
(a) Lighting design shall be consistent with the historic district
standards recommendations or shall be designed to be
consistent with the pattern of lighting in the area and as
stipulated by the Planning Board and the Historic Preservation
Commission. There shall be three categories of lighting. They
are:
[1] Ornamental.
[2] Security.
[3] Window and soft lighting.
(b) The design of the lighting shall be structured so as to
compliment display window lighting, provide security, and
provide ornamental lighting along property edges and the
street.
(5) Landscape design. The applicant shall provide a landscape plan for:
(a) Buffer areas along the periphery of the property. Such
landscaping shall consist of a variety of no fewer than three
types of evergreen trees, a minimum of six feet high at time of
planting. Such buffer areas shall be randomly interspersed
§ 141-57 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-58
131:260
with deciduous street trees, no less than three inches caliper,
with a height of no less than 15 feet at time of planting.
(b) Street trees shall be provided in the parking area with one tree
for every five spaces. Such trees shall be no less than three
inches caliper, with a height of no less than 15 feet at time of
planting.
(c) Understory plants suitable for foundation planting shall be
provided throughout the site along the edges of the primary
building, edges of parking lots and other areas such as the
entranceway to the facility.
(6) Back-of-house buffer and screening. The back-of-house areas
commonly associated with such facilities, and used for storage of
trash receptacle loading and unloading, shall be completely
screened using the same walls and architectural materials of the
main building. Such area shall have freezeproof water connections
for cleaning purposes and the capability of weatherproof storage of
recyclable materials.
(7) Signage.
(a) Signage shall be consistent with the historic district standards
or recommendations. A comprehensive signage plan shall be
provided which clearly identifies all types of signage and their
location on the site and building.
(b) Identification signs and logos shall be reviewed by the
Planning Board, its professionals and the Historic Preservation
Commission for consistency with the style and character of
signage in the district.
(c) Signs shall be:
[1] Flat wall-mounted.
[2] Painted, wood routed (either actual or simulated),
professionally designed, built and installed.
[3] Sign lighting shall be frontlit. Backlit plastic signs shall be
prohibited.
[4] Directional signs shall be erected on ornamental posts,
either wood, cast-iron or simulated cast-iron, and designed
and framed so that they are in conformance with the
architecture of the building and area.
(8) Off-street parking.
(a) Off-street parking shall be located in the rear yard of the site.
No off-street parking shall be permitted in front of the use.
§ 141-58 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-58
131:261
§ 141-59. Curbs and gutters.
Unless waived by the approving authority, concrete curbs shall be installed
on all new streets and replaced on all streets where there are existing
concrete curbs at the time development takes place. The standard curb
section shall be 10 feet in length with preformed expansion joint material
on not more than twenty-foot centers and shall be set in accordance with
approved lines and grades, and radial curbs shall be formed in a smooth
curve. Chord segments are prohibited. The finish shall be a smooth float
finish with corners rounded. Concrete curbs shall be 9 inches by 20 inches
(eight-inch exposed face), using Class B concrete having a twenty-eightday
compressive strength of 4,000 pounds per square inch and shall be air
entrained. The curbing shall be designed to provide barrier-free curb ramps
constructed in accordance with the Design Standards for Curb Ramps
for the Physically Handicapped of the New Jersey Department of
Transportation.
§ 141-60. Drainage.
All new streets shall be designed to accommodate storm drainage along
streets, including the installation of drainage inlets and pipes where
necessary for proper surface drainage. The requirements of this section
shall not be satisfied by the construction of dry wells. The system shall
be adequate to handle all water which originates within the development
and beyond, calculated on the basis of maximum potential development as
permitted under this chapter. No water shall be diverted as to overload
existing drainage systems or create flooding or the need for additional
drainage structures on other lands.
(b) Cross access easements and a linkage point shall be provided
to connect the parking to adjacent commercial uses.
(c) To the maximum extent practical, vehicle access/egress shall
be via driveways in the side or rear yard area and/or cross
access linkage to the adjoining parcels. Direct access to
Haddon Avenue shall be prohibited.
(9) Hours of operation. Convenience stores shall not conduct business
between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
A. A twenty-year storm curve shall be used in computing stormwater
runoff from the drainage basin to determine the impact on the drainage
system under consideration.
B. The pipe size shall be determined by drainage design procedures
acceptable to the approving authority. In no case shall the pipe size in a
surface water drainage system be less than 15 inches in diameter.
C. Drainage inlets shall be located at all intersections, with inlets on both
sides of the street at intervals of not more than 400 feet or such shorter
distances as required to prevent the flow of surface water from
§ 141-58 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-60
131:262
§ 141-61. Easements.
Easements for access, utilities, or other public needs shall be along side
and/or rear property lines where possible, shall not be less than 15 feet
wide, shall be dimensioned on the plat and shall be identified as follows: "
___________ easement granted to the Borough of Collingswood as provided
for in Ordinance No. ____________."
§ 141-62. Environmental impact statement.
exceeding 6.0 cubic feet per second at the drainage inlet. Access
manholes shall be placed at maximum five-hundred-foot intervals
throughout the system and at pipe junctions where there are no
drainage inlets.
D. Dished gutters on minor streets shall be permitted only at intersections
involving minor streets. Dished gutters shall not be permitted on
collector streets.
E. Storm drainpipes running longitudinally along streets shall not be
located under curbing.
F. Storm drainpipes shall be the size specified and laid to the exact lines
and grades approved by the Municipal Engineer. Specifications for
manholes, inlets and storm drains shall follow the 1961 State Highway
Specifications, as amended.
G. Blocks and lots shall be graded to secure proper drainage away from all
buildings, to prevent the collection of stormwater in pools and to avoid
the concentration of stormwater from each lot to adjacent lots.
H. Where any development is traversed by a watercourse, surface or
underground drainageway or drainage system, channel or stream, a
drainage right-of-way easement shall be provided and dedicated to the
Borough, conforming substantially to the lines of such watercourse,
with such further width as will be adequate to accommodate expected
stormwater runoff in the future based upon reasonable growth
potential in the Borough. A minimum of 15 feet beyond the bank top on
at least one side shall be provided for access to the drainage right-ofway.
I. Where storm drainpipes are installed outside of streets, easements or
rights-of-way shall be required.
A. An environmental impact statement (EIS) shall accompany all
preliminary site plans and subdivision plats. It shall be in eight-and-onehalf-
inch by eleven-inch format, bound, and shall contain maps and text
descriptions which detail the following:
(1) Background information. The report should include the name and
address of owner, applicant, design engineer, and any other
professionals associated with the project; date of report; project
§ 141-60 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-62
131:263
§ 141-63. Family day-care home.
Family day-care homes shall be permitted uses in all residential districts
and are subject to same requirements of a single-family unit within the same
zoning district contained within this chapter. The family day-care home shall
be the private, occupied, and primary residence of the day-care provider.
There shall be no less than three and no more than five children. Services
must be provided for more than 15 hours per week. Family day-care homes
title and address; description of existing use and proposed uses;
current zoning and any waivers, variances, or deviations from the
requirements of this chapter.
(2) A description of the development specifying what and how it is to
be done during construction and operation and practical alternate
plans to achieve the objective(s).
(3) An inventory of on-site environmental conditions and an
assessment of the probable impact of the development upon them;
water supply; geology; soils and properties thereof, including
capabilities and limitations; sewerage; topography; vegetation and
landscaping; noise characteristics and levels; land use; traffic on
and around site; aesthetics; and history. Air and water quality shall
be described with reference to the standards of the Department of
Environmental Protection and Energy of the State of New Jersey,
and soils shall be described with reference to the Soil Conservation
Service categories and characteristics.
(4) A list and the status of the approvals needed from federal, state or
county agencies, including comments of these governmental
agencies.
(5) An evaluation of any adverse environmental impacts which cannot
be avoided, including air and water pollution, noise, traffic,
sedimentation and siltation, and any increase in Borough services
and consequences to the Borough tax structure.
(6) A description of steps to be taken to avoid or minimize adverse
environmental impacts during construction and operation,
including maps, schedules and other explanatory data.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the approving authority may waive all
or part of an environmental impact statement if sufficient evidence is
submitted to support a conclusion that the development will have a
slight or negligible environmental impact or that the complete report
need not be prepared to evaluate the environmental impact of the
development. A waiver from the submission of an EIS must be
requested prior to being deemed complete, and the approving agency
shall either approve, approve in part or disapprove the request at the
first regular meeting at which the application is heard.
§ 141-62 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-63
131:264
are required to be licensed and registered in accordance with the Family
Day Care Provider Registration Act.
§ 141-64. Fast-food and drive-through restaurants.
§ 141-65. Fences and walls. [Amended 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 1306;
4-6-2012 by Ord. No. 1511]
Fences and walls shall not be located in any required sight triangle. No
fence or wall shall exceed four feet in height in front of the front yard
setback line of the principal structure or six feet in height behind such front
yard setback line. Fences in the front yard shall be open in design and
be of wood, wrought iron, or simulated wrought iron in construction. No
stockade fences, enclosed or solid fences or enclosed or solid walls shall be
permitted. No fence shall be erected of barbed wire, topped with spikes nor
constructed of any material that may be dangerous to persons or animals.
On lots with frontage on two or more streets, including corner lots, no fence
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish performance
standards for fast-food and other restaurants with drive-through
facilities.
B. All fast-food restaurants are subject to the area and bulk requirements
of the district in which they are located or the following, whichever is
more restrictive:
(1) Minimum lot size shall be 50,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width: 175 feet.
(3) Maximum building coverage: 15%.
(4) Maximum impervious surface, including building: 60%.
(5) Minimum front yard: 50 feet.
(6) Minimum side yard: 30 feet, each.
(7) Minimum rear yard: 30 feet.
(8) Maximum building height: 20 feet or one story.
C. Signage shall be submitted as a comprehensive package as a portion of
the preliminary site plan review and shall comply with Article IX of this
chapter.
D. Solid waste and recyclable materials shall be stored in dumpsters that
are either within the building itself or within concrete and masonry
enclosures. Proper facilities shall be installed for adequate washing of
this area.
E. Provisions shall be made, including sidewalks and crosswalks, for
pedestrian traffic traveling to and from the site as well as within the
site.
§ 141-63 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-65
131:265
or wall shall exceed four feet in height in front of the front yard or side yard
setback line of the principal structure. Lots with frontage on two or more
streets, including corner lots, shall be considered to have two front yards.
§ 141-66. Home occupation.
A home occupation shall be permitted in designated residential and
commercial districts as both a permitted accessory use or as a conditional
use. The home occupation is governed by the nature of the business, the
percentage of living space occupied by the use, and the impact of the use
on the surrounding area. Home occupations shall take place in either home
personal offices or home professional offices, with the later being the more
intensive. Sections 141-67 and 141-68 provide the standards for the offices
in which a home occupation may operate.
§ 141-67. Home Personal offices.
Home personal offices for limited business and trade are permitted as
principal uses in the Professional Office District and as accessory uses and
conditional uses in designated zoning districts, provided that:
§ 141-68. Home professional offices.
Home professional offices for business or trade are permitted as conditional
uses in residential zoning districts and as a permitted principal use in the
Professional Office District. The following standards shall apply to all home
professional offices:
A. The office is clearly incidental to the residential use of the dwelling unit
and shall not change the essential character of the dwelling.
B. The office use shall not constitute more than 10% of the building.
C. The office shall be for the use of the business owner or employee
residing in the dwelling and shall not be used by nonresident
employees.
D. The office shall not be used for meeting clients, patrons, or customers.
No retail sales are permitted.
E. No goods, materials, or supplies shall be delivered to the premises,
except as carried by the resident employee in their vehicle or by a
recognized delivery service.
F. No materials or good may be stored outside.
G. No signs identifying the business shall be permitted.
H. The business shall be properly registered in accordance with local
ordinances.
A. A home professional office shall be utilized solely by resident occupants
of the dwelling, except that no more than two persons who are not
§ 141-65 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-68
131:266
§ 141-69. Landscaping.
All commercial and industrial developments are required to submit a
detailed landscape plan, prepared by a licensed professional authorized
to prepare landscape plans, with the site plan application. The following
items shall be reflected either on the landscape plan or within the required
environmental impact statement:
residents of the dwelling may be employed on the premises at any one
time.
B. No more than 500 square feet or the equivalent of 50% of the first floor
area of the building, whichever is smaller, shall be used for the home
professional office.
C. No display of products shall be visible from the street, and no article
shall be offered for sale from the premises.
D. The residential character of the building shall not be changed.
E. The home professional office shall be located entirely within the
dwelling. [Amended 4-6-2012 by Ord. No. 1507]
F. No occupational sound shall be audible from outside the building. No
machinery or equipment shall be used which will cause interference
with radio or television reception in the neighboring residences.
G. Adequate parking shall be provided. Parking shall meet not only the
minimum requirement for the dwelling but also for a professional office
as stated in § 141-76 of this chapter. Appropriate buffers shall be
provided between the parking area and adjoining residential uses or
residential zoning districts.
H. No more than one nameplate sign or sign of two square feet or less shall
be permitted. Such sign may be attached to the residence.
I. All area and bulk requirements of the zoning district in which the home
professional office is to be located must be met.
A. All areas not covered by roadways, walkways, parking areas, etc., must
be landscaped with natural materials.
B. Tree sizes. Each type of tree shall be at least the minimum size listed
below at the time of planting:
(1) Canopy trees: 2 inches to 3 inches in caliper, at least 12feet high.
(2) Evergreen trees: 6 feet to 8 feet in height.
(3) Flowering or clumping trees: 12 feet high.
(4) Shrubs: 24 inches high.
§ 141-68 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-69
131:267
§ 141-70. Licensed child-care centers.
C. Each type of development requires a varying amount of landscaping. All
parking areas shall conform with the standards included in § 141-76.
The following minimum landscaping materials do not include required
buffer plantings but may include existing vegetation:
(1) Commercial and industrial properties: One tree per 50 feet of
perimeter property line, plus building, parking, and walkway edges
shall be treated with ground cover or shrubs. All parking areas
shall be screened from rights-of-way and residential properties. In
areas where landscaping is unable to be provided due to building
setbacks, the approving authority may waive landscape
requirements.
(2) Residential properties: two trees per dwelling unit
D. A planting and maintenance schedule shall be included on each
landscape plan detailing the number, name and size of each type of
plant to be installed as well as the symbol used to represent each plant
on the drawing and the person or organization responsible for
maintenance.
A. Child-care centers serving three children or fewer as an accessory use
to a single-family dwelling shall be subject to the conditions for a home
occupation as set forth herein. Family day-care homes, which serve
three to five children in the residence of the day-care provider, are
subject to the provisions of family day-care homes set forth within this
chapter.
B. Licensed day-care centers shall be permitted in all nonresidential
zoning districts of the Borough, provided that the following standards
are met:
(1) The child-care center shall be properly registered with the state
and licensed with Department of Human Services.
(2) The child-care center and all accessory development shall comply
with the minimum area and bulk requirements of the zoning
district in which the center is located.
(3) The location and size of a child-care center shall be permanently
deed-restricted in order to qualify for the parking, density, or floor
area ratio exclusions allowed in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.6 and
40:55D-66.7.
(4) Adequate parking shall be provided at a rate of one space per staff
person on the maximum shift, plus one space per three children.
Appropriate buffers shall be provided between the on-site parking
and any adjoining residential uses or zoning districts.
(5) Parking shall not be permitted in the front yard.
§ 141-69 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-70
131:268
§ 141-71. Lighting.
The objective is to minimize undesirable off-site effects. All area lighting
in places such as parking lots or security shall provide translucent fixtures
with shields around the light source. The light intensity at ground level
shall be a minimum of 1.0 footcandle. The total quantity of light radiated
above a horizontal plane passing through the light source shall not exceed
7.5%. For recreation purposes, more intense lighting may be permitted. In
all instances, no lighting source shall shine or reflect into windows or onto
streets and driveways. No lighting shall be a yellow, red, green or blue beam
nor be a rotating, pulsating or other intermittent frequency.
§ 141-72. Lodges, community centers, or clubs.
These uses shall be permitted only on lots which are a minimum of one
acre in size and located on a major street. On-site parking shall be provided
at the rate of one space for every three allowable occupants. "Allowable
occupants" shall mean the occupancy load established under the New
Jersey Uniform Construction Code.65 Appropriate buffers shall be provided
between the parking area and adjoining residential uses or zoning districts.
§ 141-73. Lots; legal nonconforming lots.
(6) An off-street pickup and dropoff area shall be provided which shall
be located so that vehicles will not have to back onto or off the
street to use the area.
(7) Any outdoor play area shall be fenced and supervised by a staff
member at all times when children are present.
(8) Where the play area is accessed directly from the building, an
access gate shall be provided for use by emergency personnel and
equipment.
(9) Details of all proposed play equipment shall be provided at time of
site plan approval
A. Where two or more contiguous lots exist under the same ownership and
one or more of said lots do not conform to the area and/or dimension
requirements of this chapter, said contiguous lots shall be considered
merged into the greatest number of conforming lots.
B. Any nonconforming lot existing on the date of passage of this chapter
and not meeting the definition of Subsection A may have a building
permit issued for a permitted use without an appeal for a variance,
provided that the building coverage is not exceeded, the new structure
does not violate any height or setback requirements, parking
requirements are met and the nonconforming lot abuts lots on either
side that are developed and the nonconforming lot is the largest
65.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 141-70 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-73
131:269
§ 141-74. Mobile homes and house trailers.
No house trailer or mobile home shall be permitted to be used, either
temporarily or permanently, for storage, living or sleeping purposes in any
district; nor shall any house trailer or mobile home be placed or installed
on any lot or parcel of land in any district where such trailer or mobile
home is placed upon concrete blocks or connected with the ground or a
structure in such manner that such placement or installation is or appears
to be permanent. The temporary use of a house trailer or mobile home by
a commercial or business establishment in a business or industrial district
while a permanent structure is being constructed for it shall not be deemed
to be a violation of this section.
§ 141-75. Nonconforming uses, structures and lots.
The lawful use of land or a structure existing on the date of passage
of this chapter may be continued although it may not conform to this
chapter. Land on which a nonconforming use or structure is located and
any nonconforming lot shall not be subdivided so as to be made more
nonconforming.
possible assemblage of contiguous land under Subsection A. The side
and rear yards may be reduced to the same percentage that the area of
the undersized lot bears to the zone district requirements, except that
no yard shall be less than half that required by this chapter or five feet,
whichever is greater.
A. Abandonment. It shall be considered prima facie evidence of
abandonment of a nonconforming use if it is terminated by the owner or
if a nonconforming use is discontinued for 12 consecutive months. The
subsequent use of the abandoned use shall be in conformity with this
chapter.
B. Maintenance may be made to a nonconforming use, structure or lot,
provided that the work does not change the use, expand the building or
the functional use of the building, increase the area of a lot used for a
nonconforming purpose or increase the nonconformity in any manner.
C. Building additions. Where an existing structure with a permitted use is
located on a conforming or nonconforming lot which violates any yard
requirements, alterations and additions may be made to the principal
building and/or an accessory building erected without an appeal for a
variance, provided that the total permitted building coverage is not
exceeded and that the accessory building and/or the addition does not
increase the size of that part of the structure violating the yard
requirement and does not violate any other requirements of this
chapter. Where a residential use is nonconforming solely because of
failure to meet the off-street parking requirements of this chapter, such
additions may be made and/or accessory building may be erected,
provided that the use is not changed in whole or in part and that the
§ 141-73 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-75
131:270
§ 141-76. Off-street parking and loading.
total building and/or the addition do not violate any other requirements
of this chapter.
D. Change of use and building additions. Where a nonresidential use is
nonconforming solely because of failure to meet the off-street parking,
loading or buffer requirements of this chapter, alterations may be made
to the building without an appeal for a variance, provided that the gross
floor area is not increased and there is no change in use.
E. Any nonconforming structure or use which has been partially damaged
by fire, explosion, flood, windstorm or act of God may be restored. The
structure as restored shall not exceed the height, area and bulk of the
original structure. Restoration must commence within 12 months of the
date the building was damaged, and such reconstruction must be
carried out without interruption.
A. Minimum parking requirements. The number of spaces shall be based
on the following schedule:
Type of Use Number of Parking Spaces
Animal clinics and hospitals 1 per 150 square feet gross floor
area
Art galleries and libraries 1 per 200 square feet of gross floor
area
Assembly hall, auditorium,
theater, community center there
are no fixed seats
1 per 3 seats or 1 per 150 square
feet of gross floor area where
Auto sales area and sales office,
plus 4 per service bay, if
applicable
1 per 300 square feet of showroom
Banks and financial institutions 1 per 250 square feet of gross floor
area
Bars, taverns 1 per 2 service seats
Beauty salons, barber shops,
recreational center/clubs, gyms
1 per 75 square feet of gross floor
area
Bowling alley 5 per alley, plus required spaces
for other internal uses
Business, general 1 per 200 square feet of gross floor
area
Car wash, automatic 10 stacking spaces per washing
lane, plus 1 space per employee
(minimum of 4)
Car wash, self-service 3 stacking spaces per washing
lane, plus 1 space per employee
(minimum of 2)
§ 141-75 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-76
131:271
Type of Use Number of Parking Spaces
Church 1 per 3 seats or 1 per 62 inches of
pew space and 1 per 100 square
feet gross floor area of assembly
and meeting rooms
Convenience store 1 per 100 square feet of gross floor
area
Child-care facilities 1 space per 3 students, plus 1
space per employee on maximum
shift
Dwelling unit 2
Fast-food/drive-through 1 per 100 square feet of gross floor
area
Fire station/police 1 per 250 square feet of gross floor
area
Funeral home/mortuary 10 per viewing room and chapel,
with a minimum of 30
Hospital/medical center 1 per 250 square feet of gross floor
area
Hotel/motel/lodging 1 per room, plus 1 per employee on
maximum shift, plus required
spaces for other uses
Industrial/manufacturing 1 per 800 square feet of gross floor
area
Office, general 1 per 300 square feet of gross floor
area
Office, medical and dental 1 per 100 square feet of gross floor
area
Office, professional 1 per each professional employee,
plus 1 per 250 square feet gross
floor area for clients
Postal and parcel centers,
printing and duplicating, studios
for dance, music and arts
1 per 200 square feet of gross floor
area
Rehabilitation centers 1 per 250 square feet of gross floor
area
Research laboratory 1 per 500 square feet of gross floor
area
Restaurant 1 per 3 seats
Retail sales and services 1 per 200 square feet of gross floor
area
Schools, elementary 2 per classroom
§ 141-76 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-76
131:272
Type of Use Number of Parking Spaces
Schools, high school 4 per classroom
Schools, vocational or trade 5 per classroom
Service station 4 per bay and work area, but not
less than 4
Shopping center (up to 80,000
square feet of gross leasable
area)
5 spaces per 1,000 square feet
gross leasable area
Shopping center (over 80,000
square feet of gross leasable
area)
5 spaces per 1,000 square feet
gross leasable area
Theater, movie 1 per 3 seats; 1 per 4 seats for
theaters in shopping centers
Utilities 1
B. Uses which have frontage on Haddon Avenue shall not be required to
provide on-site parking, provided that there is no increase in the gross
floor area of the building. Lots with frontage on Haddon Avenue which
have existing parking or loading areas shall not be permitted to reduce
the supply of such parking or loading, and the supply may be increased
but there shall be no new direct access drives to the parking or loading
areas from Haddon Avenue. If a new building is constructed or an
existing building expanded along Haddon Avenue, off-site parking shall
be required or existing on-site parking shall be expanded to
accommodate the added floor area. Any off-site parking shall have
appropriate control to assure its continued availability for parking.
C. Parking lot setback and location. Parking spaces located to serve
residential uses shall be within 150 feet of the entrance of the building
and within 300 feet of commercial/industrial uses. In single-family
residential districts, no off-site parking spaces shall be located in the
front of the principal structure, except for those vehicles temporarily
parked within a designated, paved driveway. For all other zoning
districts, the parking setbacks are as follows:
Zoning District
Minimum Required Parking Setback
(feet)
Front Side Rear
MF 20 10 10
CBD N/A 5 10
POD Not permitted 10 10
HBD 35 15 20
HID 35 15 20
§ 141-76 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-76
131:273
D. Access to on-site parking and loading spaces. Access shall be by on-site
aisles to permit each vehicle to proceed to and from each space without
moving another vehicle. Parking spaces shall not be an extension of any
street right-of-way nor shall be designed or located that a vehicle would
be required to back into a right-of-way. No parking shall be permitted in
fire lanes, streets, driveways, aisles, sidewalks or turning areas.
E. Parking space dimensions.
(1) Off-street parking spaces shall be 9 feet wide and 18 feet in length.
Parking area shall provide handicap parking spaces which meet all
the requirement of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
(2) Parking aisle widths. The following aisle widths, based on the
proposed angle of the parking spaces, are required:
Angle of Parking
Space
(degrees)
Width of One-Way
Aisle
(feet)
Width of Two-Way
Aisle
(feet)
90 22 23
60 18 20
45 15 20
30 12 18
0 (parallel) 12 18
(3) Off-street loading spaces shall have 15 feet of vertical clearance
and shall be designed as follows:
Loading Space
Apron Length
(feet)
Length
(feet)
Width
(feet)
90-Degree
Angle
60-Degree
Angle
60 10 72 66
60 12 63 57
60 14 60 54
F. Driveways providing site ingress and egress. Driveway openings on
state, county, or other agencies having jurisdiction shall comply with
standards set forth by those agencies. Any site plan or subdivision
proposing private driveway openings on public streets or roads shall
comply with the following:
(1) Spacing. Drives shall be limited to two drives per lot to any one
street, except that when the frontage exceeds 500 feet. In this case,
the number of drives may be based on one drive for each 250 feet of
property frontage.
§ 141-76 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-76
131:274
(2) Location. The center lines of access points shall be spaced at least
100 feet apart. Each drive shall handle no more than two lanes of
traffic and shall be at least 50 feet from the street line of any
intersecting street.
(3) Improvements. Curbing shall be either depressed at the driveway
or have the curbing rounded at the corners with the access drive
connected to the street in the same manner as another street.
(4) Widths. The dimensions of driveways shall be designated and
designed to adequately accommodate the volume and character of
vehicles for which a site plan is prepared. The required minimum
and maximum dimensions are indicated below:
One-Way Operation Two-Way Operation
Curbline
Opening
(feet)
Driveway
Width
(feet)
Curbline
Opening
(feet)
Driveway
Width
(feet)
3 - 10 family
residences
12-15 10-13 12-30 10-26
Over 10
family
residences
12-30 10-26 24-36 20-30
Commercial
and
industrial
24-50 24-34 24-50 24-46
(5) Site distance. Any exit driveway shall be located as to permit the
following maximum site distance measured in each direction along
any abutting public right-of-way:
Allowable Speed on Road
(mph)
Required Site Distance
(feet)
25 150
30 200
35 250
40 300
45 350
50 400
(6) Intersections. Driveways used for two-way traffic shall intersect
any road at any angle as nearly as 90 degrees as site conditions will
permit.
G. Surfacing.
§ 141-76 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-76
131:275
(1) Parking lot and driveway surfacing shall be approved as part of the
plan approval. Areas to experience heavy traffic shall be paved with
not less than four inches of compacted plant-mixed bituminous
stabilized base course constructed in layers not more than two
inches compacted thickness or equivalent and a minimum two-inchthick
compacted wearing surface of bituminous concrete (FABC) or
equivalent. All shall be constructed in accordance with the
Standard Specifications of the New Jersey Department of
Transportation.
(2) Residential driveways shall be constructed using any of the
following methods: [Added 3-3-2002 by Ord. No. 1306]
(a) Bituminous concrete with a four-inch base course and two-inch
top coat of FABC top mix (using NJDOT specifications).
(b) Concrete with a six-inch depth using a 4,000 PSI mix.
(c) Bricks or pavers constructed on a four-inch base of 3,500 PSI
concrete mix.
H. Landscaping in parking and loading areas. All proposed and existing
landscaping and buffering shall be shown on the site plan and comply
with the following:
(1) Unless superceded by applicable zoning regulations, a minimum of
15% of all parking areas shall be landscaped. Landscaping shall be
located in protected areas, along walkways, in center and end
islands and in all irregular spaces not used for parking.
(2) The required setback of parking lots shall be utilized and
maintained as a buffer. Buffer areas shall consist of evergreen and
canopy trees, shrubs, berms, and fences.
(3) Trees shall be spaced so as not to interfere with driver vision (shall
not exceed three feet in a site triangle) and to have branches no
lower than seven feet for pedestrian access.
(4) In parking areas with more than 15 spaces, canopy tress (two and
one-half inches in caliper and 12 feet to 15 feet in height) shall be
placed in parking islands at the rate of at least one tree for every 10
parking spaces.
(5) All areas between the parking area and the building shall be
landscaped with trees, shrubs and ground cover.
(6) Any plantings that do not live shall be replaced within one year or
one growing season.
I. Lighting in parking and loading areas. Lighting in parking areas shall
comply with § 141-71 contained within this chapter. In addition those
requirements, no lighting fixture shall be mounted higher than 25 feet.
§ 141-76 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-76
131:276
§ 141-76.1. Outdoor cafes. [Amended 3-5-2001 by Ord. No. 1247]
Also, pedestrian-oriented lighting shall be provided along walkways if
the lighting minimums cannot or will not be met throughout the site.
J. Parking specific to commercial and recreational vehicles.
(1) No more than one commercial vehicle with a gross vehicle weight
of less than 10,000 pounds may be parked, stored or garaged at any
dwelling unit or on public streets within the residential zones of the
Borough.
(2) The parking, storing or garaging of any commercial vehicle with a
gross vehicle weight of 10,000 pounds or more is prohibited within
the residential zones of the Borough.
(3) The parking, storing or garaging of any commercial-type
equipment, including but not limited to trailers, chippers, mixers,
backhoes and bulldozers, is prohibited within the residential zones
of the Borough.
(4) Recreation vehicles and equipment, including but not limited to
boats, trailers and campers, may be parked, stored or garaged
within the residential zones as long as they are not parked, stored
or garaged within the required front yard setback area and so
located to the rear of the front building line of a dwelling.
Recreational vehicles shall be limited to one vehicle per residence,
and said vehicle must be owned by the occupant of said residence.
[Amended 7-7-2008 by Ord. No. 1446]
(5) Nothing herein, however, shall prohibit the temporary parking of a
commercial vehicle for the purpose of performing services or
making pickups or deliveries in the regular course of business.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish a procedure and
authorize rules and regulations thereunder for the licensing of outdoor
cafes in the Central Business District (CBD) Zone of the Borough of
Collingswood. The Borough has determined that outdoor cafes will
promote the public interest by adding to the active and attractive
pedestrian environment created by them and provide the opportunity
for creative, colorful, pedestrian-focused commercial activities on a day,
night and seasonal basis, which activities are aesthetically pleasing and
will add to the excitement, charm, vitality and diversity of the Central
Business District.
B. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following words shall
have the meaning respectively ascribed in this section:
OUTDOOR CAFE — Any commercial establishment where food and
other refreshments are served upon the public right-of-way, namely the
sidewalks immediately in front of any restaurant or cafe.[Amended
5-5-2008 by Ord. No. 1445; 7-7-2009 by Ord. No. 1467]
§ 141-76 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-76.1
131:277
SIDEWALK — That area of the public right-of-way reserved for
pedestrian traffic from the curb to the front line of the building housing
the eating establishment.
C. Requirement of license. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm,
partnership, corporation, association or organization of any kind
(hereinafter collectively referred to as "person") to create, establish,
operate, maintain or otherwise be engaged in the business of
conducting an outdoor cafe upon the sidewalks of the Borough of
Collingswood, or on private property, unless such person shall hold a
currently valid license issued pursuant to the terms of this section.
D. No license shall be issued hereunder unless the applicant shall
demonstrate that a minimum of five feet will be available for pedestrian
traffic around such outdoor cafe and that such outdoor cafe will be
directly in front of a "commercial establishment," as hereinafter defined
for eating establishments. No food or drinks served at such outdoor
cafe shall be prepared or stored other than in the interior of the eating
establishment. The term "directly in front of" shall confine the outdoor
cafe to the area represented by an extension of each side of the building
occupied by the commercial establishment projected directly to the
curbline immediately in front thereof. The perimeter of the cafe area
shall be more than 50 feet from any driveway or alley [Amended
5-5-2008 by Ord. No. 1445; 7-11-2011 by Ord. No. 1501]
E. Application for license. Application for the license required hereunder
shall be made to the Zoning Officer and shall be signed by the applicant.
The application shall contain the following information:
(1) The name, residence, address, and telephone number of each
individual, owner, partner, or, if a domestic corporation, the names,
residences, addresses, and telephone numbers of the directors and
officers owning a 10% or greater interest in the corporation and the
chief operating executive of the corporation and, if a nondomestic
corporation, the name, residence, address, and telephone number
of the managing officer for service of process within the State of
New Jersey and a copy of the qualification of said nondomestic
corporation to conduct business in the State of New Jersey.
(2) A copy of the trade, corporate, business, or fictitious name upon
which the applicant intends to do business pursuant to this section.
(3) The address and description of each place where the applicant
intends to establish or operate an outdoor cafe.
(4) The name and address of the person owning the premises, if other
than the applicant, and the consent of the owner of the premises to
the application.
(5) Three sets of a proposed layout plan containing scaled drawings
prepared by a licensed professional architect or engineer clearly
illustrating the number, type of materials, color and location of all
§ 141-76.1 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-76.1
131:278
tables, chairs, umbrellas, or other furnishings or fixtures intended
to be located in the outdoor cafe. All tables and chairs must be
constructed of material of sufficient weight so as to not be affected
by high winds. The perimeter of the outdoor cafe shall be defined
and set off by a portable-type enclosure, which may include live
potted plantings on Borough property. The enclosure shall define
the perimeter of the area to be used as an outdoor cafe and shall
separate it from the pedestrians traversing the adjacent sidewalk.
The enclosure shall not contain doors or windows nor airconditioning
or heating equipment and shall be open at all times to
the air, and the barrier shall not have a height of more than three
feet. Awnings or outdoor umbrellas extending over the enclosure
are permitted, provided that the lowest portion of the awning or
umbrella is not less than seven feet above the adjacent sidewalk
and does not extend more than one foot beyond the enclosure. The
scaled drawings shall also illustrate the following:
(a) The location of any doors leading from the commercial
establishment to the outdoor cafe. No such doors may be
obstructed in any manner. [Amended 5-5-2008 by Ord. No.
1445]
(b) The number of feet and location of unobstructed space
permitting free passage of pedestrian traffic around each
outdoor cafe.
(c) The location of the place where any food or drink is intended to
be prepared.
(d) The enclosure or protective barrier separating the dining or
activity area of each outdoor cafe from pedestrian traffic,
which shall be indicated by a plan, elevation and section.
[Amended 5-5-2008 by Ord. No. 1445]
(e) The location of all bus stops, fire hydrants, utility poles,
benches, handicap ramps, street furniture, trees and any other
fixtures permanently located on the sidewalk in front of the
commercial establishment or within 10 feet thereof on either
or any side. [Amended 5-5-2008 by Ord. No. 1445]
(f) The type and location of any proposed outdoor lighting and
fixtures and should include the following information:
mounting height, lamp type and lumens. Any open-flame-type
fixture shall only be permitted with the approval of the Fire
Official.
(g) An application fee as set forth in § 141-13 of the Code of the
Borough of Collingswood.
F. Zoning Officer review of application. The Zoning Officer will review the
application for completeness and compliance with the terms of this
section. If the application is complete, the Zoning Officer will act upon
§ 141-76.1 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-76.1
131:279
the same within 10 business days after the application becomes
complete. If the application is not complete, the Zoning Officer will
so notify the applicant within 10 business days of the submission and
specifically detail the areas in which the application lacks compliance
with the requirements of this section.
G. Issuance of license. If the application complies with this section, the
Zoning Officer shall issue a license strictly subject to the terms and
conditions of this section.
H. Transfer of license. The license is personal to the applicant, and any
change or transfer of ownership of the outdoor cafe shall terminate the
license and shall require a new application and a new license in
conformance with all of the requirements of this section.
I. Inspection of outdoor cafe. Acceptance of the license by the applicant
shall operate as a consent to the Health, Fire, Police and Building
Officials of the Borough to inspect the outdoor cafe for continued
compliance with the terms and conditions of this section and any
federal, state, county or local law, ordinance or regulation affecting the
same.
J. Indemnity. No license required by this section shall be granted to any
person to operate an outdoor cafe until such person shall have filed
with the Zoning Officer a statement agreeing to indemnify and hold
harmless the Borough of Collingswood, its agents, servants,
representatives or employees from any or all claims, damages,
judgment costs or expenses, including attorneys' fees, which they or
any of them may incur or be required to pay because of any personal
injury, including death, or property damage suffered by any person or
persons as a result of or related in any way to the operation and
maintenance of the outdoor cafe for which the license is issued.
K. Revocability of license. Any license issued hereunder is issued solely as
a revocable license, which shall be subject to revocation or suspension
by the Borough Clerk for failure of any licensee to comply with this
section or for violation of any other applicable federal, state, county or
municipal law, regulation or ordinance. Any license issued hereunder is
issued upon the express understanding that the licensee obtains no
property right thereunder nor any interest in the continuation of said
license.
L. Unlawful operation of outdoor cafe. It shall be unlawful for any person
to operate an outdoor cafe after the suspension or termination of the
applicable license.
M. Cleanliness of area. Each licensee is responsible for keeping the area of
the outdoor cafe and the adjacent sidewalks and streets free and clear
of debris or litter occasioned by the outdoor cafe. Areas must be
cleaned as needed and at the time that business is closed and at the
beginning of each business day, but not later than 9:00 a.m.
§ 141-76.1 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-76.1
131:280
§ 141-76.2. Outdoor displays.
N. Vending machines. No vending machines of any kind are permitted on
the exterior of any building operating an outdoor cafe.
O. Signs. No signs shall be permitted in the area of the outdoor cafe except
easel and awning signs complying with Article IX, Signs, of this chapter.
There shall be no logos or advertising upon any umbrellas without prior
approval of the Collingswood Planning Board.
P. Modification, suspension or revocation of license. In addition to the
powers of suspension or revocation as set forth above, the Borough
reserves the right to modify, suspend or revoke any license on 10 days'
written notice if the Borough determines that the pedestrian operation
of the outdoor cafe has violated the terms and/or conditions of its
approval, is a hazard to public safety or because of any other safety
issue within the Borough because of such operation. The license may
also be suspended or revoked on 10 days' written notice in the event the
Borough determines that it is necessary to utilize the area or any part
thereof for the maintenance or installation of underground utilities. In
the event of any emergency, which emergency is certified by the
Borough Clerk, the license may be suspended or revoked without
notice.
Q. Duration and renewal. Outdoor cafes shall be permitted to be operated
from March 1 to November 30 in any calendar year. [Amended
5-5-2008 by Ord. No. 1445]
R. Outdoor equipment. No tables, chairs or other equipment used in the
outdoor cafe shall be attached, chained or in any manner affixed to any
tree, post, sign, curb or sidewalk or property for the Borough of
Collingswood within or near the licensed area. All equipment used in
connection with the operation of an outdoor cafe shall be of sufficient
size and weight to avoid being blown about by the wind. No food items
shall be served upon paper, Styrofoam or with plastic utensils. All
equipment, tables, chairs, umbrellas, etc., pertaining to the outdoor
seating area shall be removed at the end of each and every evening and
secured within the confines of the building. No equipment, tables,
chairs or any other material of any kind shall be permitted to remain
outdoors during hours in which the business is not open to the public
and operating.
S. Termination of license. The licensee agrees at the end of the license
period, or in the event that the license is temporarily or permanently
suspended or revoked, that the licensee will at his own cost and
expense vacate the sidewalk space and promptly remove any property
placed thereon. Failure to do so on five days' written notice shall grant
to the Borough the right to remove any property on the sidewalk, and
the licensee agrees to reimburse the Borough for the cost of removing
and storing the same.
§ 141-76.1 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-76.2
131:281
A. Limitation. No merchandise, wares, goods, foods, etc., is permitted to
be sold or offered for sale on any sidewalk or sidewalk right-of-way or
public thoroughfare or public highway or public property within the
Borough of Collingswood, except as provided herein.
B. Exemption.
(1) From time to time charitable festivals and other organized
activities are conducted within the CBD Central Business Districts
of the Borough of Collingswood.
(2) Whenever the governing body of the Borough of Collingswood
gives permission for such charitable festivals and/or other such
organized activities to occur within the CBD District, the following
restrictions shall apply:
(a) Charitable organizations and/or nonprofit organizations and
their agents, servants, and/or employees are permitted to
peddle, solicit, canvass and/or sell merchandise, etc., during
such charitable festivals or such other organized activity upon
the public sidewalks and other public property, as long as a
minimum four-foot safe, continuous, unobstructed path is
maintained on the sidewalk;
(b) The various shops and stores within the CBD District may not
display their merchandise on the sidewalk directly in front of
their stores or shops and may not make sales from such
locations during the charitable festival or other organized
activity, unless the governing body of the Borough of
Collingswood has given permission in advance of the
charitable festival and/or such organized activity for a shop or
store within the CBD District to display and sell its
merchandise. [Amended 11-3-2008 by Ord. No. 1454]
(c) No other peddler, solicitor, canvasser person and/or entity shall
be permitted to peddle, solicit, canvass, sell, or offer for sale
any merchandise during such charitable festival or other
organized activity.
(3) A "charitable festival" or "organized charitable activity" is defined
as one or more nonprofit organizations and/or nonprofit entities
conducting an organized endeavor wherein merchandise may be
sold, entertainment may be provided, celebration may be
conducted, etc., all for the purpose of raising monies for charitable
purposes.
C. Exception of certain groups. The following groups and individuals
acting on behalf of such groups are exempt from § 141-76.2B, above:
(1) Political group: a nonprofit association of persons sponsoring or
advocating certain ideas of government or maintaining certain
§ 141-76.2 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-76.2
131:282
political principles or beliefs in public policies of government or
advocating the candidacy of any individual for elective office;
(2) Religious group: a nonprofit association of persons associated for
the purpose of maintaining, advocating and/or espousing certain
religious principles and beliefs;
(3) Charitable group: a nonprofit association of persons that freely and
voluntarily administers to the needs of those persons unable to help
themselves and generally associated to serve the public good and
welfare without profit;
(4) Civic group: a nonprofit association of persons engaged in
promoting the common good and general welfare of the residents
of the municipality. Such definition shall include but not be limited
to school groups, benevolent societies and service clubs engaged in
nonprofit activities.
D. Displays of certain merchandise and ornamental plantings.
(1) The purpose of this subsection is to permit certain decorative
displays of merchandise and plantings in front of stores within the
Central Business District to assist the merchants to market their
merchandise and goods and to enhance the beauty of the Borough
of Collingswood.
(2) Ornamental plantings, merchandise, and goods except clothing,
shoes, personal apparel and garments which are offered for sale
within a store with sidewalk frontage may be displayed in front of
the exterior store front within the sidewalk right-of-way and on
privately owned property in the Central Business District. Clothing
shall only be displayed on a mannequin. There shall be no more
than one mannequin per store. The clothing shall be worn by the
mannequin, not merely draped upon it. [Amended 7-3-2006 by
Ord. No. 1406]
(3) Merchandise shall be tastefully and decoratively displayed and
located no more than 30 inches (measuring perpendicular from the
front edge) from the front wall of the building in which the store is
located. The merchandise or display shall not extend beyond four
linear feet. The display shall not obstruct the storefront entrance
and shall not extend above five feet from the sidewalk surface.
[Amended 7-3-2006 by Ord. No. 1406]
(4) A safe, continuous, unobstructed path on the public sidewalk with a
minimum of four feet must be maintained for pedestrian traffic to
pass in front of the property having an outdoor decorative display.
A minimum unobstructed distance of five feet must be maintained
from the curb as well.
(5) No other merchandise, wares, goods, foods, clothing, apparel, etc.,
may be displayed on the exterior of any store or building, either on
§ 141-76.2 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-76.2
131:283
private property or in the public right-of-way, except as provided
herein.
(6) The decorative display shall not contain front lighting, backlighting
and/or lighting within the display, except holiday lighting on
ornamental plantings. The decorative display shall not contain
electronic and/or mechanical moving devices or items even if
offered for sale within the stores. The decorative display shall not
contain any signage.
(7) The above referred to merchandise and goods permitted to be
displayed in front of the exterior store front may be displayed on
temporary removable supports such as racks, benches, shelves,
decorative carts, etc., and shall be removed at the end of each day
of business and shall have no wheels except for the decorative
carts. Packing cartons, cardboard boxes, card tables, folding
tables, or similar display supports are prohibited.
(8) No sales may occur outside the store. All sales must be conducted
within the store. The goods and merchandise within the decorative
display are not to be sold on the sidewalk.
(9) Plants, trees, cut flowers and any other vegetative matter displayed
for beautification and not for sale shall be exempt from this section.
[Amended 7-3-2006 by Ord. No. 1406]
(10)No display shall contain any sound or lighting of any kind and no
electrical power devices such as television, Internet/computer or
other similar devices shall be permitted. No merchandise,
instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use
in connection with a specified sexual activity, as defined in N.J.S.A.
2C:34-6, may be displayed. [Added 7-3-2006 by Ord. No. 140666]
(11) Businesses with any cafe tables and chairs or a sandwich board on
the exterior of their buildings shall not be permitted to maintain an
outdoor display. [Added 7-3-2006 by Ord. No. 1406]
(12) All displays of merchandise and goods under the provisions of this
chapter, and all window boxes or other exterior fixtures on a
commercial building, shall be kept neat and clean and free from
dead plants, trash, litter, and other debris. [Added 7-3-2006 by
Ord. No. 1406]
(13) In the event that the Zoning Officer determines that any decorative
display of merchandise and goods is in a state of disrepair, unkempt
or unclean or presents the potential of a pedestrian hazard or
otherwise fails to comply with the provisions of this section, the
business owner shall immediately correct the display at the request
of the Zoning Officer. The Zoning Officer shall also be authorized to
order the business owner to discontinue the display for failure to
66.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(10) has been renumbered as Subsection D(16) below.
§ 141-76.2 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-76.2
131:284
§ 141-77. Performance standards.
comply with this section or the request to correct the display.
If the Zoning Officer has determined that the business/building
is in violation of any other municipal ordinance or regulation or
state statute or regulation, the Zoning Officer shall give written
notice of the unsatisfactory condition of the business/building and/
or the violation of the terms of the ordinance, statute or regulation,
and the business will be required to correct this situation before
proceeding with any outdoor display. [Added 7-3-2006 by Ord.
No. 1406]
(14) The Zoning Officer shall be authorized to file a complaint in
Municipal Court against any business owner that establishes or
maintains an outdoor display in violation of the provisions of this
section. Any person being found in violation of this section shall be
subject to a fine in an amount not to exceed $1,000 for each
violation. [Added 7-3-2006 by Ord. No. 1406]
(15) A business with two violations of this chapter should forfeit the
right to establish or maintain outdoor displays. [Added 7-3-2006
by Ord. No. 1406]
(16) Any application for a variance from this subsection shall be
submitted to the Planning Board of the Borough of Collingswood.
The filing fee for such a variance shall be $50.
A. Electricity. Electronic equipment shall be shielded so there is no
interference with any radio or television reception beyond the
operator's property.
B. Air, water and environmental pollution. No use shall emit heat, odor,
vibrations, noise or any other pollutant into the ground, water or air
that exceeds the most stringent applicable state and federal regulation.
No permit shall be issued for any use where a state permit is required
until the state has ascertained and approved the level and quality of
emission, the type and quality of emission control and the level of
monitoring to be conducted.
C. Storage and waste disposal. No materials shall be deposited in such
manner that they can be transferred off the lot, directly or indirectly, by
natural forces such as precipitation, surface water, evaporation or wind.
All materials which might create a pollutant or be a safety and health
hazard shall be stored indoors and/or be enclosed in appropriate
containers to eliminate such pollutant or hazard. No flammable or
explosive substance shall be stored on a property except under
conditions approved by the Fire Department.
§ 141-76.2 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-78
131:285
§ 141-78. Permitted uses and principal uses.
No lot shall be utilized for more than one permitted principal use, other than
a residence with a home occupation. A building in a business district may be
utilized for more than one use upon obtaining approval for such additional
use or uses from the Planning Board as a conditional use. No more than
one principal building shall be permitted on one lot, except that apartment
or townhouse complexes and industrial/office complexes may be permitted
more than one building on a lot in accordance with an approved site plan
where all buildings are sited to comply with all yard definitions. Contiguous
retail stores in a highway business district and industrial tenants in a
highway industrial district shall be considered one principal building.
§ 141-79. Portable buildings, stationary vehicles and stands.
No building or structure of a portable nature, stationary vehicle or stand
of any description shall be permitted on any lot or parcel of land for the
purpose of displaying or selling food, merchandise or commodities of any
kind, excluding newspaper vending machines not exceeding 12 cubic feet.
§ 141-80. Private or parochial schools.
These uses shall be permitted only on lots a minimum of five acres in size,
plus an additional acre for each 100 pupils. They shall be located on major
streets. The curriculum shall be approved by the New Jersey Department of
Education under the standards which apply to public elementary and high
schools.
§ 141-81. Projections and encroachments.
The following regulations shall apply to projections and encroachments into
required open spaces:
§ 141-82. Public utilities.
All public services shall be connected to approved public utilities systems
where they exist. The distribution supply lines and service connections shall
A. Cornices, eaves, gutters or chimneys shall not project more than two
feet into required front, side or rear yards.
B. Ground floor entrance steps and terraces open to the sky may project
into the required front, side or rear yard a maximum of 30 inches in
accordance with the BOCA Code.
C. An open or lattice-enclosed fire escape or an outside stairway shall not
project more than four feet into the required rear yard, nor shall an
open balcony to a fire tower project more than four feet into the
required side or rear yard.
D. All outside stairs leading to other than the first floor shall be at the rear
of the building.
§ 141-78 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-82
131:286
be installed underground, except that lots which abut streets with existing
overhead electric or telephone lines may be supplied from those overhead
lines, but the service connections shall be installed underground. Should a
road widening or an extension of service occur as a result of development,
any replacement, relocation or extension of existing overhead lines shall be
underground.
§ 141-83. Sanitary sewer connections.
If a central sewage treatment and collection system is accessible, the
developer shall connect to the system.
§ 141-84. Satellite dish antennas.
Satellite dish antennas exceeding two feet in diameter shall be permitted
as accessory uses in all zones, provided that said use complies with the
following:
A. Only one such use per lot shall be permitted in all zones.
B. Location.
(1) Any dish antenna, its foundation pad and supportive structure must
be located in the rear yard, except as noted below.
(2) Any dish antenna and its foundation pad and supportive structure
must be set back a minimum of 10 feet from the rear property lines
and must be installed or erected on ground level.
(3) No dish antenna placed anywhere on any lot shall exceed a height
of 12 feet, and the surface area of any dish antenna may not exceed
a diameter of 10 feet.
C. Screening. For all ground-level installations, the dish antenna and
supporting structure must be screened or buffered in such a manner
that they cannot be visually seen from the public right-of-way abutting
the lot on which the dish antenna and supporting structure are situated
or visually seen from the ground level of any adjacent property. Such
screening and buffer must comply with all applicable ordinances and
regulations of the Borough of Collingswood.
D. Use. A dish antenna shall be used only for the reception of signals.
E. Site plan requirements.
(1) Minor site plan approval shall be required for all dish antenna
installations in all zones.
(2) The site plan shall identify the following:
(a) The location of the dish antenna.
(b) The engineering drawings of the dish antenna demonstrating
its methods of support and its foundations.
§ 141-82 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-84
131:287
§ 141-85. Sidewalks.
Sidewalks shall be installed in locations determined by the approving
authority to be in the interest of public safety, considering the probable
volume of pedestrian traffic, the adjoining street classification, school bus
stops and the general type of improvement intended. Where required,
sidewalks shall be at least four feet wide and four inches thick, except at
points of vehicular crossing where they shall be at least six inches thick, of
Class B concrete having a twenty-eight-day compressive strength of 4,000
pounds per square inch and shall be air entrained. Where sidewalks cross
curbs, curb ramps shall be provided as outlined in § 141-59, Curbs and
gutters. Preformed expansion joint material shall be placed on twenty-foot
intervals and where sidewalks abut curbing or a structure. If constructed of
brick or slate, sidewalks shall have a two-inch thick base of crushed stone,
two inches of Class B concrete as required above, and paver brick or paving
slate at leas one inch in thickness.
§ 141-86. Sight triangles.
Sight triangles shall be required at each quadrant of an intersection of
streets and streets and driveways. The area within sight triangles shall
be either dedicated as part of the street right-of-way or kept as part of
the lot and identified as a sight triangle easement. No grading, planting
or structure shall be erected or maintained more than 30 inches above
the center line grade of the intersecting street or driveway or lower than
eight feet above their center lines, excluding street name signs and official
traffic regulation signs. Where any intersection involves earth banks or
vegetation, including trees, the developer shall trim and grade to provide
the sight triangle. A sight triangle easement shall be expressed on the
plat as follows: "Sight triangle easement subject to grading, planting and
construction restrictions as provided for in the Collingswood Development
Regulations Ordinance." Portions of a lot set aside for the sight triangle may
be calculated in determining the lot area and minimum setbacks required by
the zoning provisions. In existing lots where no easement has been granted,
the areas described above shall be maintained free of visual obstruction.
(c) The method of installation.
(d) The materials to be used.
(e) The height of the dish antenna and related structures.
(f) The screening proposed.
F. Permits. The property owner must obtain a building permit in addition
to any required site plan approval prior to the installation and erection
of the dish antenna and supporting structure.
G. Satellite dish antennas, less than two feet in diameter, shall be
permitted in all zones, provided that only one such dish antenna per lot
shall be permitted.
§ 141-84 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-86
131:288
Citations may be prepared by the Zoning Officer for violations of this
provision.
§ 141-87. Soil erosion and sediment control.
All major site plans and major subdivisions shall incorporate soil erosion
and sediment control programs meeting the requirements of the Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Act.67
§ 141-88. Swimming pools.
Swimming pools shall conform to Chapter 269, Swimming Pools, Private,
and shall comply with all yard setback requirements.
§ 141-89. Utility facilities.
Public utility facilities shall be subject to the zoning requirements for the
district in which they are to be located, including land area, setback side
yards, structure height, and landscaping. The facilities shall not be open
to the public and shall be necessary to service the surrounding area. No
permanent storage of material or surplus equipment, except for functional
equipment within the subject building, shall be permitted in the building
or on the lot. If such a facility is placed within a residential district, the
architectural character shall be residential in nature and shall blend in
harmoniously with the surrounding area.
§ 141-90. Water supply.
Where water is accessible from a servicing utility, the developer shall
arrange for a connection to the system to serve each use.
§ 141-90.1. Wheelchair ramps. [Added 9-10-2018 by Ord. No. 1644]
Wheelchair ramps shall be permitted as an accessory structure in all
residential zoning districts, provided the following requirements of this
section are met.
A. Prior to the construction of a Wheelchair ramp, the owner of the
property shall obtain a wheelchair ramp permit from the Borough
Zoning Officer. The application for the wheelchair ramp permit shall
include the following:
(1) The location of the proposed wheelchair ramp;
(2) The name of the individual(s) residing at the property who require
the use of the wheelchair ramp;
(3) A letter from a licensed physician stating the reasons why the
wheelchair ramp is necessary to accommodate said resident(s) of
the property; and
67.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.
§ 141-86 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-90.1
131:289
§ 141-91. Yards.
No area providing front, side or rear yard space for one building shall be
considered as providing the yard provisions of another. A lot with frontage
on two or more streets, including corner lots, shall have building setback
from each street. The primary frontage shall accommodate the front yard
requirement and the secondary frontage shall accommodate the side yard
setback. In cases where both frontages can be considered primary, the front
yard setback requirement shall apply to both frontages.
(4) An acknowledgement by the applicant that the wheelchair ramp
shall be removed within 60 days of the date on which the
individual(s) requiring the wheelchair ramp no longer reside at the
property or the date on which the wheelchair ramp is no longer
required.
B. All wheelchair ramp permits shall be renewed by January 31 of each
year succeeding the year in which the wheelchair ramp application is
approved.
C. Wheelchair ramps shall be constructed in a manner that results in
minimal encroachment into the required setback of the property.
D. Wheelchair ramps shall not encroach into any recorded easement(s) or
into any public right(s)-of-way.
E. Wheelchair ramps shall be designed and constructed in accordance
with the applicable provisions and guidelines of the Americans with
Disabilities Act.
F. Any wheelchair ramp erected pursuant to this section shall be removed
within 60 days of the date on which the individual(s) requiring the
wheelchair ramp no longer reside at the property; or the date on which
said individual(s) no longer require the use of a wheelchair ramp.
G. The Borough Zoning Officer shall enforce this section in accordance
with the provisions and procedures set forth in § 141-11, Violations and
penalties; civil actions.
§ 141-90.1 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-91
131:290
ARTICLE IX
Signs
§ 141-92. Purpose.
The provisions of this article shall apply to the construction, erection,
alteration, use, type, number, location, size, design, and maintenance of
all signs. This article is intended to regulate and control signs and their
placement and construction throughout the Borough of Collingswood for
the following purposes:
A. To provide a pleasing overall environmental setting and good
community appearance, deemed vital to the continued economic
attractiveness of Collingswood by:
(1) Encouraging signs in areas of high sign concentration, such as
downtown, neighborhood retail areas, and highway corridors, so
that the placement, color, shape, brackets, support structures,
mountings, design and lighting promote good civic design that
supports the visual quality and positive collective impact and image
of such areas.
(2) Promoting signs that, in addition to the standards herein, are also
integrated with the overall design of their host building in a way
respectful of and complimentary to the historic and architectural
character of the building.
(3) Permitting signs that not only identify the "presence" of the
business or use on a thoroughfare, but also generate a positive
collective impact upon the streetscape of an area.
B. To create a more productive, enterprising, professional business
atmosphere.
C. To allow signs appropriate to the architectural and planned character
and development of each zoning district.
D. To ensure that permitted signs do not become a safety hazard or
nuisance.
E. To promote traffic safety.
F. To promote the design of signs in pedestrian corridors that focus upon
pedestrian viewers and not automobile operators.
G. To prevent business and advertising signs from conflicting with public
safety signs.
H. To prevent the overcrowding of land through multiple proliferation of
signs on a single parcel of land.
I. To facilitate fire and police protection by proper sign identification.
§ 141-92 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-92
131:291
§ 141-93. Sign permits.
J. To protect and enhance the value of properties by eliminating visual
chaos and pollution.
K. To promote the public safety and welfare of Collingswood.
A. Sign permits required. It shall be unlawful to erect, alter, maintain, use,
reletter, move or otherwise have a sign in the Borough of Collingswood
without first obtaining a sign permit. It shall be also unlawful to mount,
hang, attach, erect, alter, maintain, use, reletter, move or otherwise
have a sign in the Borough of Collingswood which protrudes from, is
perpendicular to or is otherwise mounted to the outside wall or
doorway of any structure without prior approval from the appropriate
Borough official on the method of installation. Further, any sign
described in the immediately preceding sentence shall be subject to
regular inspection by the appropriate Borough officials. However, a
permit shall not be required of any sign expressly exempted from that
requirement by this article. A sign must also meet all requirements
imposed by the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code68 and other
applicable statutes, regulations and ordinances. [Amended 4-5-2004
by Ord. No. 1330]
B. Exempted signs.
(1) The following signs shall be permitted in all districts and exempted
from a required sign permit:
(a) Official flags and signs;
(b) Holiday and seasonal decorations, displays, and lights
containing no advertising matter for a period not to exceed 45
days;
(c) Residential occupant name and address signs identifying a
house, apartment, or mailbox not exceeding one square foot;
(d) Warning, no trespassing signs, private parking, and traffic
directional signs on private property not exceeding two square
feet;
(e) Traffic circulation and directional signs on private property not
exceeding two square feet;
(f) Temporary business identification signs which meet the
conditions of § 141-101D(1);
(g) Door signs which meet the conditions of § 141-101D(2);
(h) Temporary advertising signs and permanent interior
advertising signs which meet the conditions of § 141-101D(3);
68.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 141-92 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-93
131:292
(i) Community event announcements, which meet the conditions
of § 141-101D(4);
(j) Real estate signs which meet the conditions of § 141-101D(5);
(k) Construction signs, which meet the conditions of
§ 141-101D(6);
(l) Political signs which meet the conditions of § 141-101D(7); and
(m) Temporary signs for garage and yard sales conforming to
Chapter 173, Garage Sales, of the Borough Code.
(2) Notwithstanding the above, historical identification signs must
receive a certificate of appropriateness from the Historic
Preservation Commission as provided in § 141-104B(4).
C. Prohibited signs. The following types of signs shall be prohibited:
(1) Signs, lights and similar devices which imitate official traffic,
warning or governmental signs or may be generally confused or
construed as such.
(2) Signs located in any manner or place which constitute a hazard to
pedestrian and vehicular traffic, block visibility, or obscure any
traffic sign, signal, or device.
(3) Signs or lights reflecting or emitting a glaring light which could
impair driver vision, reflected signs, and light-projected signs.
(4) Signs placed, reflected, or cast on any curb, sidewalk, utility pole or
structure, chimney, post, tree, rock, natural feature, fence, gate,
abutment, retaining wall, embankment, hydrant, bridge, another
sign, or other surface located on, over, or across any public right-ofway
or property.
(5) Signs that obstruct openings intended as a means of entrance or
exit; signs that obstruct light or air from any room or building; or
signs located so as to provide less than seven feet clearance over a
pedestrian walkway or head of an entry door, whichever is greater;
(6) Painted wall signs and murals, except as otherwise provided in
§ 141-101D(11).
(7) Signs placed above a structure's roofline or on an angled section of
a roof, except projecting and icon signs.
(8) Changeable copy signs, except as otherwise permitted in
§ 141-101C(4) through (6).
(9) Portable or movable signs, except as otherwise permitted in
§ 141-101D(L).
§ 141-93 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-93
131:293
(10) Moving signs, sequentially placed signs, or devices designed to
attract attention, all or any part of which move by flickering,
rotating, spinning, or moving in some other manner, and are set in
motion by movement of the atmosphere or by mechanical,
electrical, or any other means.
(11) Floodlights, spotlights, and directed lights as part of a business
ornamentation or sign illumination system that are not hooded or
shielded so that the light source is not visible from any public rightof-
way or adjacent property. [Amended 12-27-2018 by Ord. No.
1653]
(12) Unless otherwise exempted by § 141-93B(1)(b), exposed neon and
other exposed charged gas tube lighting fixtures, as well as other
types of lighting fixtures used to simulate them, which are used for
business identification signage, accessory signage, or
ornamentation, may be used by businesses in the historic district
with a certificate of appropriateness by the Historic Preservation
Commission. [Amended 12-27-2018 by Ord. No. 1653]
(13) Signs which contain or utilize a beacon, spot, search, or
stroboscopic light or reflector which is visible from any public
right-of-way or adjacent property, except as may be authorized by
public agents.
(14) Consecutively strung lights on nonresidential properties that form
any individual letters or numbers or blink, flash, or track, except
existing time and/or temperature signs.
(15) Internally illuminated signs, i.e., light box or backlit signs, or
illuminated signs which contain or utilize nonopaque material in
any zoning district, except as permitted in the Highway Business
District and Highway Industrial District, unless approved with a
certificate of appropriateness by the Historic Preservation
Commission as part of a historic restoration or rehabilitation.
Opaque channel-lettered signs with interior lights that shine back
onto a wall or signboard are, however, permitted.
(16) Billboards and other off-premises signs, regardless of whether they
are a principal or accessory use for a tax lot, except for community
bulletin boards on public property and unless otherwise permitted
under § 141-93F.
(17) An automobile, trailer (attached or unattached), or any vehicle of
any nature bearing signs or advertisements, parked or left
stationary for more than 24 hours at any location, or any such
automobile, trailer, or vehicle stored on an occupied lot that is not
ordinarily and customarily used to transport persons or property of
the advertised business on said lot or its employees.
(18) Signs which advertise or promote a specific individual, product or
brand name or off-premises business, service, or corporation,
§ 141-93 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-93
131:294
except for temporary advertising signs and permanent interior
advertising signs.
D. Sign permit application process.
(1) The application for a sign permit shall be on such forms as may be
required by the Borough, include a site plan indicating the location
of the proposed signage, and shall be fully completed. One sign
permit application shall include all existing and proposed
nonexempted signs on a tax lot for which the application has been
made. Permits for banners and temporary freestanding signs shall
be administered under § 141-93F. If the sign permit application is
part of a site plan, subdivision, or variance application, the
following procedures shall be incorporated into the standard
review procedures in this article for those other types of
development review applications.
(2) A completed sign permit application shall include a scale drawing
of the proposed sign, logo and lettering, with specifications for
lettering typeface and colors, position on the building or structure
and methods of attachment, calculations of sign sizes, sign
construction materials, lighting and coloring. A complete
application for an illuminated sign must include information
required in § 141-101A(4). A complete application shall include 10
full-colored copies of the application form, drawings or plans, and
any attachments thereto, as well as the signature of the applicant
and the owner of the tax lot for which the application is made. The
Zoning Officer shall determine whether an application is complete
within 30 days of its submission. An applicant may install
temporary business identification signs in accordance with
§ 141-101D(1) and other exempted signs in accordance with
§ 141-93B without a sign permit.
(3) After the application is deemed to be complete, the Zoning Officer
shall refer the application to the Planning Board for its review and
recommendation as to whether the permit should or should not be
issued and in what respect the proposed sign should be altered to
conform to this article. After the Planning Board renders a decision
to approve a sign, it shall notify the Zoning Officer that a permit
may be issued. Sign approval for those signs as described in
§§ 141-101C(2)(a)[7] thru 141-101C(2)(a)[11] shall be made solely
by the Zoning Officer. [Amended 3-6-2006 by Ord. No. 1387]
(4) In the event that a sign varies in any way from the sign design
standards or guidelines in this article, the Zoning Officer shall refer
the application to the Planning Board for a sign design waiver. In
approving a sign design waiver, the Planning Board shall consider
the zone in which the sign is to be located, the surrounding
streetscape, the architectural and historic characteristics of the
host building and adjacent buildings, visibility, other existing or
proposed signs, the proposed sign's size, appearance, materials,
§ 141-93 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-93
131:295
placement, color, lettering, and lighting and the purposes of this
article in makings its decision. [Amended 3-6-2006 by Ord. No.
1387]69
E. Sign permit application fees. There shall be no sign permit fee required
for any exempted signs. The cost of any construction or other permit
required for any approved sign shall be in addition to any required fee
for the sign application and shall be paid before any sign is erected or
installed.
F. Banner permits.
(1) Banner permits shall be required for the erection of any banner
within Collingswood. The application for a banner permit shall be
on such forms as may be required by the Borough and shall be fully
completed.
(2) The application shall be signed by the applicant and by the owner
of the tax lot for which the application is made.
(3) The application shall include a scale drawing of the proposed
banner, logo and lettering, with specifications for lettering typeface
and colors, position on the building or structure and methods of
attachment, calculations of banner size, banner construction
materials, and coloring.
(4) The application shall include 10 full-colored copies of the
application form, drawing or plan, and any attachments thereto.
The wording on the banner shall exactly match the wording shown
on the banner application and permit. Applications must be
received at least 21 days prior to the proposed erection of the
banner.
(5) A banner must meet all requirements imposed by the New Jersey
Uniform Construction Code70 and other applicable statutes,
regulations and ordinances. Banners' installations shall be
reviewed and approved by the Construction Code Officer prior to
their erection.
(6) After the application is deemed to be complete by the Zoning
Officer and approved by the Construction Code Officer, the Zoning
Officer shall refer it to the Sign Review Committee in accordance
with § 141-93D(4). The Sign Review Committee may approve the
banner permit for a maximum period of 15 days. The applicant shall
then contact the Department of Public Works to arrange erecting
the banner across the street.
69.Editor's Note: This ordinance also deleted former Subsection D(4), pertaining to the Sign
Review Committee report and recommendation, and renumbered former Subsection D(5)
as D(4).
70.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 141-93 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-94
131:296
§ 141-94. Nonconforming signs.
§ 141-95. Existing and nonconforming signs.
A. It is the intent and purpose of this chapter that, as soon as legally
possible, all existing signs not conforming to the provisions of this
chapter be eliminated or brought into conformity with the provisions of
this chapter.
B. Legal nonconforming signs. Any sign located within the Borough which
does not conform to the provisions of this chapter but which did
conform to the applicable ordinance on signs at the time that it was
erected shall be a legally nonconforming sign. It may continue in use
until it has lost its legal nonconforming status under this chapter.
C. Status of legal nonconforming signs.
(1) A legal nonconforming sign shall immediately lose its legal
nonconforming status on account of any of the following events:
(a) The sign is altered in any way in structure or size.
(b) The sign is removed.
(c) The sign is damaged in such a way that the cost of restoration
would exceed one-half of the replacement cost as of the date of
the damage.
(d) The sign is abandoned.
(2) Periodic maintenance as required by this chapter shall not be
considered as alterations resulting in the loss of legal
nonconforming status.
A. No lawfully existing permanent sign shall be enlarged, redesigned, or
altered in any way, except to conform to this chapter and to provide
ordinary sign maintenance. Alteration of the lettering or message on an
approved changeable copy sign is exempted from this requirement. Any
sign replacing an existing sign shall conform to the provisions of this
chapter.
B. No nonconforming sign shall be replaced in the event of its removal or
destruction. If a nonconforming sign is deemed damaged badly enough
to reduce its insurable value by 50%, it must not be reconstructed or
repaired except in conformance with this chapter.
C. All nonconforming signs shall be removed in the event of a change in
use, new certificate of occupancy, change of business license, or change
of tenancy on the premises. All nonconforming signs shall be removed if
a building permit is issued for any construction on said property, signrelated
or not.
§ 141-94 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-95
131:297
§ 141-96. Maintenance.
§ 141-97. Abandonment.
Abandoned signs and their supporting structures shall be removed within
30 days. The Borough may thereafter take such actions as are permitted
pursuant to § 141-94C and E.
§ 141-98. Enforcement.
D. No new signs may be approved for any property while a nonconforming
sign remains in use on that property. Approval and erection of any new
signs for a property shall be contingent upon simultaneous removal of
all nonconforming signs for said property.
A. The property owner shall be responsible for maintaining all signs
erected on a tax lot. This maintenance shall include repainting,
repairing and cleaning, as necessary. No sign shall be permitted to
exhibit:
(1) Excessive chipped or peeling paint or lettering;
(2) Damaged or broken lettering or signboard;
(3) Illegible material due to fading, obliteration, or other condition; or
(4) Dirty, torn, broken, or otherwise damaged awning, canopy,
projecting sign, or other sign support structure.
B. If the Zoning Officer determines that any sign is in a state of disrepair
so as to no longer be reasonably capable of presenting its message, or
abandoned or a danger to the public health or public safety, he shall
give written notice of the condition of the sign to the owner of the sign
and to the owner of record of the tax lot.
C. The property owner shall thereafter have 10 days to repair or remove
said sign.
D. If said sign is not satisfactorily repaired or removed within the ten-day
period, the Zoning Officer may thereafter take such actions as are
permitted pursuant to § 141-94E.
A. The Borough shall enforce this chapter.
B. Upon the discovery of a violation of this chapter, the Zoning Officer
shall give written notice to the owner of the sign and to the owner of
record of the tax lot that the sign is in violation of this chapter and to
bring the sign into conformity with this chapter or to remove it or to
apply for a sign permit to allow the sign as existing within 10 days of the
notice.
C. In the event that any sign continues to be in existence after notice, the
Borough may file a Municipal Court complaint against the owner of the
§ 141-95 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-98
131:298
§ 141-99. Penalties.
Failure to satisfactorily repair or remove a sign cited by the Zoning Officer
shall constitute a violation of this chapter as per § 141-11.
§ 141-100. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to the regulation and control of signs
within Collingswood:
ABANDONED SIGN — A sign no longer used for its original intent or a sign
on a vacant, unoccupied, or abandoned property.
BANNER — A sign stretching across a public right-of-way which temporarily
promotes an activity, special event, or otherwise promotes a special event
or the public good.
DECORATIVE FLAG — A flag displayed for decorative, and not official or
patriotic, purposes.
EXEMPTED SIGN — A permitted sign that does not require a sign permit.
FLAG — A display of cloth or fabric with symbols, icons, and/or designs
attached to a pole.
FREESTANDING SIGN — A sign supported by a sign structure placed in
the ground and which is entirely independent of any other structure for
support.
HEIGHT OF SIGN — The vertical distance measured from the surrounding
grade to the highest point of the sign.
HISTORICAL IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A sign or marker identifying a
historic site or structure listed on Collingswood, New Jersey, or National
Historic Registers, or otherwise approved by the Historic Preservation
Commission for public educational purposes.
ICON SIGN — A sculptural or three-dimensional image or symbol that is
representative of the business being advertised, e.g., eyeglasses for an
optometrist; scissors, needle and thread for a tailor; mortar and pestle for a
pharmacy; barber pole for a barbershop.
ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign that is either externally or internally lighted.
INSTITUTIONAL USE — A formally organized, nonprofit, philanthropic,
charitable, civic, or religions organization.
LETTERING AREA — The area within the smallest quadrilateral that be
drawn to contain the letters, numbers, and characters of the sign message,
exclusive of decorative borders and other design elements.
MULTIPLE OCCUPANT TENANT (MOT) SIGN — A sign listing the names
and/or uses or locations of more than one business, activity, or professional
office conducted within a building, group of buildings, or shopping center.
sign and the owner of record of the tax lot and take such other action
as may be permitted by law.
§ 141-98 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-100
131:299
PROJECTING SIGN — A uniquely designed sign, such as a double-sided sign
or icon sign, which hangs and/or protrudes perpendicular to the face of the
building via architecturally designed ornamental mountings, such as but not
limited to scrolled ornamental iron, steel brass braces, etc. Also known as a
"hanging sign."
SIGN — Any identification, description, illustration or device, illuminated
or nonilluminated, which is visible from any public place and which directs
attention to a product, service, place, activity, person, institution, business
or solicitation. This definition does not include nonlighted displays in the
windows of commercial establishments.[Amended 11-3-2014 by Ord. No.
1557]
SIGN AREA — The area within the smallest quadrilateral that be drawn to
contain the letters, numbers, and characters of the sign message, inclusive
of decorative borders and other design elements.
SIGN PLAN — A professionally drawn scale plan showing the full facade of
the building, its architectural features, if any, and the location of the sign on
the face of the building, color, texture, lettering style, mounting techniques,
etc.
TEMPORARY ADVERTISING SIGN — An advertising sign or commercial
special event banner temporarily erected for a limited time for promotional
purposes for an on-premises business establishment.
TEMPORARY BUSINESS IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A temporary sign
provided for new businesses pending approval of a formal sign application.
WALL SIGN — A sign displayed on a wall of a structure.
§ 141-101. Design standards.
A. General sign design standards.
(1) Sign content. Unless otherwise indicated in this chapter, a sign may
include only the following information:
(a) The principal name of the business, proprietor, owner, or
resident;
(b) A brief description of the principal goods, services, products,
or uses offered in trade, which description shall not exceed
three words;
(c) A logo or trademark by which the on-premises business,
proprietor, or owner is identified;
(d) The premises' street number;
(e) The premises' street name; and
(f) Any other notice or information required to be provided by law
or regulation.
§ 141-100 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-101
131:300
(2) Location of signs.
(a) A sign must be on the tax lot, building, or storefront with which
it is identified. No signs shall be allowed for or on accessory
buildings or structures.
(b) No sign shall be erected in a public right-of-way or between the
street curb and a sidewalk, other than an easel sign, projecting
sign, or awning sign, as permitted in this chapter .
(c) Freestanding signs shall be set back at least 10 feet from the
public right-of-way or the front curb line, whichever is greater,
except in the Professional Office District and all residential
districts, where they shall be set back at least five feet from the
public right-of-way or the front curb line, whichever is greater.
All freestanding signs shall be set back at least 10 feet from the
property's side yard line.
(d) No freestanding sign taller than four feet shall be erected in
any sight triangle at a street intersection or ingress or egress
points to a lot.
(e) No wall sign shall extend over any window or door, nor shall
any wall sign be suspended or project over any part of a
building or structure unless it meets the conditions of
§ 141-101D(10).
(f) A sign must be positioned on a building facade's architectural
sign band, if provided.
(3) Computation of sign area. The sign area of any sign shall be
computed by determining the area of the smallest quadrilateral
into which the sign can be fit, inclusive of decorative borders and
other design elements, as permitted by this chapter. In the case of
double-sided signs, the sign area shall be measured by using the
area of only one side of the sign. The sign structure shall not be
included as a portion of the sign area, provided that no identifying
or advertising message is displayed on the sign structure.
(4) Lighting.
(a) Illumination of a sign shall be arranged so that no substantial
light or glare is directed or reflected onto adjacent streets or
properties. The installation and assembly shall meet all
applicable building and electrical codes.
(b) An application for an illuminated sign must include a lighting
fixture catalogue cut or manufacturer's product description
sheet with isolux or lumens specifications and mounting
information. It shall indicate the lighting intensity (lumens)
that would be generated by any lighting devices shining onto
the sign and the rest of the property and neighboring
§ 141-101 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-101
131:301
properties and the lumens that would be projecting from any
illuminated signs as part of the sign plan. (This information is
part of the manufacturer's data sheet.) Externally illuminated
signs consisting of three or fewer one-hundred-watt
incandescent light bulbs, or compact fluorescent lights of
comparable wattage, shall be exempt from submitting a
lumens plan. In no instance shall the lighting intensity of any
sign, whether resulting from internal illumination or external
illumination, exceed 20 footcandles when measured with a
standard light meter perpendicular to the face of the sign from
a distance measured one foot from the face of the sign.
(5) Design guidelines. Each sign shall be reviewed under the general
sign design guidelines in § 141-101B in terms of type, size,
appearance, materials, placement, color, lettering, and lighting.
Specific sign design guidelines shall be reviewed under the zoning
district design standards in § 141-101C and specific design
standards in § 141-101D. Signs shall conform to the distinctive
character of the building on which they is located and to their
surrounding neighborhood and streetscape. No sign shall be
permitted if it reduces or impairs pedestrian or vehicular traffic
safety or the visual or architectural integrity of its building or
streetscape in which it is situated.
(6) Banners and temporary freestanding signs.
(a) Banners and temporary freestanding signs not to exceed 32
square feet may be erected in any zoning district by an
institutional or public use which has its base of operations or
principal office in the Collingswood. Banners and temporary
freestanding signs must meet the following conditions:
[1] An application must be submitted and approved in
accordance with § 141-93F. Only one banner or temporary
freestanding sign shall be permitted per applicant per
permit period.
[2] The wording on the banner or freestanding sign must be
related to promotion of a Collingswood activity that will
take place in Collingswood.
[3] The wording shall include the name of the institution or
public use sponsoring the banner, which shall be the
permit applicant of record. It shall not indicate any offpremises
commercial endorsement or sponsorship. It shall
not contain any lights, flags, pennants, streamers, or other
fluttering or spinning attachments, lighting or soundgeneration
equipment.
[4] The banner or freestanding sign shall be displayed on the
premises of the applicant's primary building for a period
not to exceed 15 days. It shall be installed by the applicant,
§ 141-101 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-101
131:302
which shall also remove the banner immediately upon the
expiration of the permit.
(b) Banners not to exceed 100 square feet may be erected in the
Central Business District and Professional Office District zones
across a public right-of-way for an institutional or public use
which has its base of operations or principal office in the
Collingswood. Such banners must meet the following
conditions:
[1] An application for a banner permit must be submitted and
approved in accordance with § 141-93F. Only one banner
shall be permitted per applicant per permit period.
[2] The wording on the banner must be related to promotion
of a Collingswood activity that will take place in
Collingswood.
[3] The wording shall include the name of the institution or
public use sponsoring the banner, which shall be the
banner permit applicant of record. It shall not indicate any
off-premises commercial endorsement or sponsorship. It
shall not contain any lights, flags, pennants, streamers, or
other fluttering or spinning attachments, lighting or
sound-generation equipment.
[4] The banner shall be installed by the Collingswood
Department of Public Works at least 14 feet above the
center of the right-of-way for a period not to exceed 15
days. The Department shall also remove the banner
immediately upon the expiration of the permit. The
Borough may charge a nominal fee for this service.
(c) Banners not to exceed 24 square feet may be erected on a
primary structure in a nonresidential zone for "grand opening"
and "going-out-of-business" special events. Such banners must
meet the following conditions:
[1] An application for a banner permit must be submitted and
approved in accordance with § 141-93F. Only one banner
shall be permitted per business per permit period.
[2] The wording on the banner may contain the words "grand
opening," "now open," "going out of business" or
comparable announcement, the name of the business,
proprietor, or owner, and/or a short description of the
business. The banner shall be displayed on the premises of
the applicant's primary building for a period not to exceed
30 days.
[3] The banner shall not indicate any off-premises commercial
endorsement or sponsorship. It shall not contain any
§ 141-101 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-101
131:303
lights, flags, pennants, streamers, or other fluttering or
spinning attachments, lighting or sound-generation
equipment.
[4] It shall be mounted no higher than 15 feet from grade or
the bottom of the second floor windowsill, whichever is
lower, and shall not cover any window or door.
[5] The banner shall be installed by the applicant, which shall
also remove the banner immediately upon the expiration of
banner permit.
B. General sign design guidelines.
(1) General guidelines. The sign's design should complement the
design of its host building or site and the overall character of the
business district. Signs should be designed and painted by
professional sign makers or experienced artists. Each sign should
be designed in accordance with the following standards.
(2) Appearance. Signs should be compatible with their surroundings.
In Collingswood's Central Business District zones, signs should
match traditional early and mid twentieth century sign patterns,
i.e., flush-mounted wall signs; window signs; awning signs;
projecting and icon signs; and murals. Small freestanding signs,
which are usually displayed on the lawn in front of a former
dwelling, are more appropriate in the Professional Office District
zones. All of these signs also would be compatible with the highway
streetscape in the Highway Business District and Highway
Industrial District zones, as well as pylons signs and illuminated
signs. Signs for businesses in a common building, shopping, office,
or industrial center should be compatible with each other too.
Signs that relate to and complement their surroundings will
capture the attention of a pedestrian or motorist better than a
poorly designed one, which may give a negative impression of the
business and the community as a whole. Signs attached to the same
building should be the same shape, color and height, regardless of
individual business ownership or tenancy in the building
(3) Materials. High-quality materials will ensure that a sign will look
attractive, reduce maintenance costs, and last longer. Sign
materials and finished textures should complement the building
materials. Permanent signs should be made of wood, high-density
foam simulating wood, medium-density overlay and finished
plywood, brass, copper, or bronze. Generally, signs made of inferior
grade unfinished wood and plastic are inappropriate and
discouraged. Cotton, vinyl, and mixed fabrics should be used for
awning signs. Plastic and lexan materials should be used for
internally illuminated signs.
(4) Placement. Many buildings have spaces that are specifically
designed for signs, such as the area below the second floor
§ 141-101 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-101
131:304
windowsill or on a building or sign fascia. Signs should be
integrated with the building without obscuring important
architectural details or storefront windows. Signs should be
mounted so as to minimize damage to historic materials. Sign
supports should be finished with architectural details to
complement the sign, such as ornamental iron or brass supports
and routed wood posts and edges to provide detail and relief.
Window and door signs should avoid cluttering and blocking views.
This will help increase customer interest and business visibility,
viability, and safety.
(5) Lettering. Lettering and character typefaces should match the
scale of the building and size of the sign. Signs should be legible
from a typical viewing position and travel speeds. For example,
lettering in the Central Business District zone should be visible to
pedestrians and slower moving traffic. Signs along highway
corridors may have lettering that is legible from quicker moving
traffic. Inappropriate typefaces have characters that are difficult to
read and incompatibly styled for their host building, site, or
district. While cursive style typefaces may be appropriate for
pedestrian-oriented signs, they would be difficult to read in an
automobile-oriented business zone. Hard-to-read, faddish, and
intricate typefaces should be avoided.
(6) Color. Colors influence a sign's legibility, character, and general
appearance. The colors should be compatible with the style and
color scheme of the building and its neighbors. Color schemes
should be kept simple, limited to two or three colors, and based on
a host building's painted exterior detailing, such as window trim
and cornices. Earth tones, primary colors, and pastels are
appropriate and can be designed with subtle combinations and
variations. Fluorescent, luminescent, and iridescent colors and
tones should only be used for traffic safety signs. Signs with a
strong color contrast are more legible. A sign with a dark
background will make lighter lettering more visible. Because
storefront windows usually appear dark, window signs should be
done in light colored paint or gold leaf.
(7) Lighting. Collingswood encourages the use of decorative light
fixtures, such as gooseneck, hooded, historic reproduction, and
alcove fixtures, complimentary to the design of building, sign, or
site. Direct external illumination should be used in all districts.
Internally illuminated signs, however, are appropriate in the
Highway Business District and Highway Industrial District zones.
Neon lights should be used only in the Central Business District
zones on buildings where it was used as a primary signage element
before 1960 or on modern buildings with compatible architectural
styling, as determined by the Historic Preservation Commission.
Signs should be evenly lit with no isolated bright or dark spots. No
§ 141-101 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-101
131:305
substantial light or glare may be directed or reflected onto adjacent
streets or properties.
C. Zoning district design standards.
(1) Historic districts. In addition to conforming to the other regulations
contained in this chapter, historic identification signs and internally
illuminated signs, except as permitted in the Highway Business
District and Highway Industrial District, are subject to the review
by the Historic Preservation Commission in accordance with Article
X of this chapter .
(2) Central Business District (CBD).
(a) A business in the Central Business District zoning district may
erect a total of two nonexempt signs, one of which may be a
sign painted on a first floor window not to exceed: in area, 20%
of the glass area; and in letter height, six inches. The second
sign may be one of the following:
[1] A wall sign not to exceed: in total sign area, 0.75 square
feet for each linear foot of building frontage or 24 square
feet, whichever is less; in lettering area, 0.5 square feet for
each linear foot of building frontage; in height, 15 feet or
the bottom of the second floor windowsill, whichever is
lower; and in lettering height, 12 inches. Such signs may
be made of dimensional opaque elements not to extend
more than three inches from the wall surface and may be
lighted from behind;
[2] A multiple occupant/tenant sign, in accordance with
§ 141-101D(8);
[3] An awning sign, which meets the conditions of
§ 141-101D(9);
[4] A projecting or icon sign, which meets the conditions of
§ 141-101D(10);
[5] A mural sign, which meets the conditions of
§ 141-101D(11);
[6] A decorative flag, which meets the conditions of
§ 141-101D(12).71 [Amended 3-6-2006 by Ord. No.
1387]
[7] A sandwich board sign which meets the conditions of
§ 141-101D(13). [Added 3-6-2006 by Ord. No. 1387]
71.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(2)(a)[6], pertaining to easel signs, was repealed
7-5-2005 by Ord. No. 1380.
§ 141-101 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-101
131:306
[8] A temporary banner sign that meets the conditions of
§ 141-101D(14). [Added 3-6-2006 by Ord. No. 1387]
[9] A freestanding pole sign that meets the conditions of
§ 141-101D(15). [Added 3-6-2006 by Ord. No. 1387]
[10] A tabletop sign that meets the conditions of
§ 141-101D(16). [Added 3-6-2006 by Ord. No. 1387]
[11] A temporary perpendicular attachment sign that meets the
conditions of § 141-101D(17). [Added 3-6-2006 by Ord.
No. 1387]
(b) Where a property fronts on more than one street, the total
number of nonexempted signs permitted shall be three. No
more than two nonexempt signs shall be erected on any
building frontage. Where a property has an entrance from a
rear parking area, one additional nonexempted sign to front
that parking area is permitted.
(3) Professional Office District (POD). A business in the Professional
Office District zoning district may erect a total of one of the
following nonexempt signs:
(a) A sign painted on a first floor window not to exceed: in area,
20% of the glass area; and in letter height, six inches;
(b) A wall sign not to exceed: in total area, 0.75 square feet for
each linear foot of building frontage or 24 square feet,
whichever is less; in lettering area, 0.5 square feet for each
linear foot of building frontage; in height, 15 feet or the bottom
of the second floor windowsill, whichever is lower; in lettering
height, 12 inches; and in projection from wall surface, one
inch.
(c) A freestanding sign not to exceed: in total area, 12 square feet;
in height, five feet; and in lettering height, six inches;
(d) A multiple occupant/tenant sign, in accordance with
§ 141-101D(8);
(e) An awning sign, which meets the conditions of § 141-101D(9);
or
(f) A projecting or icon sign, which meets the conditions of
§ 141-101D(10).
(4) Highway Business District (HBD) and Highway Industrial District
(HID).
(a) A business in the Highway Business District or Highway
Industrial District zoning district may erect a total of two of the
following nonexempt signs:
§ 141-101 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-101
131:307
[1] A sign painted on a first floor window not to exceed: in
area, 20% of the glass area; and in letter height, six inches;
[2] A wall sign not to exceed: in total sign area, 40 square feet
or 15% of the wall surface of the primary street frontage;
in height, 15 feet or the bottom of the second floor
windowsill, whichever is lower; and in lettering height, 12
inches. Such signs may be made of dimensional opaque
elements not to extend more than three inches from the
wall surface and may be lighted from behind;
[3] A freestanding sign not to exceed: in total area, 24 square
feet; in height, five feet; and in lettering height 12 inches;
[4] A freestanding sign not to exceed: in total area, 20 square
feet; in height, 12 feet with a minimum ground clearance
of seven feet; and in lettering height, 12 inches;
[5] A multiple occupant/tenant sign, in accordance with
§ 141-101D(8);
[6] An awning sign, which meets the conditions of
§ 141-101D(9);
[7] A projecting or icon sign, which meets the conditions of
§ 141-101D(10); or
[8] A mural sign, which meets the conditions of
§ 141-101D(11).
(b) Where a property fronts on more than one street, the total
number of nonexempted signs permitted shall be three. No
more than two nonexempt signs shall be erected on any
building frontage. Where a property has an entrance from a
rear parking area, one additional nonexempted sign to front
that parking area is permitted.
(c) Signs in these zoning districts may be internally illuminated.
(5) Residential Zoning Districts (SF-D1, SF-D2, SF-D3 and MFD).
(a) Any business, except a home personal office or home
professional office, in a residential zoning district may erect a
total of one of the following nonexempt signs:
[1] A wall sign not to exceed: in total area, two square feet; in
height, six feet; in lettering height, four inches; and in
projection from wall surface, one inch;
[2] A freestanding sign not to exceed: in total area, 10 square
feet; in height, five feet; and in lettering height, six inches;
[3] A multiple occupant/tenant sign, in accordance with
§ 141-101D(8).
§ 141-101 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-101
131:308
(b) A home professional office may erect a total of one of the
following nonexempt signs:
[1] A wall sign not to exceed: in total area, two square feet; in
height, six feet; in lettering height, four inches; and in
projection from wall surface, one inch.
(6) Institutional and public use signs.
(a) An institutional or public use in any Collingswood zoning
district may erect a total of two of the following nonexempt
signs:
[1] A wall sign not to exceed: in total area, 0.75 square feet for
each linear foot of building frontage or 24 square feet,
whichever is less; in lettering area, 0.5 square feet for
each linear foot of building frontage; in height, 15 feet or
the bottom of the second floor windowsill, whichever is
lower; in lettering height, 12 inches; and in projection
from wall surface, one inch.
[2] A freestanding sign not to exceed: in total area, 24 square
feet; in height, five feet; and in lettering height, 12 inches;
[3] A manual changeable copy sign not exceeding 16 square
feet.
(b) Where a property fronts on more than one street, the total
number of nonexempted signs permitted shall be three. No
more than two nonexempt signs shall be erected on any
building frontage. Where a property has an entrance from a
rear parking area, one additional nonexempted sign to front
that parking area is permitted.
(7) Restaurants, delis, and prepared food sales signs. In addition to
those permitted nonexempt signs by zoning district in this section,
restaurants, delis, and businesses selling prepared food items in
any Collingswood zoning district shall be permitted to display one
of the following changeable copy signs. Such signs shall not be
counted in the total number of permitted signs or sign area.
(a) A display case mounted on the exterior of the building wall,
and shall not exceed three square feet.
(b) A display case or board on the interior set back at least one
inch from the glass, and shall not exceed three square feet.72
D. Specific sign design standards.
72.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(7)(a), pertaining to easel signs, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed 7-5-2005 by Ord. No. 1380.
§ 141-101 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-101
131:309
(1) Temporary business identification signs. A temporary business
identification sign shall meet the following conditions:
(a) The Zoning Officer may permit a new business to display one
such sign per business, pending the necessary approvals for
the business's permanent signage.
(b) Such sign shall conform to the general design guidelines in
§ 141-101B and zoning district design standards in § 141-101C.
(c) The temporary business identification sign shall be placed in
the same location as the permanent sign would.
(d) The temporary business identification sign must be removed
upon installation of approved permanent signage or business
expiration or 90 days, whichever is sooner.
(2) Door signs. A door sign, which may include the premises' days and
hours of operation and contact numbers by which the business,
proprietor or owner may be contacted, shall meet the following
conditions:
(a) There shall be only one such sign permitted per entry door.
(b) The sign area shall not exceed 1.5 square feet, not including
any portable "open" sign under 0.25 square feet in area.
(c) The sign shall be painted, applied, or hung from the inside of
the door. Lettering on door glass shall be painted in gold leaf or
a light color.
(d) No other signage, including exempt signs, shall be placed on
the door.
(3) Temporary advertising signs and permanent interior advertising
signs.
(a) Temporary advertising signs shall meet the following
conditions:
[1] The combined sign area of all temporary advertising
signage shall not exceed 10% percent of the total window
area. Sign area shall include the signboard or mounting
structure, regardless of whether it contains letters,
characters, or other illustrations.
[2] Signs shall be mounted on a signboard or otherwise
displayed indoors inside the business premises. Signs shall
not be affixed to or supported on any window or door, and
shall be separated from store window and door surfaces by
at least 12 inches.
§ 141-101 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-101
131:310
[3] Signs must show beginning and expiration dates in onehalf-
inch letters at the lower right hand corner of each
sign. Signs shall be removed after 30 days.
[4] Individual sign letters and characters may not exceed nine
inches in height.
[5] Signs shall not contain any lights, flags, pennants,
streamers, or other fluttering or spinning attachments.
(b) Permanent interior advertising signs should be exhibited as
part of a storefront business display. Such signs must not be
affixed to or supported on any window or door and shall be
separated from store window and door surfaces by at least 12
inches. The total window coverage for all permanent interior
advertising signage shall not exceed 10% per window for each
window. No signs shall contain any interior or exterior lighting.
No one sign may contain any more than three words. Letters
and characters shall not exceed four inches in height.
(4) Community event announcements. Window signs relating to a
community-oriented event sponsored by an institutional or public
use which has its base of operations or principal office in
Collingswood may be displayed inside a first floor business window
and shall meet the following conditions:
(a) Only two such signs shall be permitted per business frontage;
(b) The total area of all such signs may not exceed 22 inches by 34
inches per business frontage. [Amended 3-6-2006 by Ord.
No. 1387]
(c) The signs may be displayed for a period of no more than 30
days before the event and must be removed by the business
proprietor immediately after the event.
(5) Real estate signs. A real estate sign shall meet the following
conditions:
(a) Only one such sign shall be permitted on the tax parcel
advertised for sale or lease and set back at least 10 feet from
all streets,
(b) It shall not exceed six square feet on each side and four feet in
height.
(c) The realtor shall remove it at closing or completion of the
matter being advertised.
(d) It may include the realtor's telephone and other contact
numbers.
§ 141-101 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-101
131:311
(e) Open house signs are permitted 24 hours prior to the sales
event and must be removed immediately after the open house.
No off-site directional signs are permitted. [Added 3-6-2006
by Ord. No. 1387]
(6) Construction signs. A construction sign shall meet the following
conditions:
(a) Only one such sign shall be permitted on the tax parcel under
construction and set back at least 10 feet from all streets,
(b) It shall not exceed six square feet for residential properties, 15
square feet for nonresidential properties, and five feet in
height.
(c) Signs are permitted at the start of said work and must be
removed at the completion of the work. [Amended 3-6-2006
by Ord. No. 1387]
(d) It may include the contractor's telephone and other contact
numbers.
(7) Political signs.
(a) Political signs relating to the candidacy of any person for
public office or pertaining to a public question which will
appear on a ballot shall be permitted on private property,
provided that such signs shall be displayed no earlier than six
weeks prior to any election in which such person is a candidate
or such issue is submitted to the voters, and the sign shall be
removed within one one week after the election. Any sign
erected pursuant to this subsection shall be unlit and shall not
exceed nine square feet in area. No more than one one sign
shall be permitted on any tax lot.
(b) Political signs must be constructed of materials sufficient to
withstand the effects of the environment and must be
maintained while erected. No sign shall encroach upon sight
triangles. All signs shall be erected in conformance with this
chapter as it relates to setbacks and height restrictions.
(c) The persons or organizations represented on the political sign
are responsible for their removal, maintenance and/or liability
regardless of whether or not authorization was given to erect
the sign in the affected location by the represented persons or
organization.
(8) Multiple occupant/tenant (MOT) signs. A flush-mounted wall,
projecting, or freestanding multiple occupant/tenant sign shall be
used where a building or site contains two or more different
commercial or office uses or tenants, and shall meet the following
conditions:
§ 141-101 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-101
131:312
(a) Only one such sign shall be permitted for each tax parcel,
except for corner properties within the Central Business
District zone where one such sign may be erected on both
frontages.
(b) No more than one multiple occupant/tenant sign shall be
erected on any building frontage.
(c) Except for projecting signs, as permitted in § 141-101D(10),
such signs shall have a maximum height of six feet.
(d) The principal heading or logo should not exceed 25% of the
sign area. A multiple occupant/tenant sign for two different
uses shall not exceed four square feet and may contain an
additional one square foot of area for each additional use in the
building or site, up to a maximum of eight square feet.
(e) Maximum letter height shall not exceed four inches. The sign's
lettering style and coloring shall be the same for all uses and
tenants.
(9) Awning signs. An awning sign shall meet the following conditions:
(a) Only one such sign is permitted per storefront, on the first floor
only.
(b) Sign letters and characters shall be painted or sewn on
awnings. Maximum letter height shall be nine inches.
(c) Awning signs may not be backlit. The awning fabric, including
sign lettering and characters, shall be made of an opaque
material such that no window or sidewalk lighting shall show
through the fabric material.
(d) Maximum lettering area shall not exceed 0.5 square feet for
each linear foot of building frontage, or 16 square feet,
whichever is less. Inclusion of the premise's street address on
the awning shall not be counted towards the maximum
permitted sign area or number of signs.
(e) Awnings attached to the same building must be the same
shape, color and height, regardless of individual business
ownership or tenancy in the building.
(f) Installation of awning signs shall require a building permit.
(10) Projecting signs and icon signs. A projecting sign or icon sign shall
meet the following conditions:
(a) Only one such sign shall be permitted for each tax parcel,
except for corner properties within the Central Business
District zone where one such sign may erected on both
frontages.
§ 141-101 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-101
131:313
(b) It shall be set back at least four feet from the street curbline,
extend no less than one foot and no more than four feet from
the building's wall surface, and not exceed six square feet.
(c) The maximum height shall be 15 feet or the bottom of the
second floor windowsill, whichever is lower. The minimum
height shall be seven feet from grade.
(d) The maximum lettering height shall be nine inches.
(e) It must not project from a building at an angle other than 90,
except at a public street corner, where it also may project in an
angle to the center of the intersection.
(f) Installation of projecting signs shall require a building permit.
(11) Mural signs. A mural sign shall meet the following conditions:
(a) Only one such sign of a maximum size of 12 square feet shall be
permitted per building, on the side or rear walls of a building
only. [Amended 11-3-2014 by Ord. No. 1557]
(b) It shall be designed and painted by a professional sign maker
or artist.
(c) It shall be designed and colored to complement the
architectural style of the subject building and visually enclosed
within a frame.
(12) Decorative flags. A decorative flag shall meet the following
conditions:73 [Amended 3-6-2006 by Ord. No. 1387]
(a) One such sign flag shall be permitted per business.
(b) The flag dimensions shall not exceed three feet in width, five
feet in length, and 15 square feet in total area.
(c) The decorative flag shall be displayed on a flagpole mounted to
the exterior of a building or store front so that the bottom edge
of the flag shall be at least seven feet above the sidewalk or
ground level and the top of the flag not exceed 12 feet above
the sidewalk or ground level.
(d) The flag may contain an icon, name or symbol of the onpremises
business, description of on-premises business or
services, and/or the word "open." The flag shall not advertise
or promote a specific individual, product or brand name or offpremises
business, service, or corporation.
(e) The flag shall not be made of plastic materials.
73.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(12), pertaining to easel and sandwich board signs,
was repealed 7-5-2005 by Ord. No. 1380.
§ 141-101 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-101
131:314
(13) Sandwich board signs. A sandwich board sign shall meet the
following conditions: [Added 3-6-2006 by Ord. No. 1387]
(a) Sandwich board signs are permitted curbside on the sidewalk
or in entrance alcoves. Only one such sign shall be permitted
per tax lot, located adjacent to the exterior of the business
establishment, and can only be used to advertise the business
located on the premises.
(b) It shall be artistically designed with a theme related to the
individual business or business district.
(c) It shall not exceed three feet in height, two feet in width, and
one-half in lettering area.
(d) It shall be located so as not to impair pedestrian or vehicular
traffic or as to block or obstruct any legally required fire exit,
curbside car door opening area, or other exit. It shall be placed
in locations to provide a minimum of four-foot pedestrian
clearance.
(e) It shall be constructed of wood, wrought iron or aluminum and
may contain chalkboard or other writable materials approved
by the Zoning Officer.
(f) Once erected, the sign base must have no more than an
eighteen-inch separation.
(g) It shall be taken inside at night after the closing of business
and during periods of inclement weather, such as rain, snow,
and high winds. The sign shall include a ten-pound-weighted
stabilizing base or other suitable mechanism to prevent
accidental collapse or falling. It shall not be strapped to any
pole.
(h) It shall not include any lighting or sound-generation
equipment.
(i) Applicant shall only be permitted to display one sign at a
particular time, as described in § 141-101D(13) through D(17).
(j) Applications for signs must be applied for with Zoning Officer.
Applicants must include, at a minimum, a drawn design (to
scale), as to appearance, construction, location and
dimensions.
(14) Temporary banner signs. A temporary banner sign shall meet the
following conditions: [Added 3-6-2006 by Ord. No. 1387]
(a) Temporary banner signs are permitted to be hung on the
outside of the business premises to advertise special events.
Only one such sign shall be permitted per tax lot and can only
be used to advertise the business located on the premises.
§ 141-101 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-101
131:315
(b) It shall be artistically designed with a theme related to the
individual business or business district.
(c) Banners cannot exceed 72 inches by 18 inches and must be
properly secured. Letters may be no larger than 12 inches.
Banners shall be constructed of nylon, vinyl or plastic
materials, as approved by the Zoning Officer.
(d) Banners cannot be hung for more than 30 days, and there must
be a minimum of 10 days between the hanging of different
banners.
(e) Banners may be hung a maximum of six times each year.
(f) Applicant shall only be permitted to display one sign at a
particular time, as described in § 141-101D(13) through D(17).
(g) Applications for signs must be applied for with Zoning Officer.
Applicants must include, at a minimum, a drawn design (to
scale) as to appearance, construction, location and dimensions.
(15) Freestanding pole signs. A freestanding pole sign shall meet the
following conditions: [Added 3-6-2006 by Ord. No. 1387]
(a) Freestanding pole signs are permitted curbside on the
sidewalk or in entrance alcoves. Only one such sign shall be
permitted per tax lot, located adjacent to the exterior of the
business establishment, and can only be used to advertise the
business located on the premises.
(b) It shall be artistically designed with a theme related to the
individual business or business district.
(c) It shall not exceed 36 inches in height (with a base no more
than 15 inches).
(d) It shall be located so as not to impair pedestrian or vehicular
traffic or as to block or obstruct any legally required fire exit,
curbside car door opening area, or other exit. It shall be placed
in locations to provide a minimum of four-foot pedestrian
clearance.
(e) It shall be constructed of metal or other materials approved by
the Zoning Officer and secured in a manner to prevent
accidental collapse or falling.
(f) It shall be taken inside at night after the closing of business
and during periods of inclement weather, such as rain, snow,
and high winds.
(g) It shall not include any lighting or sound-generation
equipment.
§ 141-101 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-101
131:316
(h) Applicant shall only be permitted to display one sign at a
particular time, as described in § 141-101D(13) through D(17).
(i) Applications for signs must be applied for with Zoning Officer.
Applicants must include, at a minimum, a drawn design (to
scale) as to appearance, construction, location and dimensions.
(16) Tabletop signs. A tabletop sign shall meet the following conditions:
[Added 3-6-2006 by Ord. No. 1387]
(a) Tabletop signs are permitted to be placed vertically on table
tops; in cases where approved cafe license is in place.
(b) It shall be artistically designed with a theme related to the
individual business or business district and shall not exceed
1.5 square feet.
(c) It shall be constructed of plastic, cardboard or other materials
approved by the Zoning Officer. It must be positioned safely to
prevent falling off table.
(d) It shall be taken inside at night after the closing of business
and during periods of inclement weather, such as rain, snow,
and high winds.
(e) Applicant shall only be permitted to display one sign at a
particular time, as described in § 141-101D(13) through D(17).
(f) Applications for signs must be applied for with Zoning Officer.
Applicants must include, at a minimum, a drawn design (to
scale) as to appearance, construction, location and dimensions.
(17) Temporary perpendicular attachment sign. A temporary
perpendicular attachment sign shall meet the following conditions:
[Added 3-6-2006 by Ord. No. 1387]
(a) Temporary perpendicular attachment signs are permitted to be
hung on the outside from currently approved perpendicular
signs of the business premises to advertise specials or events.
Only one such sign shall be permitted per tax lot and can only
be used to advertise the business located on the premises.
(b) It shall be artistically and professionally designed with a theme
related to the individual business and/or its existing approved
perpendicular sign.
(c) It shall not exceed two square feet and be lower than seven
feet off the ground.
(d) It shall be constructed of wood, canvas or metal or other
materials approved by the Zoning Officer.
§ 141-101 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-101
131:317
(e) It shall be taken inside at night after the closing of business
and during periods of inclement weather, such as rain, snow,
and high winds.
(f) Applicant shall only be permitted to display one sign at a
particular time, as described in § 141-101D(13) through D(17).
(g) Applications for signs must be applied for with Zoning Officer.
Applicants must include, at a minimum, a drawn design (to
scale) as to appearance, construction, location and dimensions.
Design plans shall also show how the temporary sign will be
attached to the permanent sign.
§ 141-101 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-101
131:318
ARTICLE X
Historic Preservation Commission, Historic District and Review
Process
§ 141-102. Historic Preservation Commission.
A. The Historic Preservation Commission of the Borough of Collingswood
is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-107 et seq. The
Historic Preservation Commission shall consist of five regular members
and two alternate members appointed by the Mayor. At least two of the
regular members shall be of and designated as "Class A" and "Class B."
The remaining regular members may be of and shall be designated as
"Class C." The two alternates must meet the qualifications of Class C
and shall be designated "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." The
classes are defined as:
(1) Class A: a person who is knowledgeable in building design and
construction or architectural history and who may reside outside
the municipality.
(2) Class B: a person who is knowledgeable of or who has a
demonstrated interest in local history and who may reside outside
the municipality.
(3) Class C: any citizen of the municipality who shall hold no other
municipal office, position or employment except for membership on
the Planning Board or the Board of Adjustment.
B. Terms of regular members.
(1) The terms of the appointment of the regular members of the
Commission shall be as follows:
(a) One member shall be appointed for a term of two years.
(b) Two members shall be appointed for terms of three years.
(c) Two members shall be appointed for terms of four years.
(2) All subsequent appointments shall be for terms of four years or
until appointment or qualification of a successor. A vacancy
occurring otherwise than by expiration of a term shall be filled for
the unexpired term only.
C. Terms of alternate members.
(1) The terms of the appointment of the alternate members of the
Commission shall be as follows:
(a) Alternate No. l shall be appointed for a term of one year.
(b) Alternate No. 2 shall be appointed for a term of two years.
§ 141-102 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-102
131:319
(2) All subsequent appointments shall be for terms of two years or until
appointment and qualification of a successor. A vacancy occurring
otherwise than by expiration of a term shall be filled for the
unexpired term only.
D. Notwithstanding any other provision, the term of any member who is
also a member of the Planning Board or the Board of Adjustment shall
be coterminous with his membership on the Planning Board or the
Board of Adjustment.
E. Rules and organization of the Commission.
(1) The Commission shall elect from its membership a Chairperson, a
Vice Chairperson and a Secretary.
(2) The Commission shall establish a regular schedule of meetings, at
least once a month or as often as required to meet the needs of its
business, to handle emergencies or to meet time constraints
imposed by law.
(3) A quorum for the transaction of business shall be three members.
(4) The Commission's Secretary shall keep minutes and records of all
meetings and proceedings, including voting records, attendance,
resolutions, findings, determinations, decisions and applications
for certificates of appropriateness. A verbatim record of
Commission meetings and proceedings shall be kept and made
available in accordance with provisions of the Municipal Land Use
Law.74
(5) All Commission records and minutes shall be made public records,
and all Commission meetings shall comply with the Open Public
Meetings Act (N.J.S.A. 10:4-7 et seq.).
(6) The Commission shall adopt written bylaws and procedures for the
transaction of its business and for the consideration of applications
for certificates of appropriateness.
(7) No member shall be permitted to act on any matter in which he or
she has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or financial
interest. A member may be removed by the governing body for
cause but only after a public hearing if he or she requests one.
F. Expenses and costs; employment of experts and staff. The governing
body shall make provision in its budget and shall appropriate funds for
the expenses of the Commission. The Commission may employ, contract
for and fix the compensation of experts and other staff and services as it
shall deem necessary. The Commission shall obtain its legal counsel
from the Borough Attorney. Expenditures pursuant to this section shall
74.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 141-102 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-102
131:320
§ 141-103. Designation of historic districts and sites.
not exceed, exclusive of gifts and grants, the amount appropriated by
the governing body.
G. Powers and duties. It shall be the responsibility of the Commission to:
(1) Make recommendations to the Planning Board and the governing
body in the preparation and periodic updating of the historic
preservation element of the Borough's Master Plan, including but
not limited to the addition or deletion of historic sites and districts
identified in the Borough's Master Plan.
(2) Make recommendations to the Planning Board and governing body
on the historic preservation implications of any plan element of the
Borough's Master Plan which has been or may be adopted.
(3) Advise the Planning Board on the inclusion of historic sites in the
recommended capital improvement program.
(4) Recommend to the governing body sites and districts to be
designated through amendment of this chapter. The criteria and
procedures for designation are set forth in § 141-103 of this article.
(5) Advise the Planning Board and the Board of Adjustment on
development and zoning applications affecting designated districts
and sites, in accordance with the procedures established in
§ 141-105 of this article.
(6) Review all permit applications affecting designated districts and
sites and to provide written reports to the Construction Official, in
accordance with the procedures established in § 141-106 of this
article.
(7) Provide advisory, educational and informational services to
promote historic preservation in the Borough.
A. Criteria for designation. The Commission shall consider for nomination
districts and sites that have integrity of location, design, setting,
materials, workmanship and association and that meet one or more of
the following criteria:
(1) Character, interest or value as part of the development, heritage or
cultural characteristics of the Borough, state or nation.
(2) Identification with a person or persons who significantly enriched
the Borough, state or nation.
(3) Site of an historic event which had significant effect on the
development of the Borough, state or nation.
(4) Embodiment of distinguishing characteristics of a type, period or
method of construction, architecture or engineering.
§ 141-102 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-103
131:321
(5) Identification with the work of a builder, designer, artist, architect
or landscape architect whose work has influenced the development
of the Borough, state or nation.
(6) Embodiment of elements of designs, detail, materials or
craftsmanship that render a site architecturally significant or
structurally innovative.
(7) Unique location or singular physical characteristics that make a
district or site an established or familiar visual feature.
(8) Likely to yield information important in prehistory or history.
B. Procedures for designation. Based on the Commission's review of
potential sites or upon the recommendations of other Borough bodies or
of interested parties, the Commission shall consider nomination of a
district or a site according to the procedures outlined below:
(1) The Commission or interested party shall prepare a nomination
report for each proposed district or site. For historic district
designations, the report shall include a building-by-building
inventory of all properties within the district; black and white
photographs of representative properties within the district; a
property map of the district showing boundaries; and a physical
description and statement of significance for the district. For
historic site designations, the report shall include one or more
black and white photographs; the tax lot and block number of the
property as designated on the Official Borough Tax Map; and a
physical description and statement of significance for the site.
(2) The Commission shall refer its nomination report to the Planning
Board for review and consideration as an amendment to the Master
Plan of the Borough.
(3) The Planning Board may schedule a public hearing on the proposed
designation of a district or site, in accordance with the procedures
set forth for adoption or amendment of the Master Plan as set forth
in the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. At least 10
days prior to the hearing, the Commission shall, by personal service
or certified mail:
(a) Notify each owner of a proposed historic site or of property
within a proposed historic district that his or her property is
being considered for historic designation and the reasons
therefor.
(b) Advise each owner of the significance and consequences of
such designation and of his or her rights to contest such
designation.
(c) Notify each owner of the date, time and place of the hearing.
§ 141-103 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-103
131:322
§ 141-104. Certificate of appropriateness.
(4) Public notice of the hearing shall be given at least 10 days prior to
the hearing by publication in the official newspaper of the Borough.
A copy of the nomination report shall also be made available for
public inspection at least 10 days prior to the hearing.
(5) Upon Planning Board review and adoption of the proposed historic
district or site designation in the Master Plan, the Commission or
the Planning Board shall forward the adopted Master Plan to the
governing body. The governing body may disapprove or change or
take no action on the adoption of an ordinance to implement the
historic district or site aspects of the Master Plan. Governing body
action on historic district or site designations shall be otherwise
subject to those procedures and statutes which apply to a change of
a zoning designation and the adoption, revision or amendment of
any development regulation.
(6) Notice of designation shall be made public by publication in the
official newspaper of the Borough and distributed to all municipal
agencies reviewing development applications and permits. A
certificate or letter of designation shall be sent to each owner
affected by the designation.
(7) A protest of designation status signed by 20% or more of the
property owners within a designated historic district or by the
owner of the property on which there is a designated historic site
may be filed with the Borough Clerk. Such designation shall not
become effective following the filing of such a protest except by the
favorable vote of 2/3 of all members of the governing body.
A. Actions requiring review. A certificate of appropriateness issued by the
Commission shall be required before a permit is issued for any of the
following or, in the event that no permit is required, before any work
can commence on any of the following activities within any historic
district or involving a designated historic site:
(1) The demolition of an historic site or an improvement within an
historic district.
(2) The relocation of an historic site or an improvement within an
historic district.
(3) A change in the exterior appearance of any historic site or of any
improvement within an historic district by addition, alteration or
replacement.
(4) Any new construction of a principal or accessory structure on any
historic site or in any historic district.
(5) Any replacement, changes in or addition of signs, shutters, outdoor
displays, fences, hedges, awnings, off-street driveway and parking
§ 141-103 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-104
131:323
materials or exterior lighting for an historic site or an improvement
within an historic district.
B. Actions not requiring review. A certificate of appropriateness issued by
the Commission is not required for:
(1) Changes to the interiors of structures.
(2) Material changes not visible from a public street.
(3) The repainting, repairing or exact replacement of any existing
improvement, provided that the work does not alter the exterior
appearance of the structure. The following are some of the
activities which are permitted under this criteria:
(a) Complete identical replacement of existing windows and doors.
(b) Repair of existing windows and doors that does not change
their designs, scale or appearance, and the installation of
storm doors and windows.
(c) Maintenance and repair of existing roofing materials involving
no change in the design, scale or appearance of the structure.
(d) Structural repairs which do not alter the exterior appearance
of the structure.
(e) Replacement of existing clapboards, shingles or other siding
with identical material.
(f) Maintenance and repair of existing clapboards, shingles or
other siding (including masonry) involving no change in the
design, scale or appearance of the structure.
(g) Exterior painting of existing structures. The Commission may
recommend colors harmonious with those historically
appropriate for the site or district.
(4) The repainting, relettering, repairing, installation, or erection of
signs in accordance with Article IX or this chapter. However, the
installation of internally illuminated signs and historic
identification signs must receive a certificate of appropriateness
from the Historic Preservation Commission.
C. Emergency repairs. When a structure or improvement requires
immediate repair to preserve the continued habitability of the structure
and/or the health and safety of its occupants or others, emergency
repairs may be performed in accordance with Borough codes without
the necessity of first obtaining a certificate of appropriateness. Under
such circumstances, the repairs performed shall be only such as are
necessary to protect the health and safety of the occupants of the
structure or others and/or to maintain the habitability of the structure.
A request for the Commission's review shall be made simultaneously
§ 141-104 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-104
131:324
with the onset of emergency work, and no further work shall be
performed on the structure until an appropriate request for approval is
made and approval is obtained in accordance with the procedures set
forth in this article. All work done under this section shall conform to
the criteria set forth in § 141-107 of this article.
D. Informal review of concept plan for proposed undertakings.
(1) At the request of applicants considering action that may require a
certificate of appropriateness, as set forth above, the Commission
shall grant an informal review of a concept plan for proposed
undertakings for which the applicant intends to prepare and submit
an application for a certificate of appropriateness. Neither the
applicant nor the Commission shall be bound by any informal
review.
(2) In the case of very minor projects involving exterior repairs or
alterations, the Commission, if the preliminary data and drawings
are sufficiently complete, may grant a certificate of
appropriateness at an informal meeting.
E. Application procedures.
(1) Applications for a certificate of appropriateness shall be made on
forms available in the construction office. Completed applications
shall be delivered or mailed to the Historic Commission Secretary
20 days prior to the meeting. [Amended 9-4-2007 by Ord. No.
1437]
(2) The Commission shall advise the applicant, in writing, of the time,
date and place of the meeting at which his or her application is to
be reviewed at least 10 days prior to the meeting.
(3) Contents of applications.
(a) Applications for certificates of appropriateness shall include:
[1] Complete application forms, which contain a precise
written description of the proposed work or activity.
[2] Sufficient photographs of the existing structure or lot.
[3] Scaled drawings showing site plan layout and facade
elevations and specifying materials.
[4] For new construction applications, a streetscape elevation
drawn to scale, showing the new structure in the context
of neighboring buildings.
[5] For large projects, working drawings and specifications
shall be required.
[6] The Commission may require the submission of additional
information reasonably necessary to make a decision.
§ 141-104 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-104
131:325
§ 141-105. Review of development and zoning applications by
Historic Preservation Commission.
F. Action on applications.
(1) The Commission shall reach a decision on the application within 45
days of submission of the complete application or referral of the
same by the Construction Official. Nothing herein shall prohibit an
extension of time by mutual agreement of the applicant and the
Commission. The Commission may advise the applicant and make
recommendations in regard to the appropriateness of the proposed
action and may grant approval upon such conditions as it deems
appropriate within the intent and provisions of this article. An
applicant shall not be required to appear or to be represented at
any meeting to consider the application.
(2) If an application is approved, the Commission shall issue a
certificate of appropriateness. If the Commission disapproves an
application, the Commission shall state its reasons, in writing, in
resolution form within 10 days of such decision and deliver a copy
of it to the applicant.
(3) When a certificate of appropriateness has been issued, the zoning
office shall, from time to time, inspect the work approved by the
certificate and report to the Commission any work not in
accordance with such certificate. The Commission shall also make
inspections of work approved by a certificate whenever it considers
such to be desirable.
(4) A certificate of appropriateness shall be valid for a period of two
years from the date of issuance unless reasonable extensions are
granted by the Commission. If a permit is also required for the
action approved and is obtained prior to the expiration of said twoyear
period, then the certificate of appropriateness shall be valid
for the life of the permit and any extensions thereof.
A. The Planning Board and the Board of Adjustment shall make available
to the Commission an informational copy of every application submitted
to either Board for development and/or zoning changes in historic
districts or on historic sites designated on the Zoning Map or in the
historic preservation element of the Master Plan. The appropriate
Board shall forward a copy of the complete application at least 14 days
prior to the hearing. The Commission shall make its recommendations
to the appropriate Board in the form of a written report or it may
convey its advice through its delegation of one of its members or staff to
testify orally at the hearing on the application and to explain any
written report which may have been submitted.
B. The Commission's recommendations shall focus on how the proposed
undertaking would affect a site or district's historic or architectural
significance as outlined in § 141-103A of this article. In considering the
§ 141-104 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-105
131:326
§ 141-106. Review of application pertaining to regulated activities
by Historic Preservation Commission.
The Zoning Officer shall refer all applications for permits pertaining to
regulated activities on an historic site, or within an historic district, to the
Commission for a written report on the application of the zoning provisions
concerning historic preservation to any of those aspects of the change
proposed, which were not determined by approval of an application for
development by a municipal agency, pursuant to the Municipal Land Use
Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. The Commission shall submit its report on
the application to the Zoning Officer within 45 days of his referral of
the application to the Commission. If, within the forty-five-day period, the
Commission recommends to the Zoning Officer against the issuance of a
permit, or recommends conditions to the permit to be issued, the Zoning
Officer shall deny issuance of a permit or include the conditions in the
permit, as the case may be. Failure of the Commission to report within
the forty-five-day period shall be deemed to constitute a report in favor of
issuance of the permit and without the recommendation of conditions to the
permit.
§ 141-107. Standards for review by Historic Preservation
Commission.
Commission's recommendations, the Planning Board and the Board of
Adjustment shall be guided by the review standards established in
§ 141-107 of this article.
C. On all matters referred to the Commission which require approval or
action by the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment, the
decision of the Commission shall be a recommendation only, which may
be approved, disapproved or amended by the Planning Board or the
Board of Adjustment. In the event that the Planning Board or the Board
of Adjustment should disapprove or amend the decision of the
Commission, it shall state its reasons therefor at a public hearing and in
its resolution of memorialization.
A. In regard to all applications, the Commission shall be guided by the
following standards:
(1) Every reasonable effort shall be made to provide a compatible use
for a property which requires minimal alteration of the building,
structure or site and its environment or to use a property for its
originally intended purpose.
(2) The distinguishing original qualities or character of a building,
structure or site and its environment shall not be destroyed. The
removal or alteration of any historic material or distinctive
architectural features should be avoided when possible.
§ 141-105 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-107
131:327
(3) All buildings, structures and sites shall be recognized as products
of their own time. Alterations that have no historical basis and
which seek to create an earlier appearance shall be discouraged.
(4) Changes which may have taken place in the course of time are
evidence of the history and development of a building, structure or
site and its environment. These changes may have acquired
significance in their own right, and this significance shall be
recognized and respected.
(5) Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship
which characterize a building, structure or site shall be treated
with sensitivity.
(6) Deteriorated architectural features shall be repaired rather than
replaced, wherever possible. In the event that replacement is
necessary, the new material should match the material being
replaced in composition, design, color, texture and other visual
qualities. Repair or replacement of missing architectural features
should be based on accurate duplications of features, substantiated
by historic, physical or pictorial evidence rather than on
conjectural designs or the availability of different architectural
elements from other buildings or structures.
(7) The surface cleaning of structures shall be undertaken with the
gentlest means possible. Sandblasting and other cleaning methods
that will damage the historic building materials shall not be
undertaken.
(8) Every reasonable effort shall be made to protect and preserve
archaeological resources affected by or adjacent to any project.
(9) Contemporary design for alterations and additions to existing
properties shall not be discouraged when such alterations and
additions do not destroy significant historical, architectural or
cultural materials and when such design is compatible with the
size, scale, color, material and character of the property,
neighborhood or environment.
(10) Wherever possible, new additions and alterations to structures
shall be done in such a manner that if such additions or alterations
were to be removed in the future, the essential form and integrity
of the structure would be unimpaired.
(11) Efforts to preserve the architectural features and historical
integrity of a property or specific feature of that property should be
consistent with the intent and purpose of the Borough’s
Development Regulations and the Borough’s Master Plan. The
time, resources, and costs determined to be necessary to preserve
the architectural features and historical integrity of a property
located within a historic district shall be considered by the
Commission and balanced against the market value of the property
§ 141-107 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-107
131:328
and any substantial economic hardship that may be sustained by an
applicant. In rendering its decision, the Commission shall consider
an applicant’s proposed use of alternative and less expensive
materials and methods of preservation. Commission members shall
provide reasons for their decision which shall be memorialized
in the Commission’s resolution. [Added 3-3-2018 by Ord. No.
1634]
B. In regard to applications for new construction, additions and
alterations, the following visual compatibility factors shall be
considered:
(1) Height. The height of the proposed building shall be visually
compatible with adjacent buildings.
(2) The proportion of a building's front facade. The relationship of the
width of the building to the height of the front elevation shall be
compatible with the buildings and places to which it is visually
related.
(3) The proportion of openings within the facility. The relationship of
the width of the windows to the height of the windows in a building
shall be visually compatible with the buildings and places to which
it is visually related.
(4) The rhythm of solids to voids in front facades. The relationship of
solids to voids in the front facade of a building shall be visually
compatible with the buildings and places to which it is visually
related.
(5) The rhythm of spacing and buildings on streets. The relationship of
the building to the open space between it and adjoining buildings
shall be visually compatible with the buildings and places to which
it is visually related.
(6) The rhythm of entrance and/or porch projections. The relationship
of the entrance and porch projections to the street shall be visually
compatible with the buildings and places to which it is visually
related.
(7) The relationship of materials, texture and color. The relationship of
the materials, texture and color of the facade and roof of a building
shall be visually compatible with the predominant materials used in
the buildings to which it is visually related.
(8) Roof shapes. The roof shape of a building shall be visually
compatible with the buildings to which it is visually related.
(9) Walls of continuity. Appurtenances of a building such as walls,
open-type fencing and evergreen landscape masses shall form
cohesive walls of enclosure along a street to the extent necessary
§ 141-107 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-107
131:329
to maintain visual compatibility of the building with the buildings
and places to which it is visually related.
(10) The scale of a building. The size of a building, the mass of a
building in relation to open spaces, the windows, door openings,
porches and balconies shall be visually compatible with the
buildings and places to which it is visually related.
(11) The directional expression of the front elevation. A building shall
be visually compatible with the buildings and places to which it is
visually related in its directional character, whether this be vertical
character, horizontal character or nondirectional character.
(12) Exterior features. A structure's related exterior features, such as
lighting, fences, signs, sidewalks, driveways and parking areas,
shall be compatible with the features of those structures to which it
is visually related and shall be appropriate for the historic period
for which the structure is significant.
C. In regard to applications to demolish an historic site or any
improvement within an historic district, the following matters shall be
considered:
(1) Its historic, architectural, cultural or scenic significance in relation
to the criteria established in this article.
(2) If it is within an historic district, its significance to the district and
the probable impact of its removal on the character and ambience
of the district and the criteria which were the basis of the
designation of the district.
(3) Its potential for use for those purposes currently permitted by
zoning regulations.
(4) Its structural condition and the economic feasibility of alternatives
to the proposal.
(5) Its importance to the Borough and the extent to which its historical
or architectural value is such that its removal would be detrimental
to the public interest.
(6) The extent to which it is of such old, unusual or uncommon design,
craftsmanship, texture or material that it would not be reproduced
or could be reproduced only with great difficulty and expense.
(7) The extent to which its retention would promote the general
welfare by maintaining and increasing the real estate values,
generating business, attracting tourists, attracting new residents,
stimulating interest and study in architecture and design or making
the Borough an attractive and desirable place in which to live.
§ 141-107 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-107
131:330
§ 141-108. Effect of project approval or denial by Historic
Preservation Commission; appeals.
D. In regard to applications to move an historic site or any building or
structure in an historic district to a new location, the following matters
shall be considered:
(1) The historic loss to the site of the original location and, if the
present location is within an historic district, to the historic district
as a whole.
(2) The reasons for not retaining the landmark or structure at its
present site.
(3) The compatibility, nature and character of the current and of the
proposed surrounding areas as they relate to the protection of the
interest and values referred to in this article.
(4) If the proposed new location is within an historic district, visual
compatibility factors as set forth in Subsection B.
(5) The probability of significant damage to the landmark or structure
itself.
(6) If it is to be removed from the Borough, the proximity of the
proposed new location to the Borough, including the accessibility
to the residents of the Borough and other citizens.
A. Approval. Issuance of a certificate of appropriateness shall be deemed
to be final approval pursuant to this article. Such approval shall neither
cause nor prevent the filing of any collateral application or other
proceeding required by any other Borough ordinance to be made prior
to undertaking the action requested concerning the site or the
structure in an historic district.
B. Denial. Denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be deemed to
preclude the applicant from undertaking the activity applied for.
C. Appeals. The granting of denial of a certificate of appropriateness may
be appealed to the Board of Adjustment in the same manner as an
appeal is taken pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70a. Nothing herein shall
be deemed to limit the right of judicial review of the Borough action
after an appeal is concluded by the Board of Adjustment.
D. Demolitions. In its review of applications for demolition of an historic
landmark or an improvement of an historic district, pursuant to
§ 141-104, the Commission may recommend the postponement of
demolition for a period not to exceed one year. The Commission shall
utilize this time period to consult with the governing body, the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and Energy or other
similarly qualified organizations to ascertain how the Borough may
preserve the premises to be demolished. The Commission shall be
§ 141-107 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-108
131:331
§ 141-109. Enforcement; violation; notice; failure to comply.
empowered to assist the owner in developing plans to preserve the
structure when moving or demolition would be a great loss to the
Borough. The Commission shall be empowered to negotiate with the
applicant to see if an alternative to demolition can be found and may
require the applicant to prepare a financial analysis which may include
any or all of the following:
(1) The amount paid for the property, the date of purchase and the
party from whom purchased, including a description of the
relationship, whether business or familial, if any, between the
owner and the person from whom the property was purchased.
(2) The assessed value of the land and improvements thereon
according to the most recent assessment.
(3) For depreciable properties, a pro forma financial statement
prepared by an accountant or broker of record.
(4) All appraisals obtained by the owner in connection with his
purchase or financing of the property or during his ownership of
the property.
(5) Bona fide offers of the property for sale or rent, the price asked and
offers received, if any.
(6) Any consideration given by the owner as to profitable, adaptive
uses for the property.
E. The Commission shall study the question of economic hardship for the
applicant and shall determine whether the site or the property in the
historic district can be put to reasonable beneficial use without the
approval of the demolition application. In the case of an incomeproducing
building, the Commission shall also determine whether the
applicant can obtain a reasonable return from his existing building. The
Commission may ask applicants for additional information to be used in
making these determinations.
A. Any person who shall undertake any activity which affects an historic
site or an improvement within an historic district and which requires a
certificate of appropriateness, without obtaining the review of the
Commission, shall be deemed to be in violation of this chapter.
B. Upon learning of the violation, the Zoning Officer shall personally serve
upon the owner of the lot whereon the violation is occurring a notice
describing the violation in detail, and giving the owner 10 days to abate
the violation by restoring the site or improvement to the condition it
was prior to the violation. If the owner cannot be personally served
within the Borough with said notice, a copy shall be posted on the site
and a copy sent to the owner at his last known address as it appears on
the Borough tax rolls.
§ 141-108 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-109
131:332
§ 141-110. Limitation on duties and powers of Historic Preservation
Commission.
No duties or powers of the Commission shall supersede or infringe on the
powers of other Borough boards or committees.
§ 141-111. Listing of historic district properties.
The listing of historic district properties is attached hereto and made a part
hereof.75
C. In the event that the violation is not abated within 10 days of service or
posting on site, whichever is earlier, the Zoning Officer shall cause to be
instituted any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such
unlawful activity; to restrain, correct or abate such violation; to prevent
the occupancy of said building, structure or land; or to prevent any
illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises.
D. If any person shall undertake any activity requiring a certificate of
appropriateness without first having obtained approval, he or she shall
be required to immediately stop the activity, apply for approval and take
any necessary measures to preserve the landmarks affected pending a
decision. If the project is denied, he shall immediately restore the site to
its preactivity status. The Zoning Officer is hereby authorized to seek
injunctive relief regarding a stop action on restoration in the Superior
Court, Chancery Division, not less than 10 days after the delivery of
notice pursuant to Subsection B hereof.
E. In the event that any action which would permanently and adversely
change an historic site or historic district or that a demolition to remove
the site is about to occur without approval having been issued, the
Zoning Officer is empowered to apply to the Superior Court of New
Jersey for injunctive relief as is necessary to prevent such actions.
75.Editor's Note: The listing of historic district properties is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 141-109 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION § 141-111
131:333
Chapter 149
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA; DRUG AND DRUNK-DRIVING-FREE
ZONES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 93.
§ 141-111 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 141-111
149:334
ARTICLE I
Drug Paraphernalia
[Adopted 2-19-1980 by Ord. No. 772 (Ch. 53 of the 1971 Code)]
§ 149-1. Sale of drug paraphernalia prohibited.
No person shall advertise, display, sell or offer to sell any type of syringe,
needle, eye dropper, spoon, pipe, testing kit, rolling paper or other
paraphernalia or appliances designed for or ordinarily used in smoking,
testing, weighing, measuring, injecting, cooking or sniffing marijuana,
cocaine, opium, hashish or other controlled dangerous substances as
defined by N.J.S.A. 24:21-1 et seq.
§ 149-2. Use of premises for manufacture or sale of drug
paraphernalia.
It shall constitute a common nuisance to maintain any building, conveyance
or premises whatever which is resorted to by persons for the manufacture,
distribution, dispensing, sale, administration or use of any type of syringe,
needle, eye dropper, spoon, pipe, testing kit, rolling paper or other
paraphernalia or appliances designed for or ordinarily used in smoking,
testing, weighing, measuring, injecting, cooking or sniffing marijuana,
cocaine, opium, hashish or other controlled dangerous substances as
defined by N.J.S.A. 24:21-1 et seq.
§ 149-3. Exemption.
Any person registered with the State Health Commissioner or referred to in
N.J.S.A. 24:21-10c shall be exempt from this article.
§ 149-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-5-1994 by Ord. No.
1058]
Any person, firm, corporation or other party violating any of the provisions
of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not
exceeding $1,000, imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding
90 days or a period of community service for not more than 90 days, or any
combination thereof. Each violation of and nonconformance with this article
or each day that any provision of this article shall have been violated shall
be construed as a separate and distinct violation thereof.
§ 149-1 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA; DRUG AND DRUNK- § 149-4
149:335

ARTICLE II
Drug-Free School Zones76
[Adopted 9-19-1988 by Ord. No. 930]
§ 149-5. Adoption of Drug-Free School Zone Map.
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of P.L. 1988, c. 44 (N.J.S.A.
2C:35-7), the Drug-Free School Zone Map produced on or about December
1987 by Thomas A.M. Fisher, Borough Engineer, is hereby approved and
adopted as an official finding and record of the location and areas within
the municipality of property which is used for school purposes and which is
owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board
and of the areas on or within 1,000 feet of such school property.
§ 149-6. Map to constitute official record.
The Drug-Free School Zone Map approved and adopted pursuant to § 149-5
of this article shall continue to constitute an official finding and record as
to the location and boundaries of areas on or within 1,000 feet of property
owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board,
which is used for school purposes, until such time, if any, that this article
shall be amended to reflect any additions or deletions with respect to the
location and boundaries of school property and Drug-Free School Zones.
§ 149-7. Notification of boundary changes.
The school board or the chief administrative officer, in the case of any
private or parochial school, is hereby directed and shall have the continuing
obligation to promptly notify the Borough Engineer and the Borough
Attorney of any changes or contemplated changes in the location and
boundaries of any property owned by or leased to any elementary or
secondary school or school board and which is used for school purposes.
§ 149-8. Availability of copies of map.
The Clerk of the municipality is hereby directed to receive and to keep on
file the original of the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 149-5 of this
article and to provide at a reasonable cost a true copy thereof to any person,
agency or court who or which may, from time to time, request such a copy,
along with a certification that such copy is a true copy of the map approved
and adopted herein and kept on file. It is hereby further directed that a true
copy of such map and of this article shall be provided without cost to the
County Clerk and to the office of the Camden County Prosecutor.
§ 149-9. Additional findings.
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
76.Editor's Note: See also § 281-1 regarding cigarette-free school zones.
§ 149-5 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA; DRUG AND DRUNK- § 149-9
149:337
A. It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 149-5
of this article was prepared and is intended to be used as evidence in
prosecutions arising under the criminal laws of this state and that,
pursuant to state law, such map shall constitute prima facie evidence of
the following:
(1) The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
municipality.
(2) The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to
such schools or a school board.
(3) That such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes.
(4) The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000
feet of such school property.
B. All of the property depicted on the map approved and adopted herein as
school property was owned by a school or school board and was being
used for school purposes as of July 9, 1987, that being the effective
dated of P.L. 1987, c. 101 (N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7).
C. Pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1988, c. 44, a prosecutor is not
precluded from introducing or relying upon any other evidence or
testimony to establish a violation of the offense defined in that statute,
including use of a map or diagram other than the one approved and
adopted pursuant to § 149-5 of this article. The failure of the map
approved herein to depict the location and boundaries of any property
which is, in fact, used for school purposes and which is owned by or
leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board, whether
the absence of such depiction is the result of inadvertent omission or
the result of any changes in the location and boundaries of such
property which have not yet been incorporated into a revised approved
map, shall not be deemed to be an official finding and record that such
property is not owned by or leased to a school or school board or that
such property is not used for school purposes.
D. All of the requirements set forth in P.L. 1988, c. 44, concerning the
preparation, approval and adoption of a Drug-Free School Zone Map
have been complied with.
§ 149-9 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 149-9
149:338
ARTICLE III
Drunk-Driving-Free School Zones
[Adopted 10-2-2000 by Ord. No. 1230]
§ 149-10. Designation of school crossings.
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of P.L. 1999, c. 185, the
attached is a list of school crossings which have been so designated by the
Borough of Collingswood.77
§ 149-11. Adoption of map.
The Drunk-Driving-Free School Zones Map produced on or about July 21,
2000 by Kevin Zelinsky, the Borough Engineer, is hereby approved and
adopted as an official finding and record of the location and areas within
the municipality of property which is used for school purposes and which is
owned by or leased by any elementary or secondary school on school land
and of the areas on or within 1,000 feet of such school property.
§ 149-12. Map and list to constitute official findings.
The Drunk-Driving-Free School Zones Map approved and adopted pursuant
to § 149-11 of this article shall continue to constitute an official finding
and record as to the location and boundaries of areas on or within 1,000
feet of property owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school
or school board which is used for school purposes until such time, if any,
that this article shall be amended to reflect any additions or deletions with
respect to the location and boundaries of school property and drunk-driving/
drug-free school zones. The list of school crossings designated above by
the Borough Commissioners shall continue to constitute an official finding
and record of the location of school crossing zones within the Borough of
Collingswood until such time, if any, that this article shall be amended to
reflect any additions or deletions with respect to school crossing zones in
the Borough of Collingswood.
§ 149-13. Changes in locations or boundaries.
The school board, or the chief administrative officer in the case of any
private or parochial school, is hereby directed and shall have the continuing
obligation to promptly notify the office of the Borough Engineer and the
borough's Attorney of any changes or contemplated changes in the location
and boundaries of any property owned by or leased to any elementary or
secondary school or school board and which is used for school purposes or
of any additions or deletions to school crossings.
77.Editor's Note: Said list is on file in the borough offices.
§ 149-10 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA; DRUG AND DRUNK- § 149-14
149:339
§ 149-14. Original map and list to be on file; copies.
The Borough Clerk is hereby directed to receive and to keep on file the
original of the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 149-11 of this
article and the list of school crossings and to provide at a reasonable cost
a true copy thereof to any person, agency or court which may from time to
time request such a copy, along with a certification that such copy is a true
copy of the map approved and adopted herein and kept on file. It is hereby
further directed that a true copy of such map and list and of this article shall
be provided without cost to the Camden County Clerk and to the office of
the Camden County Prosecutor.
§ 149-15. Map and lists as evidence.
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
A. It is understood that the map and list approved and adopted pursuant to
this article was prepared and are intended to be used as evidence in
prosecutions arising under the criminal and traffic laws of this state and
that, pursuant to state law, such map and list shall constitute prima
facie evidence of the following:
(1) The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
municipality.
(2) The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to
such schools or a school board.
(3) That such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes.
(4) The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000
feet of such school property.
(5) The location of all school crossings in the Borough of Collingswood.
§ 149-14 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 149-15
149:340
Chapter 155
EMERGENCY, STATE OF
§ 155-1. Authority to declare state of emergency; powers of Mayor.
When there exists in the Borough of Collingswood a state of disaster or
emergency brought about by natural causes or by the action of any person
or persons and such state of disaster or emergency causes or may cause
violence and injury to be inflicted upon people in the Borough of
Collingswood and causes or may cause damage and destruction to property
in the Borough of Collingswood, both public and private, all being against
the health, safety and welfare of the people of the Borough of Collingswood,
then in that event, the Mayor or, in his absence, the Acting Mayor (herein
designated as "Mayor") shall have the authority to declare that a state
of disaster or emergency exists; and he shall have the authority and be
empowered to do the following:
§ 155-2. State of emergency or disaster to be publicized.
The Mayor, upon declaring that a state of disaster or emergency exists in
the Borough of Collingswood, shall forthwith advise any newspaper and
radio station located within the Borough of Collingswood or elsewhere
and shall request that the announced state of disaster or emergency be
publicized at once.
§ 155-3. Judgment of Mayor to be final and absolute. [Amended
8-15-1994 by Ord. No. 1058]
The judgment of the Mayor that a state of disaster or emergency exists
within the Borough of Collingswood and that it has caused or is likely to
cause injury and damage to person and property within the Borough of
Collingswood shall be final and absolute.
§ 155-4. Unlawful acts.
After the Mayor has declared that a state of disaster or emergency exists
in the Borough of Collingswood and has issued an order or proclamation
regulating the movements of persons or vehicles in or about the Borough
A. Issue orders or proclamations regulating the hours during which
persons shall be prohibited from remaining upon the public streets,
ways and places in the Borough of Collingswood.
B. Issue orders or proclamations regulating the hours during which
vehicular traffic shall be prohibited or restricted from traveling over the
streets of the Borough of Collingswood.
C. Issue orders or proclamations regulating the hours during which all
sales of gasoline by gasoline service stations in the Borough of
Collingswood shall be closed to business.
§ 149-15 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA; DRUG AND DRUNK- § 155-4
149:341
of Collingswood or the sale of gasoline by gasoline service stations in the
Borough, it shall be unlawful and a violation to be upon the streets, ways or
places in the borough, to drive vehicles over the streets in the borough or
to sell gasoline at any gasoline service station during the hours prohibited
by said order or proclamation unless otherwise permitted by the Borough of
Collingswood.
§ 155-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-15-1994 by Ord. No.
1058]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of an order or
proclamation issued by the Mayor shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject
to a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000), imprisonment for a
term not to exceed ninety (90) days or a period of community service not to
exceed ninety (90) days, or any combination thereof.
§ 155-6. Cost recovery. [Added 5-1-2017 by Ord. No. 1617]
The Borough shall be authorized to require reimbursement from:
§ 155-7. Definitions. [Added 5-1-2017 by Ord. No. 1617]
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ACCIDENT, INCLUDING NATURAL DISASTER — An unforeseen or
unexpected happening or occurrence which of itself causes great harm
or damage, or which creates the potential for great harm or damage to
individuals and/or property, and which requires immediate and prudent
securing and monitoring by the Borough, and/or agents of the Borough,
A. Those responsible for (either intentionally, accidentally, or as a result of
actions by others) or owning or controlling property affected by the
leaking, spilling, releasing or allowing certain hazardous substances or
materials to escape containment, or for damaged and/or downed power
lines, electric services lines, gas mains, gas service conduits, water
mains, sanitary sewer mains, storm sewer mains, occupancy leads,
telephone lines, cable television lines, traffic signals or signs; thereby
requiring the Borough and/or its agents to provide emergency
containment, cleaning, and/or disposal of hazardous substances or
materials, or for the securing the prudent monitoring of the site of an
accident or natural disaster, including those involving public or private
utilities.
B. Those responsible for (either intentionally, accidentally, or as a result of
actions by others) or owning or controlling property affected by or
involved in an emergency incident including bomb threats, vehicle fires,
illegal fires, a fire resulting from an outstanding prior notice of fire code
violation, extraction from vehicles involved in accidents, and accidentrelated
cleanup.
§ 155-4 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 155-7
149:342
to reduce the potential for such damage, but not including emergency
incidents.
BOMB THREAT — The verbal or written threat of a bomb or other explosive
device which if discharged as threatened would violate a federal, state or
local law, or cause property damage and/or personal injury or death.
DANGEROUS OR HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES OR MATERIALS — Any
substance (including gases or vapors) which if spilled, leaked, or otherwise
released from its container is dangerous or harmful to the environment or
human or animal life, health, or safety, or otherwise constitutes a danger,
threat or nuisance to the public health, safety or welfare. Hazardous
materials shall include but not be limited to such substances as chemicals
and gases, explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum-based
products, poisons, biologic agents, flammables, combustibles, hazardous
wastes, or corrosives. The Borough's Emergency Management Coordinator
or his designee shall have reasonable discretion to determine whether any
particular substance constitutes a hazardous material.
DECLARATION OF EMERGENCY — As defined in § 155-1.
EMERGENCY INCIDENT — A bomb threat, vehicle fire, an illegal fire,
extrication from vehicles involved in accidents, accident-related cleanup
and traffic officers for roadway closures due to vehicle accidents.
EMERGENCY RESPONSE — The providing, sending and/or utilization of
public works, police, fire and/or rescue services by the Borough at an
emergency incident or at an incident involving release of a dangerous or
hazardous substance or material, or an accident requiring immediate and
prudent securing and monitoring by the Borough and/or agents of the
Borough.
EXPENSE OF AN EMERGENCY RESPONSE —
ILLEGAL FIRE — A fire set or determined to have been set in violation of
a federal, state or local law and shall include an arson fire, a fire set in
violation of a no-burning ban or other and/or a fire set without a required
permit.
The expense for an emergency incident shall be according to a fee
schedule adopted by the Borough of Collingswood.
A.
For all other emergency responses, the direct costs incurred by the
Borough in making an appropriate emergency response to an accident
or incident, including the costs of providing police, fire-fighting and
rescue services, public works and/or other Borough personnel, or the
services of other agents of the Borough at the scene of an incident or
accident. Related administrative costs, which for agents of the Borough
shall be 15% of the actual charge to the Borough, accruing after the
occurrence of such incident or accident are also included. Such costs
and expenses shall include the salaries or wages, workers'
compensation benefits, and fringe benefits of the personnel responding
to the incident or accident and the costs of equipment and materials
used.
B.
§ 155-7 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA; DRUG AND DRUNK- § 155-7
149:343
RESPONSIBLE PARTY — Any individual, firm, corporation, association,
partnership, commercial entity, consortium, joint venture, government
entity or any other legal entity responsible for an emergency incident or any
owner, tenant, occupant or party in control of real and/or personal property
from which, onto which or related to which there is a public safety or fire
emergency incident and their heirs, estates, successors and assigns.
§ 155-8. Duty to remove and clean up. [Added 5-1-2017 by Ord. No.
1617]
It shall be the duty of any person, firm, corporation, public or private
utility, or any other entity directly or indirectly causing, contributing to,
or allowing the leakage, spillage or any other release of dangerous or
hazardous substances or materials, or owning or controlling property
affected thereby or requiring the securing and monitoring of sites or
locations of accidents and/or natural disasters, including downed power
lines and electric service lines, ruptured gas mains, gas service conduits,
water mains, occupancy leads, telephone lines, or cable television lines,
to immediately secure, monitor, and clean up the area or location in such
manner that the area or location involved is fully restored to the condition
existing prior to such occurrence. The Borough shall have no duty to
contain, clean up or dispose of any release of hazardous substances or
materials, or other materials, but in emergency situations the Borough's
Emergency Management Coordinator, or his designee, shall have the
authority to take whatever action is reasonably necessary to protect the
health, safety, and welfare of the general public including securing and
monitoring sites of accidents or providing for or arranging for the
containment, removal or clean up of any hazardous substances or materials.
The Borough shall inspect the site to insure that the cleanup has been fully
completed.
§ 155-9. Failure to remove and clean up. [Added 5-1-2017 by Ord.
No. 1617]
Any person or entity failing to comply with this chapter, and/or whether a
nonemergency incident, emergency response is provided by the Borough,
shall be liable to the Borough and shall reimburse the Borough for all costs
and expenses, including the costs incurred by the Borough or any agents the
Borough engages, for the complete abatement, cleanup, restoration and/or
securing of the affected area.
§ 155-10. Submittal of bill. [Added 5-1-2017 by Ord. No. 1617]
The Borough Administrator or Chief Financial Officer shall, within 10 days
of receiving itemized costs incurred for an emergency response, submit
a bill for the same by first class mail or personal delivery to any person
or entity liable for these expenses as previously enumerated under this
chapter. The bills shall require full payment within 30 days from the date of
billing.
§ 155-7 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 155-11
149:344
§ 155-11. Enforcement. [Added 5-1-2017 by Ord. No. 1617]
If any person or entity fails to reimburse the Borough as above provided,
the Borough shall have the right to bring an action in the appropriate court
to collect such costs. If such person or entity is the owner of real property
affected or practically affected by the release of hazardous materials, or
requiring emergency securement or monitoring, the Borough shall have
the right to add any and all costs of cleanup, restoration and/or of any
emergency response to the tax roll of such property and to levy and collect
such costs in the same manner as provided for the levy and collection of real
property taxes against said property.
§ 155-12. Procurement authority. [Added 5-1-2017 by Ord. No.
1617]
The Borough's Emergency Management Coordinator shall have the
authority to procure all necessary resources to enable the Borough to
respond as necessary to the events covered by this chapter and shall,
following the passage of the emergency circumstances, immediately
proceed with the required reporting and documentation procedures under
the Borough's purchasing policies or as otherwise required under the
statutes of New Jersey.78
Chapter 157
ENVIRONMENTAL HAZARDS
78.Editor's Note: Former § 155-13, Fee schedule, added 5-1-2017 by Ord. No. 1616, and which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 12-2-2019 by Ord. No. 1675.
§ 155-11 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA; DRUG AND DRUNK- § 155-12
149:345

ARTICLE I
Single-Use Plastic Bags
[Adopted 10-7-2019 by Ord. No. 1669]
§ 157-1. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to this article:
GOODS AND PRODUCTS — Items that are prepared and/or made to be
sold, including, but not limited to, clothing, food and groceries, prepared
foods, beverages, merchandise, books, jewelry, tobacco products, toys,
furnishings, novelty items, and any and all other things and items sold at
retail establishments or stores.
PRODUCE BAG or PRODUCT BAG — Any bag without handles that is used
exclusively to segregate produce, meats, other food items, and merchandise
to the point of sale inside a store or to prevent such items from coming
into direct contact with other purchased items, where such contact could
damage or contaminate other food or merchandise when placed together in
a reusable or recycled bag.
RECYCLABLE PAPER CARRYOUT BAG — A paper bag that meets all of the
following requirements:
RETAIL — The sale of goods and products for use and/or consumption.
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT or RETAIL STORE — Any commercial enterprise,
whether or not operated for profit, including, but not limited to, mercantile
establishments, department stores, food-service establishments,
restaurants, pharmacies, convenience and grocery stores, supermarkets,
clothing stores, seasonal and temporary businesses, special event vendors,
farmers' market vendors, jewelry stores, and stores which sell household
goods, or any other commercial establishment not specifically identified
herein, which may utilize single-use plastic bags for the conveyance of
merchandise by its customers in the Borough of Collingswood.
A. Contains no old-growth fiber;
Is 100% recyclable overall and contains a minimum of 40% postconsumer
recycled material;
B.
Is capable of composting, consistent with the timeline and
specifications of American Society of Testing and Materials (ASTM)
Standard 06400;
C.
D. Is accepted for recycling in curbside programs in the Borough;
Has printed on the bag the name of the manufacturer, the location
where the bag was manufactured, and the percentage of post-consumer
recycled material used; and
E.
Displays the word "recyclable" in a visible manner on the outside of the
bag.
F.
§ 157-1 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA; DRUG AND DRUNK- § 157-1
149:347
REUSABLE BAG — A bag that is designed and manufactured to withstand
repeated uses over a period of time, is machine washable or made from a
material that can be cleaned and disinfected regularly, is at least 2.25 mil
thick if made from plastic, has a minimum lifetime of 75 uses, and is capable
of carrying a minimum of 18 pounds.
SINGLE-USE, PLASTIC CARRYOUT BAG — A bag, sheet or receptacle
produced or manufactured from a material commonly known as "plastic"
or "polyethylene" provided at the check-out stand, cash register, point of
sale, or other point of departure for the purpose of transporting goods or
products out of the establishment. The term "single-use, plastic carryout
bag does" not include reusable bags or garment bags (see other exemptions
under "Exemptions" section79).
§ 157-2. Prohibition on use of single-use, plastic carryout bags.
No retail establishments or retail stores shall provide or offer to any
customer single-use, plastic carryout bags at the check stand, cash register,
or point of sale, as otherwise provided in this article. This prohibition shall
become effective on April 15, 2020. Until such time, beginning on October
15, 2019, retail establishments and retail stores shall be encouraged to
implement the provisions of this article on a voluntary basis. The owners
and operators of such establishments and stores will be solicited and
notified by representatives of the Borough in cooperation with Sustainable
Collingswood ("Collingswood Green Team") of the requirements of this
article. The Borough shall track progress and coordinate with the Green
Team to provide retail establishments and retail stores with technical
assistance and advise of best practices to implement alternatives to plastic
bags.
§ 157-3. Exemptions.
The following exemptions shall apply to the requirements of this article:
A. Produce or product bags provided by operators and used by consumers
inside retail establishments to:
(1) Contain or wrap frozen foods, meat, or fish, whether packaged or
not;
(2) Contain or wrap flowers, potted plants, or other items where
dampness may be an issue;
(3) Contain unwrapped prepared foods or bakery goods;
(4) Contain unpackaged bulk produce such as fruit, vegetables, herbs
or flavors; or
(5) Contain refrigerated butchered meat and fish;
79.Editor's Note: See § 157-3, Exemptions.
§ 157-1 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 157-3
149:348
§ 157-4. Permitted.
Retail establishments and retail stores shall also satisfy the requirements
of this article by providing the following alternatives to single-use plastic
carryout bags to their customers.
§ 157-5. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be subject to the following
requirements and penalties:
(6) Bag used to protect a purchased item from damaging or
contaminating other purchased items when placed in a recycled
paper bag or reusable grocery bag;
(7) A bag other than a single-use plastic bag at point of sale as defined
in the definitions section of this article that is designed specifically
for food and customer safety (prepared foods for delivery or offpremises
consumption).
B. Newspaper bags, door-hanger bags, laundry and/or dry-cleaning bags,
bags provided by a pharmacy to a customer purchasing a prescription
medication, or bags sold in packages containing multiple bags intended
for use as food storage bags, garbage bags, yard waste bags, or pet
waste bags.
A. Alternative carryout bags.
(1) All retail establishments and retail stores may provide customers
with reusable bags and/or recyclable paper bags as defined in this
article as an alternative to single-use plastic carryout bags. Retail
establishments are required to charge a minimum fee of $0.10 to
customers for reusable bags or recyclable paper carryout bags that
meet the requirements in this article.
(2) A retail establishment or retail store may choose, in its discretion,
to provide a credit to customers that choose to bring their own
bags.
(3) A retail establishment or retail store may sell reusable bags for an
amount determined by the retail establishment or retail store.
(4) Each retail establishment and retail store is strongly encouraged to
educate its staff to promote the use of reusable bags, and to post
signs encouraging customers to bring their own reusable bags.
A. A duly designated representative of the Borough of Collingswood shall
have the responsibility for enforcement of this article and may, if
considered to be necessary in the implementation of this article,
promulgate reasonable rules and regulations in order to enforce the
provisions thereof, including, but not limited to, investigating violations
and imposing penalties.
§ 157-3 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA; DRUG AND DRUNK- § 157-5
149:349
§ 157-6. Temporary exemption requests.
Any retail establishment or retail store may apply in writing to the
Borough's designated representative for a temporary exemption from the
requirements of this article, due to demonstrated hardship in implementing
this article within the time period set forth herein.
§ 157-7. No conflict with federal or state law.
Nothing in this article is intended to create any requirement, power or duty
that is in conflict with any federal or state law.
§ 157-8. Severability.
The provisions of this article are declared to be severable, and if any
section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase thereof for any reason be
held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections,
subsections, sentences, clauses and phrases of this article, but shall remain
in effect; it being the legislative intent that this article shall stand
notwithstanding the invalidity of any part.
B. Any retail establishment or retail store that violates or fails to comply
with any of the requirements of this article after an initial written
warning notice has been issued for that violation shall be liable for
infraction violation.
C. If a retail establishment or store has subsequent violations of this
article after the issuance of an initial written warning of a violation, the
following penalties will be imposed and shall be payable by the operator
of the retail establishment or store:
(1) A fine not exceeding $150 for the first violation after a written
warning; and
(2) A fine not exceeding $250 for the second violation after the written
warning; and
(3) A fine not exceeding $500 for the third and any subsequent
violations after the written warning.
A. Exemption decisions are effective upon Borough approval, shall be
considered to be final, and they are not appealable except as otherwise
provided for by law. The Borough's designated representative may also
impose conditions upon approval of any temporary exemption request.
B. A fee of $50 shall be required for all exemption requests.
C. Temporary exemptions may be granted for a period not to exceed six
months.
§ 157-5 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 157-8
149:350
Chapter 163
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 29.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 113.
Fire damaged buildings — See Ch. 115.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 117.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 135.
Development regulations — See. Ch. 141.
Hazardous substances — See Ch. 177.
Fire insurance claims — See Ch. 181, Art. I.
Key boxes — See Ch. 186.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 227.
§ 157-8 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA; DRUG AND DRUNK- § 157-8
149:351

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 163-1. Local enforcement.
Pursuant to § 11 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983, c. 383),80 the
New Jersey Uniform Fire Code shall be locally enforced in the Borough of
Collingswood.
§ 163-2. Local enforcing agency designated.
The local enforcement agency of this article shall be the Bureau of Fire
Prevention of the Municipal Fire Department or any other agency
designated by the Borough.
§ 163-3. Duties of local enforcing agency.
The local enforcing agency shall enforce the Uniform Fire Safety Act,81
codes and regulations adopted under it in all buildings, structures and
premises within the geographic boundaries of the Borough of Collingswood
and shall faithfully comply with the requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety
Act and the Uniform Fire Code.
§ 163-4. Life-hazard uses.
The local enforcing agency established by § 163-2 of this chapter shall carry
out the periodic inspections of life-hazard uses required by the Uniform Fire
Code on behalf of the Commissioners of Community Affairs.
§ 163-5. Organization; supervision over local enforcing agency.
The local enforcing agency established by § 163-2 of this chapter shall be
a part of the Department of Public Safety. This local enforcing agency shall
be under the direct supervision and control of the Fire Official, who shall
report to the Municipal Fire Chief of the Borough of Collingswood. If the
Fire Official and the Fire Chief are the same person, the Fire Official shall
report to the Director of Public Safety.
§ 163-6. Fire Official; inspectors and other employees.
A. The local enforcing agency shall be under the supervision of a Fire
Official who shall be appointed by the Borough of Collingswood Board
of Commissioners.
B. The Fire Official shall serve for a term of three years. Any vacancy shall
be filled for the unexpired term by appointment as provided in this
section.
80.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-202.
81.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.
§ 163-1 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA; DRUG AND DRUNK- § 163-6
149:353
§ 163-7. Appeals.
Pursuant to §§ 15 and 17 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act,82 any person
aggrieved by any order of the local enforcement agency shall have the right
to appeal to the Construction Board of Appeals of Camden County.
§ 163-8. Additional inspections and fees; exemption.
In addition to the inspection and fees required pursuant to the Act and
the regulations of the Department of Community Affairs, the following
additional inspections and fees shall be required:
C. An alternate Fire Official also shall be appointed as provided herein for
the same term. The alternate Fire Official shall serve only in the
absence of the Fire Official and shall have the same authority of the Fire
Official while serving in that capacity.
D. All fire inspectors and any other employees as may be necessary for the
local enforcing agency shall be appointed by the Borough of
Collingswood Fire Office and upon the recommendation of the Fire
Chief.
E. The Fire Official and Fire Inspectors and other employees of the local
enforcing agency shall be subject to removal by the Borough of
Collingswood pursuant to any applicable state or federal laws. Each
Fire Inspector or other employee to be removed shall be afforded an
opportunity to be heard by the appointing authority or a designated
hearing officer.
A. All commercial, business or office uses which are not covered by the
life-hazard use registration shall be inspected annually. Multifamily
dwellings (other than owner-occupied one- and two-family dwellings)
shall be included herein as a commercial use.
(1) The fee per unit for inspections for such units shall be:
Housing
Inspection Fee
H1 1 to 7 units $65
H2 8 to 14 units $55
H3 15 to 21 units $50
H4 22 to 29 units $40
(2) Nonprofit organizations shall be exempt from the fee.
B. A license shall be issued by the Borough and shall be displayed in the
place of business, evidencing that the inspections required herein have
82.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-206 and 52:27D-208, respectively.
§ 163-6 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 163-8
149:354
§ 163-9. Establishment of fees.
occurred. The license shall state the type of business being conducted
on the premises.
A. Life-hazard uses. All fees established in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:70-2.9 shall be invoiced by and paid to the New Jersey Division of Fire
Safety.
B. Non-life-hazard uses.
(1) In addition to the registration required by the Uniform Fire Code,
the following non-life-hazard uses shall register with the local
enforcing agency. These uses shall be inspected on an annual
(twelve-month) schedule established by the local enforcing agency
and shall pay an annual fee as set forth below. No use required to
register with the State of New Jersey as a life-hazard use shall be
required to register pursuant to this section.
(2) The tenant or user or occupant of a tenant space will be responsible
to register and pay the fee for the space that a tenant or occupant
of the space actually occupies. All fees are based on the user group
assigned and the gross square footage of the area being registered.
(3) In buildings that have common and/or public areas, the owner of
the building is responsible to register and pay the fee for those
common and/or public areas.
(4) For buildings designated as office use groups, the building owner
will be responsible for payment of the registration fee. The fee will
be based on the total square footage of the building.
(5) All registrations will be for a period of one year. Fees are not
refundable.
C. Business, mercantile, commercial, factory, industrial, storage,
warehousing or utilities.
(1) All fees for this category shall be as set forth in the following table.
(2) Exception: The following not-for-profit agencies, businesses and
civic organizations are exempt from the inspection fees as
established in Article II and from the permit fees established in the
Uniform Fire Safety Code:
(a) State, county and municipal operations within the Borough of
Collingswood.
(b) Local churches and/or synagogues within the Borough of
Collingswood.
§ 163-8 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA; DRUG AND DRUNK- § 163-9
149:355
(c) Local civic organizations that are located within and directly
benefit the residents of the Borough of Collingswood,
respectively.
(3) The following table outlines registration fees based on business use
group:
Business Use Group Fee
B-1 Buildings 2,999 square feet and less $80
B-2 Buildings in excess of 3,000 square feet
and not exceeding 4,999 square feet
$125
B-3 Buildings in excess of 5,000 square feet
and not exceeding 9,999 square feet
$195
B-4 Buildings in excess of 10,000 square feet
and not exceeding 14,999 square feet
$255
B-5 Buildings in excess of 15,000 square feet
and not exceeding 24,999 square feet
$355
B-6 Buildings in excess of 25,000 square feet
and not exceeding 49,999 square feet
$480
B-7 Buildings in excess of 50,000 square feet
and not exceeding 99,999 square feet
$605
B-8 Buildings in excess of 100,000 square feet
and not exceeding 199,999 square feet
$755
B-9 Buildings in excess of 200,000 square feet
and not exceeding 299,999 square feet
$905
Each additional 100,000 square feet $355
D. Collingswood residential fire inspection fees.
(1) Residential properties with 30 or more units shall pay an annual
fire inspection fee based on the square footage of the common
areas only in accordance with the table below.
(a) Exception: life-hazard-use buildings.
(2) Residential properties with less than 30 units shall pay a $30
annual fire inspection fee per unit in addition to the residential
housing fees.
(a) Exception: life-hazard-use buildings.
(3) Residential properties with only one residential unit shall pay a $55
annual fire inspection fee per unit in addition to the residential
housing fees.
(a) Exception: life-hazard-use buildings.
E. Collingswood residential fire inspection fees.
§ 163-9 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 163-9
149:356
(1) All fees for this category do not apply to owner-occupied units.
(2) The following table outlines registration fees based on residential
use group:
Residential User Group Fee
R-1 3 to 5 units $80
R-2 6 to 25 units $125
R-3 26 to 50 units $255
R-4 51 units to 100 units $455
R-5 Over 100 units $605
F. Residential housing inspection fees.
(1) Housing inspection fees shall be $65 per housing unit up to seven
units in addition to the residential fire inspection fee listed in
Subsection D.
(2) Housing inspection fees shall be $55 per housing unit from eight to
14 units.
(3) Housing inspection fees shall be $50 per housing unit from 15 to 21
units.
(4) Housing inspection fees shall be $40 per housing unit from 22 to 29
units.
(5) No housing inspection fee shall be charged for 30 or more units as
these properties will be required to submit to a certificate of
occupancy inspection and fee in Subsection J below.
(6) Housing inspection fees shall be set forth in accordance with the
table below:
Housing Inspection Fee
H1 1 to 7 units $65
H2 8 to 14 units $55
H3 15 to 21 units $50
H4 22 to 29 units $40
G. Fire and housing reinspection fees, use groups B1 to B9 and R1 to R5.
(1) The first reinspection shall be completed at no charge to the
responsible party.
(2) The second reinspection fee shall be $50.
(3) The third reinspection fee shall be $70.
§ 163-9 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA; DRUG AND DRUNK- § 163-9
149:357
(4) The fourth and all subsequent reinspection fees shall be $100 per
reinspection.
(5) The following table outlines reinspection fees for use groups B1 to
B9 and R1 to R5:
Reinspection Group Fee
RE1 First reinspection No fee
RE2 Second reinspection $50
RE3 Third reinspection $70
RE4 Fourth and all subsequent
reinspections
$100
H. Certificate of smoke alarm and carbon monoxide alarm and portable
fire extinguisher compliance (CSACMAPFEC).
(1) CSACMAPFEC-1, inspections requested on all one- and two-family
dwellings within 10 calendar days of the settlement date: $75.
(2) CSACMAPFEC-2, smoke detector/carbon monoxide inspections
requested on all one- and two-family dwellings within 10 calendar
days of the settlement date: $150.
(3) Senior citizen discounts in the amount of a $25 reduction in fees in
Subsection H(1) through (2) will be provided to Borough of
Collingswood senior citizen age 65 and older (proof of age
required) selling their home.
(4) The following table outlines fees for CSDCMAC:
CSDCMAC Group Fee
CSDCMAC-1 $75
CSDCMAC-2 $150
(5) The above fee for CSACMAPFEC entitles the applicant to one
inspection. Each additional reinspection requires an additional fee
of $50.
(6) A certificate is valid for a period of 180 days from the date of
issuance, or one change of ownership.
I. Exterior resale inspections.
(1) All fees for exterior property maintenance inspections required for
change of ownership shall be $50 for the initial inspection. No fee is
required for subsequent inspections.
(2) The fee in this section applies to all residential and commercial
properties.
§ 163-9 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 163-9
149:358
J. Apartment certificate of occupancy inspections. All fees for apartment
certificate of occupancy inspections shall be $75 for each inspection
and $75 for each and every reinspection.
K. Commercial occupancy certificate inspections. All fees for commercial
occupancy certificate inspections shall be $50 for each inspection.
There shall be no charge for reinspections.
L. Penalties.
(1) At no time shall penalties exceed the maximum permitted under
N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.12.
(2) Dedicated penalties shall be assessed in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:70-2.12A in the amount of $50 per violation only on the first
round (P1) of penalties.
(3) P3, P4, and P5 penalties shall be assessed from the date of the
initial inspection.
(4) Penalties for violations of the Uniform Fire Code shall be assessed
per violation in accordance with the below-listed schedule.
Penalty Group Fee
P1 First round $50 plus $50
dedicated
P2 Second round $500
P3 Third round $100 per day
P4 Fourth round $500 per day
P5 Fifth round Maximum permitted
by UFC
M. Fire incident and/or investigation reports.
(1) An administrative fee of $25 shall be charged to any entity
requesting reproduction of a fire incident, or fire investigative
report, which is not a public document under the New Jersey Open
Public Records Act.83
(2) Exception: Any Borough of Collingswood resident or business
owner will be entitled to reproductions of any of the abovereferenced
reports for incidents in which they are directly involved,
at no cost.
N. Certificate of Fire Code status. As per Section 5:70-2.2(e) [N.J.A.C.
5:70-2.2(e)] of the Uniform Fire Code, any request for a certificate of
Fire Code status shall be $25.
O. Permits.
83.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq.
§ 163-9 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA; DRUG AND DRUNK- § 163-9
149:359
(1) As defined and required by the Uniform Fire Code, the fees for
permits issued shall be set forth in the following table.
(2) The following table outlines the permit fee schedule:
Permit Type Fee
Type 1 $110
Type 2 $210
Type 3 $360
Type 4 $560
P. Civil court appearance and depositions. Any employee or volunteer
member of the Pennsauken Township or Borough of Collingswood Fire
Department subpoenaed to testify in civil court or a deposition shall
appear, and compensation shall be set forth as follows: actual cost
based on current salary as approved by the current collective
bargaining agreements, plus any additional cost that may be required
to backfill an employee's position if that employee is scheduled while on
duty. In addition, a per-mile charge based on federal government rate
plus tolls for distances exceeding 25 miles will apply. The Fire
Department(s) will charge a service charge of $25 for preparation of all
invoices.
Q. Investigative conferences and meetings. An uninterrupted ninetyminute
conference at the Fire Prevention and Inspection Bureau, on
site, or at a location designated by the requestor shall be set as follows:
$100 per hour.
R. Fire safety training. Fire safety training that is requested for the
purpose of compliance with a governmental regulation or other such
standard, including but not limited to fire extinguisher and evacuation
planning: $125 per hour (maximum 25 students).
S. Fire watch coverage.
(1) When requested or required to provide fire watch coverage due to
an emergency condition, requirement of permit function, or by
notice of violation and order to correct, the cost of such service will
be the current Fire Marshal's overtime pay rate, plus an additional
administrative fee of $100 for the actual cost of the processed
payroll.
(2) Failure for the property owner or designated property
representative to establish or properly document a fire watch when
requested by the Fire Department will result in an assessed penalty
not to exceed $1,000 per day for every day the condition exists.
T. Fire apparatus and personnel. When requested to provide fire
apparatus and personnel for nonexigent circumstances, the requestor
§ 163-9 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 163-9
149:360
must reimburse the Fire Department for the actual cost of the
personnel for the time provided and $150 per vehicle provided.
U. Cost of suppression. If the origin and cause of the fire results from a
violation of the Uniform Fire Safety Act previously cited by the Fire
Prevention and Inspection Bureau, the owner/occupant shall be
responsible for the cost of fire suppression. The cost of suppression
shall be computed based on the following formula: [hourly rate of all
personnel on location] plus [the cost of each vehicle on the incident
scene in accordance with Subsection M(1) above].
V. Collection of fees.
(1) Delinquent fees.
(a) All fees and registration forms must be returned to the Fire
Marshal's office within 30 days of having been mailed to the
user. Failure to respond within this thirty-day period will result
in a notice of violations being sent by the Fire Marshal to the
user. If the registration and fees are not returned within 15
days of the notice having been mailed to the user, penalties will
be imposed pursuant to the Uniform Fire Code. Failure to pay
the registration fee or any penalties assessed shall result in a
person being liable for a further penalty upon conviction for
nonpayment or nonregistration. The penalty upon conviction is
$100 for the first offense and up to $1,000 for each subsequent
offense.
(b) Collection of any unpaid fee or penalty shall be enforced
through the Borough of Collingswood Municipal Court or a
court of competent jurisdiction.
W. Inspection frequency.
(1) Life-hazard uses. Inspection frequency for life hazard uses will be
determined by the Uniform Fire Safety Act.
(2) Non-life-hazard use. The following table will show inspection
frequency based on use:
User Group Inspection Frequency
All user groups 12 Months
(3) Permit uses.
(a) Permit uses shall be inspected annually with the exception of
Subsection W(3)(a)[1] through [9] below.
[1] Fumigation permits shall be inspected quarterly by
calendar year.
[2] All roofing permits, kettle, torch, or otherwise, shall be
inspected per occurrence.
§ 163-9 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA; DRUG AND DRUNK- § 163-9
149:361
§ 163-10. Nicky's Law.
[3] All group/overnight stays shall be inspected per
occurrence.
[4] All live fire-training permits shall be inspected per
occurrence.
[5] All fireworks permits shall be inspected per occurrence.
[6] All tent permits shall be inspected per occurrence.
[7] All multipurpose room change of use permits shall be
inspected per occurrence.
[8] All bonfire permits shall be inspected per occurrence.
[9] All outdoor fireplace permits shall be inspected once per
ownership and are nontransferable.
(b) The following table shall show inspection frequency based on
permit use:
Permit Type Inspection Frequency
Type I thru Type IV 12 months
Fumigation 3 months
Roofing Per occurrence
Group overnight stay Per occurrence
Live fire training Per occurrence
Fireworks Per occurrence
Tent Per occurrence
Multipurpose room change of
use
Per occurrence
Bonfire Per occurrence
Outdoor fireplace Per ownership
(nontransferable)
A. Before any Use Group R-3 or R-4 structure is sold, leased or otherwise
made subject to a change of occupancy for residential purposes, the
owner shall obtain a certificate of smoke alarm and carbon monoxide
alarm and portable fire extinguisher compliance (CSACMAPFEC),
evidencing compliance with N.J.A.C. 5:70-4.19, for the enforcing agency
of the Borough of Collingswood established by § 163-2 of this chapter.
B. The owner, or authorized agent of the owner, shall apply for a
CSACMAPFEC on a form provided by the enforcing agency. The
application shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee as set forth in
Subsection C.
§ 163-9 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 163-10
149:362
§ 163-11. Rapid access key boxes.
All buildings with an automatic fire alarm system or sprinkler system are
required to have a rapid access key box in accordance with Chapter 186,
Key Boxes, of the Code of Collingswood.
§ 163-12. Enforcement of fire lanes.
The Fire Official or his/her designee shall have the ability to issue civil
penalties against persons who stop or stand a vehicle in a fire lane located
within the Borough of Collingswood as such fire lanes are described in
Schedule XXIV of Chapter 293 of the Borough of Collingswood Municipal
Code (§ 293-71.2).
C. The fee for the application for a CSACMAPFEC shall be as outlined in
§ 163-9H(4) of this Code.
D. All residential sleeping areas within the Borough shall have at least one
fully operable smoke detector located within each sleeping area. The
detector must meet the requirements in the New Jersey Uniform Fire
Code. All such residential sleeping areas enclosed by a door or
otherwise shall, in addition, have at least one fully operable smoke
detector located outside each sleeping area within 10 feet of such
sleeping area. Installation of the smoke detectors shall be in
accordance with the manufacturer recommendations and the National
Fire Safety Code, Borough ordinances or any other applicable statute or
ordinance. Additionally, a carbon monoxide detector(s) shall be
installed, meeting the requirements of UL Standard 2034; provided,
however, that no carbon monoxide alarm shall be required in any
building that does not contain any fuel-burning appliances and does not
have an attached garage.
E. A CSACMAPFEC shall not be transferable. If the change of occupancy
specified in the application for a CSDCMAC does not occur within six
months, a new application shall be required.
§ 163-10 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA; DRUG AND DRUNK- § 163-12
149:363

ARTICLE II
Outdoor and Open Burning
§ 163-13. Purpose.
This article shall amend Chapter 163 of the Borough of Collingswood
Uniform Fire Safety Regulations and is intended to promote the public
health, safety and welfare and to safeguard the health, comfort, living
conditions, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Borough of Collingswood
by regulating the air pollution and fire hazards of open burning and outdoor
burning.
§ 163-14. Applicability.
This article applies to all outdoor burning and open burning within the
Borough of Collingswood.
§ 163-15. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CAMPFIRE — A small outdoor fire intended for recreation or cooking, but
not including a fire intended for disposal of waste wood or refuse.
CLEAN WOOD — Natural wood which has not been painted, varnished
or coated with a similar material; has not been pressure treated with
preservatives; and does not contain resins or glues as in plywood or other
composite wood products.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE — Building waste materials,
including but not limited to waste shingles, insulation, lumber, treated
wood, painted wood, wiring, plastics, packaging, and rubble that results
from construction, remodeling, repair, and demolition operations on a
house, commercial or industrial building, or other structure.
FIRE OFFICIAL — The Fire Official of the Borough of Collingswood or other
person designated by the Fire Official.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Collingswood.
A. This article does not apply to grilling or cooking food using charcoal,
wood, propane or natural gas in cooking or grilling appliances.
B. This article does not apply to burning for the purpose of generating
heat in a stove, furnace, fireplace or other heating device within a
building used for human or animal habitation.
C. This article does not apply to the use of propane, acetylene, natural gas,
gasoline or kerosene in a device intended for heating, construction or
maintenance activities.
§ 163-13 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA; DRUG AND DRUNK- § 163-15
149:365
OPEN BURNING — Kindling or maintaining a fire where the products
of combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air without passing
through a stack or a chimney. This includes burning in a burn barrel.
OUTDOOR BURNING — Open burning or burning in an outdoor wood-fired
boiler or patio wood-burning unit.
OUTDOOR WOOD-FIRED BOILER — A wood-fired boiler, stove or furnace
that is not located within a building intended for habitation by humans or
domestic animals.
PATIO WOOD-BURNING UNIT — A chimnea, patio warmer, outdoor
fireplace or other portable wood-burning device used for outdoor recreation
and/or heating.
REFUSE — Any waste material, except trees, logs, brush, stumps, leaves,
grass clippings, and other vegetative matter.
§ 163-16. General prohibition.
Open burning and outdoor burning are prohibited in the Borough of
Collingswood unless the burning is specifically permitted by this article.
§ 163-17. Open burning of refuse.
Open burning of refuse is prohibited.
§ 163-18. Burning trees, logs, brush, stumps, leaves, and grass
clippings.
Open burning of trees, logs, brush, stumps, leaves, and grass clippings is
prohibited.
§ 163-19. Outdoor wood-fired boilers.
No person shall install, use, or maintain an outdoor wood-fired boiler in
the Borough of Collingswood, unless approved by permit through the
Construction Office.
§ 163-20. Patio wood-burning units.
A patio wood-burning unit may be installed and used in the Borough of
Collingswood only in accordance with all of the following provisions:
A. A permit must be obtained through the Fire Official.
B. The patio wood-burning unit shall not be used to burn refuse.
C. The patio wood-burning unit shall burn only clean dry wood.
D. The patio wood-burning unit shall be located at least 15 feet from the
nearest structure which is not on the same property as the patio woodburning
unit. The unit shall not be located less than five feet from
§ 163-15 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 163-20
149:366
§ 163-21. Permit.
A permit must be obtained through the Borough Fire Official's office. There
will be no fee for the permit, and it will be valid to the person or agency
to which it is issued for the length that that person or agency occupies the
property. This permit must be on hand, and available for inspection, anytime
that the patio wood-burning unit is in use.
§ 163-22. Liability.
A person utilizing or maintaining an outdoor fire shall be responsible for all
fire-suppression costs and any other liability resulting from damage caused
by the fire.
§ 163-23. Right of entry and inspection.
The Fire Official or any authorized officer, agent, employee or
representative of the Borough of Collingswood who presents credentials
may inspect any property for the purpose of ascertaining compliance with
the provisions of this article.
§ 163-24. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
combustible structures on the same property or on any decks, porches
or balconies.
E. The patio wood-burning unit and its by-products shall not cause a
nuisance to neighbors.
F. Must be in an approved container with an ember-suppressing lid.
(Stone/block fire pits must have a lid or screen.)
G. The use of flammable liquids and accelerants is prohibited.
H. Trees, brush, grass, leaves or other material is prohibited.
I. Must have working garden hose stretched to fireplace or proper fire
extinguisher within 10 feet.
A. The Fire Official, his/her designee and the Borough of Collingswood are
authorized to enforce the provisions of this article.
B. The Fire Official, at any time and with just cause, has the right to revoke
a permit.
C. Any person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or
governmental entity who or which violates any of the provisions of this
article or fails to comply with a duly authorized order issued pursuant
to this article shall be deemed to be responsible for a municipal civil
infraction which shall be punishable by a civil fine of no less than $50
and no more than $100.
§ 163-20 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA; DRUG AND DRUNK- § 163-24
149:367
D. The violator shall pay costs, which may include all expenses, direct and
indirect, which the Borough of Collingswood has incurred in connection
with the municipal infraction. In no case, however, shall costs of less
than $50 or more than $100 be ordered. In addition, the Borough of
Collingswood shall have the right to proceed in any court of competent
jurisdiction for the purpose of obtaining an injunction, restraining
order, or other appropriate remedy to compel compliance with this
article. Each day that a violation of this article exists shall constitute a
separate violation of this article.
§ 163-24 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 163-24
149:368
Chapter 167
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental Commission — See Ch. 23.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 135.
Development regulations — See Ch. 141.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 263.
§ 163-24 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA; DRUG AND DRUNK- § 163-24
149:369

ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization; Findings of Fact; Purpose and Objectives
§ 167-1. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et seq.
delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote public health, safety, and general welfare
of its citizenry. Therefore, the Mayor and Commissioners of Collingswood
Borough of Camden County, New Jersey does ordain as follows.
§ 167-2. Findings of fact.
§ 167-3. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
A. The flood hazard areas of the Collingswood Borough are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and
velocities, and when inadequately anchored, causes damage in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
A. Protect human life and health;
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
§ 167-1 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA; DRUG AND DRUNK- § 167-3
149:371
§ 167-4. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters;
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 167-3 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 167-4
149:372
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 167-5. Terms defined.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
AH ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by one-percent-annual-chance
shallow flooding (usually areas of ponding) where average depths are
between one and three feet. Base flood elevations (BFEs) derived from
detailed hydraulic analyses are shown in this zone.
AO ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by one-percent-annual-chance
shallow flooding (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain) where average
depths are between one and three feet.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Borough Administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO or AH Zone on a
community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with a one-percentannual
or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding
is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — Land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year. It is shown on the FIRM as Zone V, VE, V1-30, A, AO, A1-A30,
AE, A99, or AH.
BASE FLOOD — A flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The flood elevation shown on a
published Flood Insurance Study (FIS) including the Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM). For Zones AE, AH, AO, and A1-30 the elevation represents
the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. For Zones
VE and V1-30, the elevation represents the stillwater elevation (SWEL) plus
wave effect (BFE = SWEL + wave effect) resulting from a flood that has a
one-percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
§ 167-5 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA; DRUG AND DRUNK- § 167-5
149:373
COASTAL A ZONE — The portion of the special flood hazard area (SFHA)
starting from a Velocity (V) Zone and extending up to the landward limit
of the moderate wave action delineation. Where no V Zone is mapped, the
Coastal A Zone is the portion between the open coast and the landward limit
of the moderate wave action delineation. Coastal A Zones may be subject to
wave effects, velocity flows, erosion, scour, or a combination of these forces.
Construction and development in Coastal A Zones is to be regulated the
same as V Zones/coastal high-hazard areas.
COASTAL HIGH-HAZARD AREA — An area of special flood hazard
extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along
an open coast and any other area subject to high-velocity wave action from
storms or seismic sources.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood
hazard.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM) — The official map on
which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A non-basement building built, in the case of a
building in an area of special flood hazard, to have the top of the elevated
floor or, in the case of a building in a Coastal A Zone, to have the bottom
of the lowest horizontal structural member of the elevated floor, elevated
above the base flood elevation plus freeboard by means of piling, columns
(posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water, and
adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the
building during a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. In an area of
special flood hazard, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated
by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient
to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In Areas of Coastal
A Zones "elevated building" also includes a building otherwise meeting the
definition of "elevated building" even though the lower area is enclosed by
means of breakaway walls.
EROSION — The process of the gradual wearing away of land masses.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
§ 167-5 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 167-5
149:374
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report in which the
Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the
Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion
control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term
describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which
provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without accumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than
0.2 foot.
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood
level for purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and
floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the
hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed or existing walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
B.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
§ 167-5 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA; DRUG AND DRUNK- § 167-5
149:375
LIMIT OF MODERATE WAVE ACTION (LiMWA) — Inland limit of the area
affected by waves greater than 1.5 feet during the base flood. Base flood
conditions between the V Zone and the LiMWA will be similar to, but less
severe than those in the V Zone.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, useable solely for
the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than
a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such
enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable nonelevation design requirements of 44 CFR 60.3.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION
— A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation adopted
by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
A. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the longest
horizontal projections;
B.
§ 167-5 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 167-5
149:376
SAND DUNES — Naturally occurring or man-made accumulations of sand
in ridges or mounds landward of the beach.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L.
No. 97-348), includes substantial improvements and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The "actual start" means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site such as
the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings or piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
"actual start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a
gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its condition before damage
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start
of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
C.
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
D.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure.
B.
§ 167-5 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA; DRUG AND DRUNK- § 167-5
149:377
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter that
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter. A new or substantially improved structure or
other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or
other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10),
(e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
§ 167-5 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 167-5
149:378
ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 167-6. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of Collingswood Borough, Camden County, New Jersey.
§ 167-7. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
§ 167-8. Violations and penalties.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, relocated to, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined
not more than $10,000 for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs
and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent
Collingswood Borough, from taking such other lawful action as is necessary
to prevent or remedy any violation.
§ 167-9. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 167-10. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
A. The areas of special flood hazard for Collingswood Borough,
Community No. 340131, are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) A scientific and engineering report, "Flood Insurance Study,
Camden County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)," dated August 17,
2016.
(2) "Flood Insurance Rate Map for Camden County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions)," as shown on Index and panel(s) 34007C0036F,
34007C0037F, 34007C0039F, 34007C0041E, whose effective date
is August 17, 2016.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study, maps and advisory documents
are on file at 678 Haddon Avenue, Collingswood, New Jersey.
§ 167-6 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA; DRUG AND DRUNK- § 167-10
149:379
§ 167-11. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Considered as minimum requirements;
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
A. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural
causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special
flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of Collingswood
Borough, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance
Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 167-10 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 167-11
149:380
ARTICLE IV
Administration
§ 167-12. Establishment of development permit.
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins, including placement of manufactured homes, within any area of
special flood hazard established in § 167-7. Application for a development
permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Borough Administrator and
may include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing
the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question;
existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities;
and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is
required:
§ 167-13. Designation of local administrator.
The Borough Administrator is hereby appointed to administer and
implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit
applications in accordance with its provisions.
§ 167-14. Duties and responsibilities of administrator.
Duties of the Borough Administrator shall include, but not be limited to:
A. Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures;
B. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been
floodproofed;
C. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in § 167-17B; and
D. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
A. Permit review.
(1) Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(2) Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
(3) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway,
assure that the encroachment provisions of § 167-18A are met.
(4) Review all development permits in the Coastal A Zone area of the
area of special flood hazard to determine if the proposed
§ 167-12 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA; DRUG AND DRUNK- § 167-14
149:381
development alters the terrain or sand dunes so as to increase
potential flood damage.
(5) Review plans for walls to be used to enclose space below the base
flood level in accordance with § 167-19B(4).
B. Use of other base flood and floodway data. When base flood elevation
and floodway data has not been provided in accordance with section
§ 167-7, Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard, the
Borough Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any
base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or
other source, in order to administer sections § 167-17A, Specific
standards, Residential construction, and § 167-17B, Specific standards,
Nonresidential construction.
C. Information to be obtained and maintained.
(1) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.
(2) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
§ 167-12C.
(3) In Coastal A Zone areas, certification shall be obtained from a
registered professional engineer or architect that the provisions of
§ 167-19B(1) and (2)(a) and (b) are met.
(4) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
D. Alteration of watercourses.
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control Section
and the Land Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
(2) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so the flood-carrying capacity
is not diminished.
E. Substantial damage review.
(1) After an event resulting in building damages, assess the damage to
structures due to flood and non-flood causes.
§ 167-14 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 167-14
149:382
§ 167-15. Variance procedure.
(2) Record and maintain the flood and non-flood damage of substantial
damage structures and provide a letter of Substantial Damage
Determination to the owner and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control Section.
(3) Ensure substantial improvements meet the requirements of
§ 167-17A, Specific standards, Residential construction, and
§ 167-17B, Specific standards, Nonresidential construction.
F. Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. Make interpretations where
needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict
between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in § 167-15.
A. Appeal board.
(1) The Planning Board as established by Mayor and Commissioners
shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
(2) The Planning Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Borough Administrator in the
enforcement or administration of this chapter.
(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Planning Board, or any
taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the Collingswood Municipal
Court, as provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D.
(4) In passing upon such applications, the Planning Board shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
§ 167-14 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA; DRUG AND DRUNK- § 167-15
149:383
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program of that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
(5) Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection A(4) and the
purposes of this chapter, the Planning Board may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to
further the purposes of this chapter.
(6) The Borough Administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions, including technical information, and report any variances
to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
B. Conditions for variances.
(1) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, provided that the
items in Subsection A(4)(a) through (k) have been fully considered.
As the lot size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
(2) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
(3) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
§ 167-15 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 167-15
149:384
(4) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
(5) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public as identified in Subsection A(4),
or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(6) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
§ 167-15 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA; DRUG AND DRUNK- § 167-15
149:385

ARTICLE V
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
§ 167-16. General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard, compliance with the applicable
requirements of the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23) and the
following standards, whichever is more restrictive, is required:
A. Anchoring.
(1) All new construction to be placed or substantially improved and
substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement of the structure.
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use
of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
C. Utilities.
(1) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(2) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters;
(3) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
and
(4) For all new construction and substantial improvements the
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
D. Subdivision proposals.
§ 167-16 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA; DRUG AND DRUNK- § 167-16
149:387
§ 167-17. Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in § 167-7, Basis for establishing areas of special
flood hazard or in § 167-14B, Use of other base flood data, the following
standards are required:
(1) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(2) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize
flood damage;
(3) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage; and
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed new development which contain at
least 50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
E. Enclosure openings. All new construction and substantial
improvements having fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that
are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in
an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings in at least two exterior
walls of each enclosed area, having a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than
one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
or other covering or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. Residential construction.
(1) For Coastal A Zone construction see § 167-19, Coastal A Zone.
(2) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure located in an A or AE Zone shall have the lowest floor,
including basement together with the attendant utilities and
sanitary facilities, elevated at or above the base flood elevation plus
one foot or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1, whichever is
more restrictive.
(3) Require within any AO or AH Zone on the municipality's FIRM that
all new construction and substantial improvement of any
§ 167-16 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 167-17
149:388
residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including
basement together with the attendant utilities and sanitary
facilities, elevated above the depth number specified in feet plus
one foot, above the highest adjacent grade (at least three feet if no
depth number is specified). And, require adequate drainage paths
around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away
from proposed structures.
B. Nonresidential construction.
(1) In an area of special flood hazard, all new construction and
substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other
nonresidential structure located in an A or AE Zone (for Coastal A
Zone construction see § 167-19, Coastal A Zone) shall have the
lowest floor, including basement together with the attendant
utilities and sanitary facilities:
(a) Either:
[1] Elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus one foot
or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1, whichever is
more restrictive; and
[2] Require within any AO or AH Zone on the municipality's
DFIRM to elevate above the depth number specified in feet
plus one foot, above the highest adjacent grade (at least
three feet if no depth number is specified); and require
adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures;
(b) Or:
[1] Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level plus one
foot or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 6-1,
whichever is more restrictive, the structure is watertight
with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water;
[2] Have structural components capable of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of
buoyancy; and
[3] Be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect that the design and methods of construction are
in accordance with accepted standards of practice for
meeting the applicable provisions of this subsection. Such
certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in
§ 167-14C(2)(b).
C. Manufactured homes.
§ 167-17 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA; DRUG AND DRUNK- § 167-17
149:389
§ 167-18. Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in § 167-7 are areas
designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area
due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles,
and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
§ 167-19. Coastal A Zone.
Coastal A Zones are located within the areas of special flood hazard
established in § 167-7. These areas may be subject to wave effects, velocity
flows, erosion, scour, or a combination of these forces; therefore, the
following provisions shall apply:
(1) Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
§ 167-16A(2).
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall:
(a) Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(b) Be constructed to minimize flood damage;
(c) Have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage; and
(d) Be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the top of the
lowest floor is at or above the base flood elevation plus one foot
or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1, whichever is
more restrictive.
A. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development unless a technical evaluation
demonstrates that encroachment shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
B. If Subsection A is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements must comply with Article V, Provisions for Flood Hazard
Reduction.
C. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data
has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
accumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than 0.2 foot at any
point.
A. Location of structures.
(1) All buildings or structures shall be located landward of the reach of
the mean high tide.
§ 167-17 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 167-19
149:390
(2) The placement of manufactured homes shall be prohibited, except
in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision.
B. Construction methods.
(1) Elevation. All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be elevated on piling or columns so that:
(a) The bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the
lowest floor (excluding the piling or columns) is elevated to or
above the base flood elevation plus one foot or as required by
ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 4-1, whichever is more restrictive; and
(b) With all space below the lowest floor's supporting member
open so as not to impede the flow of water, except for
breakaway walls as provided or in Subsection B(4).
(2) Structural support.
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
securely anchored on piling or columns.
(b) The pile or column foundation and structure attached thereto
shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral
movement due to the effects of wind and water loading values
each of which shall have a one-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year (one-hundred-year
mean recurrence interval).
(c) Prohibit the use of fill for structural support of buildings within
Coastal A Zones on the community's FIRM.
(3) Certification. A registered professional engineer or architect shall
develop or review the structural design specifications and plans for
the construction and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction to be used are in accordance with accepted standards
of practice for compliance with the provisions of Subsection B(1)
and (2)(a) and (b).
(4) Space below the lowest floor.
(a) Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a
structure started after the enactment of this chapter shall not
enclose the space below the lowest floor unless breakaway
walls, open wood lattice-work or insect screening are used as
provided for in this section.
(b) Breakaway walls, open wood lattice-work or insect screening
shall be allowed below the base flood elevation provided that
they are intended to collapse under wind and water loads
without causing collapse, displacement or other structural
damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting
foundation system. Breakaway walls shall be designed for a
§ 167-19 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA; DRUG AND DRUNK- § 167-19
149:391
safe loading resistance of not less than 10 and no more than
20 pounds per square foot. Use of breakaway walls which
exceed a design safe loading of 20 pounds per square foot
(either by design or when so required by local or state codes)
may be permitted only if a registered professional engineer or
architect certifies that the designs proposed meet the following
conditions.
[1] Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less
than that which would occur during the base flood; and
[2] The elevated portion of the building and supporting
foundation system shall not be subject to collapse,
displacement or other structural damage due to the effects
of wind and water load acting simultaneously on all
building components (structural and nonstructural). Water
loading values used shall be those associated with the base
flood. Wind loading values used shall be those required by
applicable state or local building standards.
(c) If breakaway walls are utilized, such enclosed space shall be
used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage
and not for human habitation.
(d) Prior to construction, plans for any breakaway wall must be
submitted to the Construction Code Official or Building
Subcode Official for approval.
C. Sand dunes. Prohibit man-made alteration of sand dunes within Coastal
A Zones on the community's DFIRM which would increase potential
flood damage.
§ 167-19 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 167-19
149:392
ARTICLE VI
Enactment
§ 167-20. When effective.
This chapter shall be effective on August 17, 2016, and shall remain in force
until modified, amended or rescinded by Collingswood Borough, Camden
County, New Jersey.
§ 167-20 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA; DRUG AND DRUNK- § 167-20
149:393
Chapter 171
GAMES OF CHANCE
§ 167-20 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 167-20
149:394
ARTICLE I
Raffle Licensing
[Adopted 12-28-2007 by Ord. No. 1441]
§ 171-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish a procedure and authorize rules
and regulations thereunder for the licensing of raffles to be conducted by
charitable organizations within the Borough of Collingswood. The Borough
has determined that raffles will promote the public interest by raising funds
for the benefit of charitable organizations.
§ 171-2. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, corporation,
association or organization of any kind (hereinafter collectively referred
to as "applicant") to create, establish, operate, maintain or otherwise be
engaged in conducting a raffle within the Borough of Collingswood unless
such applicant shall hold a currently valid license issued pursuant to the
terms of this article.
§ 171-3. Application for license.
A. Pursuant to the Raffles Licensing Law, N.J.S.A. 5:8-50 et seq.
(hereinafter referred to as "the Act"), application for the required
license shall be made to the Borough Clerk and shall be signed by the
applicant. The application shall be signed by the Chief of Police and
contain the following information:
(1) A description of the entity wishing to apply for a license to conduct
a raffle within the Borough of Collingswood, including the name
and address of the applicant along with sufficient facts relating to
its incorporation and organization to enable the Borough to
determine that the applicant is a bona fide organization or
association of veterans of any war in which the United States has
been engaged, or a church or a religious congregation or religious
organization, or a charitable, educational or fraternal organization,
or a civic or service club, or a senior citizen association or club, or
an officially recognized volunteer fire company or an officially
recognized volunteer first aid or rescue squad;
(2) The names and addresses of the officers of the entity;
(3) A description of the specific kind or kinds of game or games of
chance intended to be held, operated and conducted by the
applicant, and the place or places where, the day or dates and the
time or times when such game or games of chance are intended to
be held, operated and conducted by the applicant under the license
applied for;
§ 171-1 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA; DRUG AND DRUNK- § 171-3
149:395
§ 171-4. Borough Clerk review of application.
Upon receipt of the application, the Borough Clerk will make an
investigation of the qualifications of the applicant and the merits of the
application and it shall determine that the applicant is duly qualified to
be licensed under the Act to hold, operate and conduct games of chance
under the provisions of the Act and the rules and regulations governing
the holding, operation and conduct thereof in the municipality; that the
(4) The items of expense intended to be incurred or paid in connection
with the holding, operating and conducting of such games of
chance and the names and addresses of the persons to whom, and
the purposes for which, they are to be paid;
(5) The specific purposes to which the entire net proceeds of such
game or games of chance are to be devoted and in what manner;
(6) That no commission, salary, compensation, reward or recompense
will be paid to any person for the holding, operating or conducting
of such game or games of chance and who shall assist therein
except as provided under the Act; and
(7) That no prize will be offered and given in cash except as otherwise
provided in the Raffles Licensing Law and a description of the value
and character of the prizes which are to be given and any other
information which said rules and regulations may require.
B. Each application shall designate an active member or members of the
applicant entity under whom the game or games of chance described in
the application are to be held, operated and conducted. The application
shall also include a statement executed by the applicant and by the
member or members, so designated, that he, she, or they will be
responsible for the holding, operation and conduct of such games of
chance in accordance with the terms of the license and the provisions of
said rules and regulations governing the holding, operation and
conduct of such a game or games of chance and of the Act, if such
license is granted.
C. If any equipment to be used in or in connection with the holding,
operating or conducting of any such game of chance is to be leased
from any person, persons or corporation, a written statement shall
accompany the application, signed and verified under oath by such
person or persons or executed and verified under oath on behalf of such
corporation, stating his, her or its address and the amount of rent which
will be paid for such equipment and that such rental conforms to the
schedule of authorized rentals prescribed by rules of the Legalized
Games of Chance Control Commission and that such lessor or lessors,
or, if a corporation, all of its officers and each of its stockholders who
hold 10% or more of its stock issued and outstanding, have been
approved by said Commission as being of good moral character and not
having been convicted of a crime.
§ 171-3 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 171-4
149:396
designated member or members of the application designated in the
application to hold, operate or conduct the game or games of chance for
which the license is applied are bona fide active members of the applicant
and persons of good moral character and have never been convicted of a
crime; that such game or games of chance are to be held, operated and
conducted in accordance with the provisions of the Act and in accordance
with the rules and regulations governing holding, operation and conduct
thereof and that the proceeds thereof are to be disposed of as provided by
the Act, and if the governing body is satisfied that no commission, salary,
compensation, reward or recompense whatever will be paid or given to
any person holding, operating or conducting or assisting in the holding,
operation or conduct of any such game of chance except as in the Act
otherwise provided; that any rental to be paid for any equipment to be used
in or in connection with the holding, operation and conduct of such game or
games of chance conforms to the schedule of authorized rentals prescribed
by rules of the Legalized Games of Chance Control Commission and that
such lessor or lessors have been approved as to good moral character and
freedom from conviction of crime by said Commission; that no prize will be
offered or given in cash except as authorized by regulation promulgated by
the Control Commission or of greater value than is provided in the Act in
any game or games of chance held, operated and conducted under license.
§ 171-5. Issuance of license.
Upon satisfactory determination of those factors, the Borough shall issue
a license to the applicant for the holding, operation and conduct of the
specific kind, or one or more of the specific kinds, of games of chance
applied for accordingly, upon the payment of a license fee as prescribed by
regulation promulgated by the Control Commission.
§ 171-6. Duration of license.
Licenses issued hereunder shall be effective no longer than a period of one
year.
§ 171-7. License fees. [Added 4-7-2008 by Ord. No. 1444]
A. No license shall be issued by the Borough of Collingswood ("Borough")
pursuant to the New Jersey Raffles Licensing Law, N.J.S.A. 5:8-50 et
seq., and the Borough's raffles licensing ordinance until the following
fees have been paid to the Borough:
(1) For on-premises draw raffles for cash prizes (50/50) in excess of
$400 or merchandise prizes where the total combined retail value
of prizes awarded is in excess of $400, the sum of $20 shall be paid
for each day on which a drawing(s) is to be conducted under the
license.
(2) For on-premises draw raffles for cash prizes (50/50) that do not
exceed $400 or merchandise prizes where the total combined retail
value of prizes awarded does not exceed $400, there shall be no
§ 171-4 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA; DRUG AND DRUNK- § 171-7
149:397
licensing fee. In the event the retail value of the prize(s) offered
or awarded exceeds $400 in a raffle in which it was anticipated
that the retail value would not exceed $400, the licensee shall
submit a check or money order, made payable to the New Jersey
Legalized Games of Chance Commission ("Control Commission"),
in the amount of $20 at the time of filing the report of operations
required by N.J.A.C. 13:47-9, and pay the applicable fees along with
a copy of the Report of Raffle Operations.
(3) For off-premises draw raffles awarding merchandise as a prize, the
sum of $20 shall be paid for each $1,000, or part thereof, of the
retail value of the prize(s) to be awarded.
(4) For carnival games or wheels, the sum of $20 shall be paid for each
game or wheel held on any one day, or any series of consecutive
days, not exceeding six at one location.
(5) For off-premises cash (50/50) raffles, a $20 fee shall be paid at the
time the application is filed. In the event the awarded prize exceeds
$1,000, then an additional fee of $20 for each $1,000, or part
thereof, in value of the awarded prize in excess of $1,000 shall be
forwarded to the Control Commission by check, payable to the
Legalized Games of Chance Control Commission, together with the
Report of Operations, as required by N.J.A.C. 13:47-9, and the
applicable Borough fees paid, along with a copy of the Report of
Raffle Operations.
(6) For special door prize raffles, no fee is due and no license is
required, provided the merchandise awarded is wholly donated,
has a total retail value of less than $50, and the raffle is conducted
in accordance with N.J.A.C. 13:47-3.11 and 13:47-8.15.
(7) For calendar raffles awarding cash or merchandise as a prize, the
sum of $20 shall be paid for each $1,000, or part thereof, of the
retail value of the prize(s) to be awarded.
(8) For instant raffle games awarding cash or merchandise as a prize,
the following sums shall be paid:
(a) For each day on which instant raffle tickets are sold or offered
for sale: $20; or
(b) For a one-year license to sell, or to offer for sale, instant raffle
tickets during that year: $750.
(9) For golf hole-in-one contests, the sum of $20 shall be paid for each
$1,000, or part thereof, of the retail value of the ancillary prizes
offered.
(10) For armchair races, the sum of $50 shall be paid for each licensed
day of operation.
§ 171-7 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 171-7
149:398
(11) For casino nights, the sum of $100 shall be paid for each day of
operation.
B. The licensee fees set forth in Subsection A(1) through (11) above shall
not apply to any senior citizen association or club registered with the
Control Commission which will hold, operate or conduct the games
solely for the bona fide active members of the licensed association or
club. No fee shall be charged to any senior citizen association or club
for processing an application or issuing a license to hold, operate or
conduct any legalized game of chance solely for its bona fide active
members.
C. The licensee fees set forth in Subsection A(1) through (11) above shall
be paid to the Municipal Clerk of the Borough, who shall forward the
fees to the Control Commission. In addition to the foregoing fees, the
sum of $10 shall be paid to the Borough at the time the application is
filed to defray the Borough's administrative expenses in the
administration of the New Jersey Raffles Licensing Law84 and the
Borough's raffle licensing ordinance.
84.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 5:8-50 et seq.
§ 171-7 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA; DRUG AND DRUNK- § 171-7
149:399
Chapter 173
GARAGE SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Development regulations — See Ch. 141.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 193.
Circulars and handbills — See Ch. 197, Art. I.
§ 173-1. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a garage sale in the Borough
of Collingswood without having first obtained a license to do so, to be
known as a "garage sale license," from the Borough Clerk of the Borough of
Collingswood.
§ 173-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARAGE SALE — Any casual or occasional sale of tangible personal
property, including all sales known as "garage sales," "lawn sales," "attic
sales," "rummage sales," "bazaar sales" or "flea market sales."[Amended
10-3-1977 by Ord. No. 734]
PERSON — Any person or persons, firm, association, partnership, club or
corporation.
§ 173-3. Application procedure and requirements.
A. An application for a license to conduct a garage sale shall be filed with
the Borough Clerk on forms to be furnished by the borough, which
forms shall include the following information:
(1) The name and address of the person conducting said sale.
(2) The name and address of the owner of the property on which said
sale is to be conducted, together with the written consent of such
owner if the applicant is other than the owner.
(3) The location at which the sale is to be conducted.
(4) The date said sale is to take place.
(5) The date and nature of any past sale conducted by the applicant
within the Borough of Collingswood.
B. Application for such license shall be made not less than two weeks prior
to the date of the sale to be conducted pursuant to the license applied
for.
§ 171-7 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 173-4
173:400
§ 173-4. Fee; exception. [Amended 9-7-1976 by Ord. No. 717]
The fee to be paid for the license to be issued hereunder shall be $2, except
that where the applicant is a bona fide religious, educational or charitable
institution or organization or a governmental agency, no fee shall be payable
for the license to be issued hereunder.
§ 173-5. Limitations on issuance of licenses. [Amended 10-3-1977
by Ord. No. 734]
No license may be issued to any person more than three times in any twelvemonth
period. No license may be issued for any location within the Borough
of Collingswood more than three times in any twelve-month period.
§ 173-6. Duration of license.
The license to be issued hereunder shall authorize the holding of a garage
sale for not more than one calendar day, except that a license may authorize
the holding of a garage sale on a second day if rain or inclement weather
prevents such sale from being held on the first designated day.
§ 173-7. Hours and days of sales. [Amended 7-3-2006 by Ord. No.
1405]
Garage sales shall not commence before 8:00 a.m. and must be terminated
by sundown. No garage sale shall be permitted to be held or conducted on
Sunday.
§ 173-8. Items to be sold restricted.
Garage sales shall offer for sale only used items of personal property owned
by the person conducting the garage sale or by the owner of the property
upon which the sale is conducted. No new merchandise shall be offered for
sale.
§ 173-9. Advertising. [Amended 10-3-1977 by Ord. No. 734]
No advertising of garage sales shall be permitted except as follows:
A. One or more discreet advertisements in the classified advertising
section of a newspaper.
B. A writing sent by mail.
C. A sign, not greater in size than three feet by four feet, on the property
where the sale is to be conducted. Such sign shall not be posted earlier
than four days prior to the day the sale is to be conducted and shall be
removed not later than 24 hours after the sale is conducted.
D. Not more than two signs, neither of which shall be greater in size than 1
1/2 feet by two feet, on property other than that on which the sale is to
be conducted. Prior to posting any such sign, the applicant shall have
§ 173-4 GARAGE SALES § 173-9
173:401
§ 173-10. Display of license.
The license issued hereunder shall be prominently displayed on the
premises upon which the garage sale is conducted throughout the entire
period of the sale.
§ 173-11. Exemptions. [Amended 9-6-1976 by Ord. No. 717;
10-3-1977 by Ord. No. 734]
§ 173-12. Conduct; additional rules; inspections.
received permission to post such sign from the owner of the property
where the sign is to be posted. Such sign or signs shall be posted not
earlier than the day the sale is to be conducted and shall be removed
the same day after the sale is conducted.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect the following
persons or sales:
(1) Persons selling goods pursuant to any order of a court of competent
jurisdiction.
(2) Any sale conducted by a merchant or other business establishment
at a place of business where sales are permitted by Chapter 141,
Development Regulations, of the Code of the Borough of
Collingswood or permitted as a nonconforming use.
(3) Any casual sale conducted within a building or structure and
consisting of not more than seven items.
B. Where the applicant is moving from the location at which the sale is to
be conducted or the applicant is the executor, administrator or heir of
the owner or tenant of the property on which the sale is to be
conducted, the applicant may so indicate in his application for the
permit provided for in this chapter; and in such event, the provisions of
§ 173-6 of this chapter shall not be applicable. In lieu thereof, the
license to be issued to such applicant shall authorize the holding of a
garage sale for not more than six calendar days. On only one of such
days shall the applicant be permitted to display property outside of a
building or structure, and on only one such day shall the applicant be
permitted to advertise the sale by means of advertising listed in
§ 173-9C and D of this chapter.
A. The person to whom a license is issued and the owner and/or tenant of
the premises on which a garage sale is conducted shall be jointly and
severally responsible for the maintenance of good order on the
premises during the hours in which a garage sale is conducted. No such
person shall permit any loud or boisterous conduct on said premises nor
permit vehicles to impede the passage of traffic on any streets in the
vicinity of such premises. All such persons shall obey the reasonable
orders of any member of the Police or Fire Departments of the Borough
§ 173-9 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 173-12
173:402
§ 173-13. Effect on other provisions. [Amended 8-15-1994 by Ord.
No. 1058]
Nothing contained herein shall be deemed in any way to alter any provisions
of Chapter 141, Development Regulations, of the Code of the Borough of
Collingswood or to permit any act forbidden therein.
§ 173-14. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-15-1994 by Ord. No.
1058]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000,
imprisonment for not more than 90 days or a period of community service
for not more than 90 days, or any combination thereof, for each violation.
Each day on which a sale is held in violation of any provision of this chapter
shall be considered a separate violation.
Chapter 175
GREEN DEVELOPMENT
of Collingswood in order to maintain the public health, safety and
welfare.
B. All licensed premises shall be subject to such reasonable rules as may
be made, from time to time, by the Board of Commissioners of the
Borough of Collingswood and shall be subject to inspection by the Code
Enforcement Officer, Chief of Police and Fire Chief or any of their
agents or duly authorized representatives of the Borough of
Collingswood. [Amended 8-15-1994 by Ord. No. 1058]
§ 173-12 GARAGE SALES § 173-14
173:403

ARTICLE I
Major Development Checklist
[Adopted 10-7-2019 by Ord. No. 167285]
§ 175-1. Green development checklist and information statement.86
85.Editor's Note: The "whereas" clauses of this ordinance provided,, in part, the following:
"Whereas, the Board of Commissioners wish to adopt as the Borough's policy to encourage
developers to incorporate sustainable building practices throughout the development
process and submission of a 'Green Development Information Statement' should be
required as part of the major site plan and major subdivision process; and Whereas, The
Green Development Checklist and information statement outlines the contents for the
Information Statement and is based on the LEED system standards for building and
neighborhood development and Sustainable Jersey's Model Green Development Checklist,
but not intended to be exclusive; incorporation of additional sustainable development
practices in development projects is strongly encouraged to help the Borough become a
more sustainable community."
86.Editor's Note: Said checklist is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 175-1 GARAGE SALES § 175-1
173:405
Chapter 177
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES
§ 175-1 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 175-1
177:406
ARTICLE I
Cleanup Costs
§ 177-1. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CLEANUP AND REMOVAL COSTS — All costs associated with a discharge
within the boundaries of the Borough of Collingswood, which shall include
labor and material for the removal of hazardous substances or taking of
reasonable measures to prevent or mitigate damages to the public health,
safety or welfare of the residents of the Borough of Collingswood, including
the lands, private and public, therein.
DISCHARGE — Any intentional or unintentional action or omission resulting
in the release, spill, leak, emission, dump or disposal of hazardous
substances into the waters or lands within the Borough of Collingswood, or
outside the borough when damage may result to the waters or lands inside
the borough.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE — All elements and compounds, including
petroleum products as set forth within N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.11B, as amended,
except that sewage sludge shall be considered a "hazardous substance" for
the purpose of this Article.
PERSON — Any individual, public or private corporation, companies,
associations, societies, firms, partnerships or joint-stock companies.
§ 177-2. Liability for costs.
Any person who shall discharge hazardous substances within the Borough
of Collingswood shall be strictly liable for all cleanup and removal costs
incurred by the Borough of Collingswood or agencies and employees
thereon.
§ 177-3. Hearing on assessment.
Upon assessment of cleanup and removal costs, the person assessed may,
within ten (10) days of receipt of such assessment, make a written request
for a hearing before the Borough Commission exclusively upon the
reasonableness of the amount assessed.
§ 177-4. Attorneys' fees; collection costs.
The person responsible for the discharge shall be liable for all reasonable
attorneys' fees and costs incurred in the collection of cleanup and removal
costs.
§ 177-1 HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES § 177-4
177:407
Chapter 181
INSURANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Claims procedure — See Ch. 7. Licenses and permits — See Ch. 193.
§ 177-4 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 177-4
181:408
ARTICLE I
Fire Insurance Claims
[Adopted 2-22-1983 as Ord. No. 802]
§ 181-1. Certificate of search required prior to payment of claims.
No insurer issuing fire insurance policies in the State of New Jersey shall
pay any claims for fire damages in excess of two thousand five hundred
dollars ($2,500.) on any real property located within the Borough of
Collingswood unless or until the insured person submits and official
certificate of search for municipal liens pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-12,
certifying that all taxes, assessments or other municipal liens or charges
levied and assessed and due and payable against said property have been
paid or the Borough of Collingswood submits a certified copy of a resolution
in accordance with § 181-2.
§ 181-2. Installment payments.
The Borough Commissioners of the Borough of Collingswood, pursuant to
Section 4 of P.L. 1978, c. 184,87 may enter into an agreement with the owner
of any fire-damaged property to pay in full all delinquent taxes, assessments
or other municipal liens by installments pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-19 or
for the redemption of the tax sale lien by installment payments pursuant
to Article 7 of Chapter 5 of Title 54 of the New Jersey Statutes (N.J.S.A.
54:5-65) if the Borough Commissioners is satisfied that the claim for fire
damages is to be used to restore or improve the fire-damaged property. An
insurer receiving a certified copy of such a resolution or agreement from
the Borough Commissioners of the Borough of Collingswood is authorized
to make full payment on the claim to the insured person.
§ 181-3. Payment of liens and other charges; appeals.
Unless a resolution pursuant to § 181-2 above is received, any insurer
issuing fire insurance policies on property in the Borough of Collingswood
is authorized and required, prior to the payment of any claims for fire
damages in excess of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.), to pay
to the Borough of Collingswood the amount of the liens appearing on the
official certificate and such other recorded liens or related charges as may
be certified to the insurance company; provided, however, that if appeal is
or has been taken on the amount of any lien or charge, other than an appeal
on the assessed evaluation of real property pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:3-21, the
insurance company shall follow the procedure set forth in Section 3 of P.L.
1978, c. 184,88 setting forth the escrow to be held by the court pending
disposition of said appeal.
87.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 17:36-11.
88.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 17:36-10.
§ 181-1 INSURANCE § 181-3
181:409
Chapter 186
KEY BOXES
§ 186-1. Requirements.
All properties within the Borough of Collingswood having an automatic fire
alarm system or a fire sprinkler system shall be equipped with a rapid
access key box. This shall not apply to owner-occupied one- and two-family
dwellings.
§ 186-2. Designation of system; location of box.
The Fire Official shall designate the type of rapid access key box system to
be implemented within the borough and shall have authority to require all
structures to use the designated rapid access key box system. The location
of the box shall be installed in a location approved by the Collingswood Fire
official. The box shall be required to have a tamper switch connected to the
building's fire alarm system.
§ 186-3. Key box contents.
The rapid access key box(s) shall contain the following:
§ 186-4. Compliance.
All existing buildings shall comply with this chapter within one year of
its effective date. All newly constructed buildings, buildings not currently
occupied or buildings under construction (i.e., alarm system installation)
shall comply immediately.
§ 186-5. Violations and penalties.
Any building owner violating this chapter shall be subject to penalties, as
set forth in the Uniform Fire Code.
Chapter 189
LIBRARY
A. Key(s) to locked points of egress, whether on the interior or exterior of
such buildings.
B. Key(s) to the locked mechanical rooms.
C. Key(s) to the locked elevator rooms and controls.
D. Key(s) to any fence or secured areas.
E. Key(s) to any other areas as directed by the Fire Official.
§ 181-3 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 189-1
186:410
§ 189-1. Notice to return property.
No person shall detain or fail to return any book or article borrowed from
the Collingswood Public Library contrary to the rules and regulations of
the Library after thirty (30) days have elapsed from the date of posting
by certified mail, return receipt requested, of the notice demanding the
return thereof, addressed to said person at the last address furnished to the
Library. In the event that the person is a minor, the notice shall be sent to
the parent or guarantor as shown on the records of the Library.
§ 189-2. Damage of property prohibited.
No person shall willfully or maliciously cut, tear, deface, disfigure, damage
or destroy any book or other article or any part thereof which is owned by
or is in the custody of the Collingswood Public Library.
§ 189-3. Registration under false name; use of wrong card.
No person shall register under or furnish a false name or address or use any
card other than the one issued to such person for the purpose of borrowing
any books or any article or material from the Library.
§ 189-4. Violations and penalties.89
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to
imprisonment in the county jail for a term not to exceed ninety (90) days, a
fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.) or a period of community
service for not more than ninety (90) days, or any combination thereof,
for each violation. For the purpose of this section, each book or article
borrowed from the Collingswood Public Library shall constitute a separate
violation. The penalties contained in this section do not in any way affect a
person's responsibility to return borrowed library material or its value, plus
any accrued fines on that material.
89.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 189-1 LIBRARY § 189-4
189:411
Chapter 193
LICENSES AND PERMITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Coin-operated amusement devices — See Ch.
97.
Amusements — See Ch. 101.
Animals — See Ch. 105.
Canvassing and soliciting — See Ch. 123.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 135.
Development regulations — See Ch. 141.
Garage sales — See Ch. 173.
Noise — See Ch. 207.
Poolrooms — See Ch. 223.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 265.
Private swimming pools — See Ch. 269.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 277.
Vehicle sales lots — See Ch. 289.
§ 189-4 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 189-4
193:412
ARTICLE I
Payment of Delinquent Taxes and Assessments
[Adopted 7-18-1988 as Ord. No. 926]
§ 193-1. Payment required; waiver. [Amended 5-21-1990 by Ord. No.
972]
§ 193-2. Suspension or revocation of licenses.
Any license or permit issued or approved by the Borough of Collingswood
shall be revoked or suspended if the licensee is the owner of the property
for which the license or permit has been issued or approved and the
licensee has failed to pay the taxes due on the property for at least three (3)
consecutive quarters.
§ 193-3. Restoration upon payment.
Upon payment of all delinquent taxes and assessments, the license or
permit shall be restored.
A. Except as hereinafter set forth in Subsection B, prior to the issuance or
approval by the Borough of Collingswood of any license, as provided for
within the Code of the borough, the applicant, if he is the owner of the
property wherein the business or activity for which the license or
permit is sought or wherein the business or activity is to be conducted,
shall pay any delinquent property taxes or assessments assessed on the
property wherein the business or activity for which the license or
permit is sought or wherein the business or activity is to be conducted.
B. In the event that the health, safety and welfare of the municipality or its
inhabitants is threatened by continued code violations cited by borough
officials and in the event that application is made to the Borough
Commissioners to waive the requirements of Subsection A above, this
provision may, by proper resolution of the governing body, be waived as
herein set forth.
§ 193-1 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 193-3
193:413
Chapter 195
LIGHTING, OUTDOOR
§ 195-1. Requirements.
A. All outdoor light fixtures installed and thereafter maintained, other
than those serving one- and two-family dwellings, shall comply with the
following requirements:
(1) Where used for security purposes or to illuminate walkways,
roadways and parking lots, only shielded light fixtures shall be
used.
(2) Where used for commercial and industrial purposes, such as in
merchandise display areas, work areas, platforms, signs,
architectural, landscape or sports or recreational facilities, all light
fixtures shall be equipped with automatic timing devices and
comply with the following:
(a) Light fixtures used to illuminate flags, statues or any other
objects mounted on a pole, pedestal or platform shall use a
narrow cone beam of light that will not extend beyond the
illuminated object.
(b) Other upward-directed architectural, landscape or decorative
direct light emissions shall have at least 90% of their total
distribution pattern within the profile of the illuminated
structure.
(c) Recreational and sports facility lighting shall be shielded
whenever possible. Such lighting shall have directional and
glare control devices, when necessary, to comply with § 195-2.
(d) Externally illuminated signs, including commercial billboard,
building identification or other similar illuminated signs, shall
comply with the following:
[1] Top-mounted light fixtures shall be shielded and are
preferred.
[2] When top-mounted light fixtures are not feasible,
illumination from other positioned light fixtures shall be
restricted to the sign area. Visors or other directional
control devices shall be used to keep spill light to an
absolute minimum.
(e) All other outdoor lighting shall use shielded light fixtures.
(3) All floodlight-type fixtures, once properly installed, shall be
permanently affixed in the approved position.
§ 193-3 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 195-1
193:414
§ 195-2. Light trespass (nuisance light).
All light fixtures, except street lighting and those used on one- or twofamily
dwellings, shall be designed, installed and maintained to prevent
light trespass, as specified in Subsections A and B below.
§ 195-3. Illuminance and luminance requirements.
Illuminance and luminance requirements shall be as set forth in the current
editions of the Lighting Handbook of the Illuminating Engineering Society
of North America ("IESNA") and other IESNA publications. This chapter
adopts those standards.
§ 195-4. Electric utility floodlights.
No electric utility floodlight intended for property illumination shall be
located within the public right-of-way on any public roadway or on any
property unless:
(4) Foundations supporting lighting poles not installed four feet behind
the curb shall not be less than 24 inches above ground.
(5) When 50% or more of existing outdoor light fixtures are being
replaced or modified, then all lighting must be made to conform
with the requirements of this section.
A. At a height of five feet above the property line of the subject property,
illuminations from light fixtures shall not exceed 0.1 footcandle in a
vertical plane on residentially zoned property.
B. Outdoor light fixtures installed and thereafter maintained shall be
directed so that there will not be any objectionable direct glare source
visible above a height of five feet from any property or public roadway.
A. Streetlighting. Average IESNA illuminance recommendations should
not be exceeded. IESNA average-to-minimum illuminance uniformity
ratios are to be used as a guide for designing safe and adequate
roadway lighting.
B. Outdoor parking facilities. Outdoor parking lot illuminance shall be
based on certain illuminance specifications recommended by the
IESNA, as contained in Schedule A.90
C. All other illuminance uses shall not exceed IESNA recommendations.
D. Internally illuminated signs shall not exceed IESNA luminance
recommendations.
A. The luminaire is sufficiently shielded and aimed so that no
objectionable direct glare source is visible at any point on the roadway
90.Editor's Note: Schedule A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 195-1 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 195-4
193:415
Chapter 197
LITTERING AND DUMPING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Air pollution — See Ch. 89.
Alcoholic beverages, open containers — See
Ch. 93.
Amusements — See Ch. 101.
Brush, grass and weeds — See. Ch. 113.
Canvassing and soliciting — See Ch. 123.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 211.
Parks — See Ch. 217.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 227.
Recycling — See Ch. 233.
Solid waste — See Ch. 261.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 265.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 285.
where the viewing height is five feet or greater and when the distance
from the mounting pole is 70 feet or greater.
B. The property being illuminated does not exceed the maximum
maintained illuminance levels to perform the lighting task prescribed in
§ 195-3, Illuminance and luminance requirements, of this chapter.
C. All electric utility floodlights shall be subject to the requirements in
§ 195-2, Light trespass (nuisance light).
§ 195-4 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 195-4
193:416
ARTICLE I
Circulars and Handbills
[Adopted 8-16-1971 by Ord. No. 662 as Ch. 48 of the 1971 Code;
amended in its entirety 8-15-1994 by Ord. No. 1058]
§ 197-1. Distribution regulated.
No person or persons shall distribute, cast or place or cause to be
distributed, cast or placed in or along any of the streets or highways or
on any of the sidewalks or footways or in any vestibule or yard or upon
any porch or in any store, dwelling house or other building any paper,
circular, advertisements, handbill, wastepaper or fruit skin, provided that
nothing herein contained shall be held to prohibit the regular distribution
of newspapers or circulars by duly licensed persons.
§ 197-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this article shall, on
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000 or confinement
in the county jail for a period not exceeding 90 days or a period of
community service for not more than 90 days, or any combination thereof,
for each offense.
§ 197-1 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 197-2
193:417

ARTICLE II
Regulations
[Adopted 5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 922]
§ 197-3. Prohibited acts and regulated activities. [Amended
9-7-2004 by Ord. No. 1349]
§ 197-4. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LITTER — Any used or unconsumed substance or waste material which has
been discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber, paper or
other natural or synthetic material, or any combination thereof, including
but not limited to any bottle, jar or can or any top, cap or detachable
tab of any bottle, jar or can, any unlighted cigarette, cigar, match or
flaming or glowing material or any garbage, trash, refuse, debris, rubbish,
grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspaper, magazines,
glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or other packaging or construction
material, but does not include the waste of the primary processes of mining
or other extraction processes, logging, sawmilling, farming or
manufacturing.
LITTER RECEPTACLE — A container suitable for the depositing of litter.
§ 197-5. Litter receptacles.
Litter receptacles and their servicing are required at the following public
places which exist in the municipality, including sidewalks used by
pedestrians in active retail commercially zoned areas, such that, at a
minimum, there shall be no single linear quarter-mile without a receptacle;
buildings held out for use by the public, including schools, government
buildings and parks; construction sites; gasoline service stations; parking
lots; and at special events to which the public is invited, including sporting
events, parades, carnivals, circuses and festivals. The proprietors of these
places or the sponsors of these events shall be responsible for providing and
servicing the receptacles such that adequate containerization is available.
§ 197-6. Dumping prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discard or dump along any street or
road, on or off any right-of-way, any household or commercial solid waste,
rubbish, refuse, junk, vehicle or vehicle parts, rubber tires, appliances,
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, discard or otherwise
place any litter of any nature upon public or private property other that
in a litter receptacle, or having done so, to allow such litter to remain.
B. Any litter thrown or discarded or allowed to fall from a vehicle or boat
shall also be deemed to have violated this article.
§ 197-3 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 197-6
193:419
furniture or private property, except by written consent of the owner of said
property, in any place not specifically designated for the purpose of solid
waste storage or disposal.
§ 197-7. Exterior storage of household items. [Amended 11-3-2008
by Ord. No. 1454; 3-2-2009 by Ord. No. 1459; 12-6-2010 by Ord. No.
1488]
It shall be unlawful for any residential or commercial property owner to
store or permit storage of any bulky household waste, including household
appliances, furniture and mattresses, in areas zoned residential, except in a
fully enclosed structure.
§ 197-8. Storage of tires.
It shall be unlawful for any residential property owner to store or permit
the storage of tires in areas zoned residential, except in a fully enclosed
structure or on days designated for the collection of tires.
§ 197-9. Storage of vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any residential property owner to park or permit the
parking of any vehicle on his or her residential lawn.91
§ 197-10. Litter falling from uncovered vehicles; cleanup.
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be driven, moved, stopped or parked
on any highway unless such vehicle is constructed or loaded to prevent any
of its load from dropping, shifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom.
Any person operating a vehicle from which any glass or objects have fallen
or escaped which could cause an obstruction, damage a vehicle or
otherwise endanger travelers or public property shall immediately cause
the public property to be cleaned of all glass or objects and shall pay the
costs therefor.
§ 197-11. Construction sites.
It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent or contractor in charge of a
construction or demolition site to permit the accumulation of litter before,
during or after completion of any construction or demolition project. It shall
be the duty of the owner, agent or contractor in charge of a construction
site to furnish containers adequate to accommodate flyable or nonflyable
debris or trash at areas convenient to construction areas and to maintain
and empty the receptacles in such a manner and with such a frequency as
to prevent spillage of refuse.
91.Editor's Note: Original Sec. VII, Inoperable vehicles, which immediately followed this
section, was deleted 8-15-1994 by Ord. No. 1058. See now Ch. 285, Vehicles, Abandoned.
§ 197-6 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 197-12
193:420
§ 197-12. Open and overflowing bins.
It shall be unlawful for any residential or commercial property owner to
permit open or overflowing waste disposal bins on his or her property.
§ 197-13. Responsibility for compliance.
It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or person in
charge of any structure to keep and cause to be kept the sidewalk and
curb abutting the building or structure free from obstruction or nuisances
of every kind and to keep sidewalks, areaways, backyards, courts and alleys
free from litter and other offensive material. No person shall sweep into
or deposit in any gutter, street, catch basin or other public place any
accumulation of litter from any public or private sidewalk or driveway.
Every person who owns or occupies property shall keep the sidewalk in
front of his or her premises free of litter. All sweepings shall be collected
and properly containerized for disposal.
§ 197-14. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-15-1994 by Ord. No.
1058]
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any provision
of this article shall, upon trial and conviction, be subject to a fine of up to
$1,000, imprisonment for not more than 90 days or a period of community
service for not more than 90 days, or any combination thereof. Each day
upon which a violation of this article shall continue to exist shall be deemed
a separate offense.
§ 197-12 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 197-14
193:421
Chapter 201
LOITERING AND CURFEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks — See Ch. 217 Poolrooms — See Ch. 223.
§ 201-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings indicated:
GUARDIAN — A person, other than a parent, to whom legal custody of the
juvenile has been given by court order, or who is acting in the place of the
parent, or is responsible for the care and welfare of the juvenile.
JUVENILE — An individual who is under the age of 18 years.
LOITERING — Remaining idle in, essentially, one location, and shall include
the concepts of spending time idly, loafing or walking about aimlessly, and
shall also include the colloquial expression "hanging around."
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public has access, including, but
not limited to, a public street, road, thoroughfare, sidewalk, bridge, alley,
plaza, park, recreation or shopping area, public transportation, facility,
vehicle used for public transportation, parking lot or any other public
building, structure or area.
§ 201-2. Loitering prohibited; discretion of police officer; Board of
Education property.
A. Prohibition. No person shall loiter in a public place in such a manner as
to:
(1) Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace.
(2) Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the
comfort and repose of any person.
(3) Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles.
(4) Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in any public
place. This Subsection A(4) shall include the making of unsolicited
remarks of an offensive, disgusting or insulting nature, or which
are calculated to annoy or disturb the person to or in whose
hearing they are made.
B. Discretion of police officers. Whenever any police officer shall, in the
exercise of reasonable judgment, decide that the presence of any
person in any public place is causing, or is likely to cause, any of the
conditions enumerated in Subsection A, he may, if he deems it
§ 197-14 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 201-2
201:422
§ 201-3. Hours; applicability.
§ 201-4. Responsibility of parent or guardian.
necessary for the preservation of the public peace and safety, order that
person to leave that place. Any person who shall refuse to leave after
being ordered to do so by a police officer shall be guilty of a violation of
this chapter.
C. No minor shall enter onto any property controlled by the Borough of
Collingswood Board of Education between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m. for any purpose, unless accompanied by a responsible adult,
or unless said minor has permission from the Borough of Collingswood
Board of Education, which permission has been transmitted, in writing,
to the Borough Clerk of the Borough of Collingswood, or her designate.
A. It shall be unlawful for any juvenile of any age under 18 years to be on
any public street, or in a public place, between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a juvenile as follows:
(1) When the juvenile is accompanied by his or her parent(s) or
guardian(s).
(2) When the juvenile is upon a medical emergency, errand, or
legitimate business directed by his or her parent(s) or guardian(s).
(3) When the juvenile is gainfully employed at the time.
(4) When the juvenile is an attendant as a bona fide student at an
evening school of instruction.
(5) When the juvenile is in attendance at a function sponsored by a
religious, community-based or educational organization,
association or society.
(6) When the juvenile is in attendance at a supervised cultural,
educational and social event.
(7) When the juvenile is attending extracurricular school activities.
(8) When the minor shall, as a result of the exceptions enumerated in
this Subsection 6(3), (4), (5) and (6) immediately above, be
traveling on or upon any of the public places in the Borough of
Collingswood, after the prescribed hour while returning to his or
her residence from such activity.
A. No parent or guardian of a juvenile shall knowingly permit said juvenile
to violate the provisions of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any
parent or guardian to allow an unaccompanied juvenile to be on any
public street or any public place during the aforementioned hours
subject to the exceptions set forth in § 201-3B above. The term
§ 201-2 LOITERING AND CURFEW § 201-4
201:423
§ 201-5. Enforcement.
§ 201-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction,
be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or by imprisonment for not more
than 30 days. Any juvenile who violates this chapter shall be treated as a
juvenile offender in accordance with the laws of the State of New Jersey.
Each violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate
offense. Furthermore, both the juvenile, and/or the juvenile's parent(s) or
guardian(s), in the event of a violation of this chapter, shall be required to
perform community service.
"knowingly" includes knowledge which a parent or guardian should
reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a
juvenile in said parents or guardian's legal custody.
B. Whenever any juvenile is charged with violation of this chapter, his
parent(s) or guardian(s) shall be notified by the Chief of Police or any
other person designated by him to give such notice. If at any time within
30 days following the giving of the notice, as provided in this section,
the juvenile, whose parent(s) or guardian(s) have received the notice
referred to in the previous sentence, again violates this chapter, it shall
be presumed in the absence of evidence to the contrary that the
juvenile did so with the knowledge and permission of his parent(s) or
guardian(s).
A. If a police officer reasonably believes that a juvenile is in a public place
in violation of this chapter, the officer shall notify the juvenile that he or
she is in violation of this chapter and shall require the juvenile to
provide his or her name, address and telephone number and how to
contact his or her parent(s) or guardian(s). In determining the age of
the juvenile, and in the absence of convincing evidence, such as a birth
certificate, a police officer shall use his or her best judgment in
determining age.
B. In the event that the police officer determines that the person is a
juvenile in or on the public place after 10:00 p.m. and before 6:00 a.m.,
the police officer shall ascertain whether the juvenile is in or on the
public place in accordance with the exception provisions of § 201-3B
above.
§ 201-4 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 201-6
201:424
Chapter 207
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Coin-operated amusement devices — See Ch.
97.
Amusements — See Ch. 101.
Animals — See Ch. 105.
Canvassing and soliciting — See Ch. 123.
Development regulations — See Ch. 141.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 193.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 211.
Parks — See Ch. 217.
§ 201-6 LOITERING AND CURFEW § 201-6
201:425

ARTICLE I
Regulation of Certain Businesses
[Adopted 8-16-1971 by Ord. No. 662 as Ch. 72, Art. II, of the 1971
Code]
§ 207-1. Location restrictions on certain businesses and plants.92
No such building or plant shall be erected or established within a radius
of 250 feet of any dwelling house, apartment house or other residence or
within a radius of 250 feet of any church, theater or other place of public
assemblage.
§ 207-2. Application for permit; fee.
Any person, persons, partnership or corporation desiring to conduct any
business in the Borough of Collingswood shall make application, in writing,
to the Board of Commissioners of the Borough of Collingswood, setting forth
in said application the character of the building or plant intended to be
constructed, the nature of the business to be operated, the kind, number
and character of vehicles proposed to be used in conducting the business
involved and the location of said plant or establishment and the location of
all buildings within a radius of 250 feet thereof. Said application shall be
mailed or delivered to the Clerk of the Borough of Collingswood, together
with an application fee of $5.
§ 207-3. Hearing on application.
The Borough Clerk shall present the application to the Board of
Commissioners of the Borough of Collingswood, who shall, after receiving
said application, state the time and place, not exceeding 30 days from
the receipt of said application, at which time and place said Board of
Commissioners will hold a public hearing on said application.
§ 207-4. Action on permit application.
After the public hearing, the Board of Commissioners shall grant or refuse
said permit as it deems proper for the protection of life and property and
the promotion of the public health, safety and welfare.
§ 207-5. Applicability to preexisting uses.
This article shall not apply to any plants, establishments or business places
established in the municipality before the passage of this article.
92.Editor's Note: Original § 72-10, When permit required, which immediately preceded this
section, was repealed 8-15-1994 by Ord. No. 1058.
§ 207-1 LOITERING AND CURFEW § 207-6
201:427
§ 207-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-15-1994 by Ord. No.
1058]
Any person or persons, partnership or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000,
imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed 90 days or a period of
community service for not more than 90 days, or any combination thereof,
in the discretion of the court. Each day that any of the provisions of this
article shall be violated shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
subject to be punished by a fine, imprisonment or community service, as
above provided.
§ 207-7. Statutory authority.
This ordinance is passed in accordance with Chapter 245 of the Laws
of 1944 (N.J.S.A. 40:52-1) and Chapter 152 of the Laws of 1917 (N.J.S.A.
40:48-2) and shall take effect after its publication and passage according to
law.
§ 207-6 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 207-7
201:428
ARTICLE II
Unnecessary and Unusual Noises; Parades
[Adopted 8-16-1971 by Ord. No. 662 as Ch. 72, Art. I, of the 1971
Code]
§ 207-8. Certain noises prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or
continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which either
annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or
safety of others within the limits of the borough.
§ 207-9. Unlawful acts.
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and
unnecessary noises in violation of this article, but said enumeration shall
not be deemed to be exclusive, namely:
A. Radios, televisions, phonographs, tape decks, compact disks (CD), etc.
The using or permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio
receiving set, CD, digital audio recording, television, musical
instrument, sound speaker, phonograph or other machine or device for
the producing or reproducing of sound for the purpose of entertainment
or in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the
neighboring inhabitants, or people in the vicinity of such devices, at any
time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for
the person or persons who are in the room, vehicle or area in which
such machine or device is operated. The operation of any such set,
instrument, phonograph, machine or device at any time in such manner
as to be plainly audible at a distance of 25 feet from the building,
structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence
of a violation of this article. The operation of any such set, instrument,
musical instrument, sound speaker, phonograph, machine or device
shall further fall under the requirements set forth under Subsection J,
Prohibited hours and duration. [Amended 8-15-1994 by Ord. No.
1058; 6-7-1999 by Ord. No. 1187; 5-11-2012 by Ord. No. 1509]
B. Loudspeakers or amplifiers for advertising. The using, operating or
permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio receiving set,
musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier, stereo,
cd or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of
sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of
commercial advertising or for any other purpose. [Amended 6-7-1999
by Ord. No. 1187]
C. Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting or singing on the public streets,
particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any
time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of
persons in any office or in any dwelling, hotel, motel or other type of
§ 207-8 LOITERING AND CURFEW § 207-9
201:429
§ 207-10. Permit for use of sound equipment; requirements;
regulations.
residence or of any persons in the vicinity. [Amended 6-7-1999 by
Ord. No. 1187]
D. Construction or repairing of buildings. The erection (including
excavation), demolition, alteration or repair of any building in a
residential area other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. on weekdays and between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on
Saturdays. Nothing in this subsection shall prevent the occupant or
owner of the premises at any time from making minor repairs or
improvements to, on or about the premises, provided that the same
shall be done without causing a nuisance or disturbing the peace and
quiet of the neighborhood. [Amended 8-1-2016 by Ord. No. 1600]
E. Schools, courts, churches and hospitals. The creation of any excessive
noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning,
church or court while the same is in use or adjacent to any hospital
which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institution or
which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided that
conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the same
is a school, hospital or court street.
F. Drums. The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the
purpose of attracting attention by the creation of noise to any
performance, show or sale.
G. Hawkers and peddlers. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers
and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood.
H. Pile drivers, hammers, etc. The operation, other than between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, of any pile driver, steam
shovel, bulldozer or other earthmoving machinery, pneumatic hammer,
derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliance, the use of which is
attended by loud or unusual noise.
I. The discharging of any firearms, weapons or explosive devices of any
type. [Added 6-7-1999 by Ord. No. 1187]
J. Prohibited hours and duration. The hours of operation for any set,
instrument, musical instrument, sound speaker, phonograph, machine
or device shall be limited to the hours between 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.,
Monday through Thursday and Sunday, and 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on
Friday and Saturday. The operation of any set, instrument, musical
instrument, sound speaker, phonograph, machine or device shall be
limited to time period of four hours in duration. Each period of
operation shall be followed by a stoppage of 60 minutes before
resuming the operation of any set, instrument, musical instrument,
sound speaker, phonograph, machine or device. [Added 5-11-2012 by
Ord. No. 1509]
§ 207-9 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 207-10
201:430
§ 207-11. Parades.
Parades may be permitted within borough limits, provided that a permit
is issued for the same. Application shall be made to the Borough Clerk,
who in turn will refer the same to the Chief of Police for investigation. The
application must be made a minimum of 10 days prior to the parade, which
application shall indicate the time, the approximate number of people in
A. Sound equipment prohibited. The use or operation of a sound truck,
loudspeaker or amplifying system, either from a stationary position or
from a moving vehicle, shall be unlawful within the borough limits for
any purpose other than that of a civic nature directly pertinent to
activities within the Borough of Collingswood or affecting the residents
of this community. (Political activities at no time shall be considered
under this article as civic in nature.)
B. Permit necessary. Prior to the use of such sound equipment for the
purposes specified, a permit shall be obtained from the Borough Clerk.
Application forms for this purpose shall be furnished by the Borough
Clerk and shall require the applicant the applicant to disclose:
(1) The names and addresses of all persons and organizations for
which such a permit is being sought.
(2) The specific purpose of the application.
(3) The number and type of equipment and vehicles to be used.
(4) The projected hours and areas of the use of such equipment within
the borough.
(5) The person or official who shall be in charge of and responsible for
compliance with the terms of this article.
(6) In detail, the specific nature of the civic activity to be advertised.
C. Municipal emergency use. In addition to the allowance of sound devices
for civic purposes, the municipality may utilize any device of this nature
at any and all times that there may be a municipal emergency
regardless of the provisions of this article.
D. Prohibited hours. The hours of limitation for operation of sound devices
shall be not before 9:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m. on any weekday and not
at all on Sunday.
E. Fee required. No fee shall be required for making the aforesaid
application or for issuing the permit.
F. Type of use prohibited. The use of the aforesaid sound devices shall at
no time cause injury to the health of any person or persons nor shall it
be otherwise detrimental to the general welfare and dignity of the
community, and the use thereof shall at all times be under the control of
the governing body and of the Police Department as an agency thereof.
§ 207-10 LOITERING AND CURFEW § 207-11
201:431
the parade, the desired route and the purpose of the parade. The Chief of
Police shall have the right to reroute said parade if, in his opinion, it is apt
to interfere with the free flow of vehicular traffic or to create danger to life,
limb or property.
§ 207-12. Exceptions.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to apply to church bells or
chimes or to prohibit playing by a band or orchestra in a hall or building or
in the open air.
§ 207-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-7-1999 by Ord. No.
1187]
Any person who shall violate this article shall, upon conviction thereof, pay
a fine not exceeding $1,000, be imprisoned in the county jail for a term not
exceeding 90 days or serve of a period of community service for not more
than 90 days, or any combination thereof, for each offense, in the discretion
of the court.
§ 207-11 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 207-13
201:432
Chapter 211
NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH
GENERAL REFERENCES
Air pollution — See Ch. 89.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 113.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 135.
Littering and dumping — See Ch. 197.
Noise — See Ch. 207.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 227.
Solid waste — See Ch. 261.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 285.
§ 211-1. Adoption of code by reference.
A code defining and prohibiting certain matters, things, conditions or acts
and each of them as a nuisance; prohibiting certain noises or sounds;
requiring the proper heating of apartments; prohibiting lease or rental
of certain buildings; prohibiting spitting in or upon public buildings,
conveyances or sidewalks; authorizing the inspection of premises by an
enforcing official; providing for the removal or abatement of certain
nuisances and the recovery of expenses incurred by the Borough
Commissioners in removing or abating such nuisances; and prescribing
penalties for violations is hereby established pursuant to Chapter 188, Laws
of 1950.93 A copy of said code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof
without inclusion of the text thereof herein.
§ 211-2. Title of code.
The code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey
(1953)."
§ 211-3. Copies of code on file; availability.
Three (3) copies of said Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953)
have been placed on file in the office of the Clerk of the borough upon the
introduction of this chapter and will remain on file there for the use and
examination of the public.
§ 211-4. Violations and penalties.94
Any person who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this
chapter or code established herein or notice issued pursuant thereto shall,
upon conviction thereof, be liable to a penalty of not more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.), by imprisonment in the county jail for a period
93.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 et seq.
94.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 207-13 NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH § 211-4
211:433
not to exceed ninety (90) days or by a period of community service for not
more than ninety (90) days, or any combination thereof.
Chapter 217
PARKS AND RECREATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 93.
Animals — See Ch. 105.
Littering and dumping — See Ch. 197.
Loitering and curfew — See Ch. 201.
Noise — See Ch. 207.
§ 211-4 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 211-4
211:434
ARTICLE I
Parks, Parkways and Reservations
[Adopted 8-16-1971 by Ord. No. 662 as Ch. 74, Art. I, of the 1971
Code]
§ 217-1. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PARK — Includes any park, parkway or reservation within the limits of
the Borough of Collingswood which is opened to the public, irrespective of
whether or not the same shall be owned by the borough.
§ 217-2. Defacement and destruction of property.
No person shall injure, deface, displace, remove, destroy or tamper with
any property, drive, bridge or equipment of any nature or kind located in or
about any park.
§ 217-3. Injury to and removal of plant life.
No person shall destroy, cut, injure or remove any growing thing, plant,
growth or any branch thereof or set fire or assist another to set fire to any
timber, shrubs, trees, plants, flowers, grass or plant growth, except at such
time when permission to do so shall have been given by proper authority.
§ 217-4. Permit required to sell merchandise.
No person shall sell or offer for sale any object or merchandise or any other
thing, whether corporeal or incorporeal, unless a permit is first obtained
therefor from the Board of Commissioners.
§ 217-5. Firearms and weapons.
No person shall bring into the park or have in his possession therein any
rifle, shotgun or fowling piece or any air gun, spring gun, slingshot or other
instrument or weapon in which the propelling force is a spring or air, except
when authorized by law.
§ 217-6. Animals.
No person shall cause or permit any animal owned by him, in his custody
or under his control, except a duly licensed dog when restrained by a leash
not exceeding eight feet in length, to be in any park; and each such animal
so found at large may be seized and disposed of as provided by the law or
ordinance covering disposal of stray dogs.95 No person shall permit any dog,
whether licensed or unlicensed, whether upon a leash or not, to enter any
swimming pool maintained for human bathing.
95.Editor's Note: See Ch. 105, Animals.
§ 217-1 NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH § 217-7
211:435
§ 217-7. Alcoholic beverages.
No beer or intoxicating liquors shall be sold within any park or brought into
the same for consumption or free distribution therein.
§ 217-8. Littering.
No person shall scatter, drop or leave in any portion of the parks, except in
the receptacles provided for the purpose, any piece of paper, rag, garbage,
dead flower or other rubbish.
§ 217-9. Unlawful conduct.
No person shall use threatening, abusive, offensive or insulting language;
do any obscene or indecent act; throw stones or other missiles; annoy
persons; interfere with, encumber, obstruct or render dangerous any drive,
path, walk or public place; do any act tending or amounting to a breach
of the peace: engage in, instigate, aid or encourage a contention or fight;
assault any person; play games of chance; participate in the conduct of a
lottery or use or operate any slot machine, gaming table or instrument; sell
fortunes or futures; drink, take, use or have in his possession or be under
the influence of any intoxicating liquors, opiates or other habit-forming
drugs; cast, throw or deposit on the ice or in the ponds and lakes any sticks,
stones, dead animals, offensive matter or substance or other matter that
would tend to injure the ice for skating or pollute the pond.
§ 217-10. Swimming. [Amended 8-15-1994 by Ord. No. 1058]
No person shall bathe, wade or swim in any park waters except at such
times and in such swimming or wading pools as the Board of Commissioners
designates and unless so covered with a bathing suit as to prevent any
indecent exposure of the person; nor shall any person dress or undress in
any place therein, except in such bathing houses as may be maintained for
the purpose, or appear in bathing costumes at any place within the parks
except within the limits of the designated bathing places. No person shall
bathe, wade or swim in any such duly designated park water or pool unless
he shall first have obtained an annual permit therefor. All permits shall be
issued for the calendar year only and shall be evidenced by a metal, plastic
or other similar tag which shall be visibly displayed upon the bathing suit
or the person entitled thereto. Such permits and tags shall be issued upon
rates to be determined annually by the Commissioners and the Director of
Recreation.
§ 217-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-15-1994 by Ord. No.
1058]
Any person violating any provisions of this Article shall be subjected to a
fine or penalty therefor not exceeding $1,000, imprisonment in the county
jail for a term not exceeding 90 days or a period of community service for
not more than 90 days, or any combination thereof, in the discretion of the
court.
§ 217-7 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 217-11
211:436
ARTICLE II
Parking in Knight Park
[Adopted 8-16-1971 by Ord. No. 662 as Ch. 74, Art. II, of the 1971
Code]
§ 217-12. Applicability of state vehicle and traffic regulations.
The request of the Trustees of Knight Park that the provisions of Subtitle
1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey be made applicable to
the various semipublic or private roads, drives, driveways, trails, terraces,
paths or other roadways of Knight Park open to or used by the public is
hereby approved.
§ 217-13. Parking restrictions. [Amended 9-21-1992 by Ord. No.
1015; 4-4-1994 by Ord. No. 1052]
It shall be unlawful for the owners or drivers of automobiles to park in
Knight Park between sunset and sunrise unless directed by the Police
Department. It shall be unlawful for the owners or operators of motor
vehicles to park their motor vehicles or permit them to be parked on any of
the lawns, fields or areas where grass is planted within Knight Park at any
time.
§ 217-14. (Reserved)96
§ 217-15. Signs to be posted; costs. [Amended 4-4-1994 by Ord. No.
1052]
All signs, posts, bolts or other necessary materials shall be installed and
paid for by the applicant. Work shall be checked by the Police Department
to ensure installations meet state and federal specifications, and all signing
shall conform to the current manual on uniform traffic control devices.
§ 217-15.1. One-way streets. [Added 9-20-1993 by Ord. No. 1038;
amended 4-4-1994 by Ord. No. 1052]
The following shall be designated as one-way streets:
Names of Street Direction
Perimeter Road Northbound from Collings Avenue to
Park Avenue
§ 217-15.2. Speed limits. [Added 4-4-1994 by Ord. No. 1052]
A. The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the parking lots shall be
15 miles per hour.
96.Editor's Note: Former § 217-14, Exception to parking regulations, was repealed 4-4-1994
by Ord. No. 1052.
§ 217-12 NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH § 217-15.2
211:437
§ 217-15.3. Tow-away zones. [Added 4-4-1994 by Ord. No. 1052]
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, to block entrance- or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grass area
or pedestrian walkway or to present in any way a safety or traffic hazard
may be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 217-16. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-20-1993 by Ord. No.
1038; 4-4-1994 by Ord. No. 1052]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, every
person convicted of a violation of this Article or any supplement thereto
shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $100 or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
B. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 217-15.2 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 217-16
211:438
ARTICLE III
Ice-Skating in Knight Park
[Adopted 8-16-1971 by Ord. No. 662 as Ch. 74, Art. III, of the 1971
Code]
§ 217-17. Authority to promulgate rules and regulations. [Amended
8-15-1994 by Ord. No. 1058]
The Commissioner of Public Works is hereby authorized to promulgate rules
and regulations governing the use and enjoyment of the lakes in Knight Park
for ice-skating purposes by the public.
§ 217-18. Approval of rules and regulations.
Such rules and regulations shall be submitted, in writing, to the Board of
Commissioners and shall not take effect until such time as the same have
been approved by a majority vote thereof.
§ 217-19. Posting of rules and regulations.
Such rules and regulations, together with any amendments thereto or
supplements thereof, shall be conspicuously posted at the public view in the
Municipal Building, police headquarters and in the vicinity of the lakes in
Knight Park.
§ 217-20. Scope.
Such rules and regulations may provide the time or times when said lakes
shall be used for ice-skating purposes by the public, as well as the manner
or means by which the public is to be so advised, and may also provide for
the proper policing and control of the use and all activities of said lakes and
the surrounding areas.
§ 217-21. Unsafe skating conditions; red signal flag.
§ 217-22. Tampering with flag or signs.
No unauthorized person shall lower or remove said flag or in any way
tamper with or remove the same or any sign, notice or bulletin board posted
A. A red signal flag shall be flown in the vicinity of said lakes at all times
when skating upon said lakes is determined unsafe or is unauthorized,
and it shall be unlawful for anyone to walk, skate, sled or trespass upon
the same while said flag is so flying, except duly authorized officials
who may enter upon said lakes for the purpose of making official tests
or enforcing the provisions of this Article or said rules and regulations
made pursuant hereto.
B. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit any person, at his
own risk, from entering upon said lakes at any time for the purpose of
making any rescue of any person or animal.
§ 217-17 NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH § 217-22
211:439
by the borough in connection with the use of said lakes for ice-skating
purposes.
§ 217-23. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this Article or any
of the rules and regulations made hereunder shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding $500 or imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding
90 days, or both, in the discretion of the court.
§ 217-22 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 217-23
211:440
ARTICLE IV
Permits for Activities in Knight Park
[Adopted 8-6-2018 by Ord. No. 164297]
§ 217-24. Permits.
At the request of the Trustees of Knight Park, the Borough shall assist in
the issuance and enforcement of permits to individuals and organizations
for the use of various buildings, athletic fields and other facilities located
within Knight Park in accordance with rules established by the Trustees of
Knight Park.
97.Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former Article IV as Article V, and former
§§ 217-24 and 217-25 as §§ 217-25 and 217-26, respectively.
§ 217-24 NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH § 217-24
211:441

ARTICLE V
Department of Recreation
[Adopted 7-2-2007 by Ord. No. 1435]
§ 217-25. Department established.
There is hereby created a Department of Recreation for the Borough of
Collingswood which shall be supervised by an appointee of the Borough
Commissioners. The Department of Recreation shall offer recreational
programs for the residents of the Borough of Collingswood and other
persons.
§ 217-26. Fees. [Amended 6-1-2009 by Ord. No. 1463; 8-10-2009 by
Ord. No. 1468; 12-29-2009 by Ord. No. 1474; 6-14-2010 by Ord. No.
1481; 6-6-2011 by Ord. No. 1493; 4-6-2015 by Ord. No. 1568;
6-4-2018 by Ord. No. 1640]
The Department of Recreation shall be responsible for organizing and
supervising recreational programs within the Borough and shall determine
the fees to be charged for such recreational programs. Fees shall be
charged to provide the necessary funds for the organization and supervision
of the recreational programs and to maintain the playgrounds and
recreation places within the Borough. Participation in the following
recreation programs of the Department of Recreation shall require payment
of the following fees:
SUMMER
Program Fee
Archery $50
Basketball league $25
Girls summer league $650/team
Girls basketball camp $100
Boys basketball camp $100
Golf $30 youth/$50 adults
Field hockey Fall: $35 grades K through 6; summer:
$25 grades 7 through 12
Field hockey camp $25 grades 1 through 6
Playground $160 (5 weeks)
$50 weekly and $20/day
Soccer camp $80
Swim lessons $35
Swim team $50 for first two swimmers; $35 each
additional swimmer
Tennis $30
§ 217-25 NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH § 217-26
211:443
SUMMER
Program Fee
Soccer $35
Mini soccer $20
Travel soccer U8, U9, U10: $85
U11, U12, U13, U14, U15: $110
Friendship soccer $60
Field hockey $30
Wrestling $30
Boys basketball $30
Girls basketball $30
Indoor soccer $20
Indoor hockey $30
Girls softball $30
Girls lacrosse $30
Odyssey of the Mind $60
Summer field hockey, K through 4 $35
Summer field hockey 5 through 8 $50
Lacrosse camp $25
Playground $50 per week; $20 per day
Preschool playground $40 per week
Fall mini soccer $25
Fall soccer $40 for first child; $35 each additional
Fall field hockey $40 for first child; $35 each additional
Wrestling $40 for first child; $35 each additional
Boys basketball $40 for first child; $35 each additional
Girls basketball $40 for first child; $35 each additional
Lacrosse $40 for first child; $35 each additional
Travel field hockey, K through 2 $50
Travel field hockey, 3 through 4 $100
Travel field hockey, 5 through 6 $120
Travel field hockey, 7 through 8 $140
Late fees $5
Sending school district
registrations
1 1/2 times registration fee
Roberts Pool fees
Collingswood family $250
§ 217-26 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 217-26
211:444
SUMMER
Program Fee
Collingswood family presale $200
Nonresident family $500
Collingswood adult $75
Nonresident adult $150
Collingswood senior citizen $50
Collingswood child ages 3-20 $60
Nonresident child $120
Day band sales (sold at the pool
only)
Collingswood resident $10
Nonresident $20
Guest passes 5 for $30
Garden club $35 per member
§ 217-26 NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH § 217-26
211:445
Chapter 221
POLITICAL FUND-RAISING
§ 217-26 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 217-26
221:446
ARTICLE I
Use of Government Buildings and Equipment
[Adopted 6-5-2000 by Ord. No 1219]
§ 221-1. Short title.
An ordinance banning the use of government buildings and equipment for
political fund-raising.
§ 221-2. Purpose.
Whereas, our laws in New Jersey do not presently ban solicitation or
acceptance of political contributions by public office holders and employees
while in any room or building occupied in the discharge of official duties;
whereas, solicitation and acceptance of political contributions in rooms
and buildings occupied in the discharge of official duties threatens the
independence of public employees, undermine the efficiency of government
by taking officials and employees away from the people's business and
leads to the appearance of improper influence of political contributions on
government functions; whereas, prohibiting the solicitation and acceptance
of political contributions in rooms and buildings occupied in the discharge
of official duties will address these harms and leave open ample alternative
venues for political fund-raising; whereas, our laws in New Jersey do not
presently recognize the misuse of public property for political fund-raising
as a district offense; therefore, it is accordingly found and determined
that the municipality's interest in an independent and efficient government
workforce and a government that is undermined by neither the fact nor
appearance of improper influence of political contributions on government
decisions require the prohibition of political fund-raising in rooms or
buildings occupied in the discharge of official duties or through the use of
public property.
§ 221-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CANDIDATE — The term "candidate" means any individual seeking election
to a public office of the federal, state, county or municipal government, or
school district or political party, and any individual who shall have been
elected or failed of election to any such office.
MUNICIPAL OFFICIAL, EMPLOYEE and APPOINTEE — The term
"municipal official, employee and appointee" means any person holding
elective municipal office or holding an appointed position in the municipal
government or in any agency, commission, board or office thereof, whether
the position is full- or part-time, compensated or uncompensated, and any
employee of municipal government or of any municipal agency, commission,
board or office thereof, whether the position is full-time or part-time.
§ 221-1 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 221-3
221:447
MUNICIPALITY — The term "municipality" means the government of the
municipality, including any officer, department, board, commission or
agency thereof.
POLITICAL CONTRIBUTION — The term "political contribution means any
loans and transfers of money or other things of value to or by any candidate,
elected official or political organization, or other commitments or
assumptions of liability to make any such transfer. Political contributions
shall be deemed to have been made upon the date when such commitment
is made or liability assumed.
POLITICAL ORGANIZATION — The term "political organization" means
any two or more persons acting jointly, or any corporation, partnership or
other incorporated or unincorporated association which is organized to or
does aid or promote the nomination, election or defeat of any candidate
or candidates for federal, state, county, municipal or school board office or
political party office. Political organization includes, but is not limited to,
organizations defined in N.J.S.A. 19:44A-3 as a "political committee," "joint
candidates committee," "continuing political committee," "political party
committee," "candidate committee" or "legislative leadership committee."
PUBLIC PROPERTY — The term "public property" means all personal
property owned, leased or controlled by the municipal government,
including but not limited to vehicles, phones, fax machines, computers,
stationery, including municipal letterhead, postage and other office
equipment.
SOLICIT — The term "solicit" means to ask for by oral or written
communication, a contribution as that term is defined herein.
§ 221-4. General regulations.
A. Prohibition against soliciting or accepting political contribution in
rooms or buildings occupied in the discharge of public duties. No
municipal official, employee or appointee may solicit, commit to pay or
receive payment of or a commitment to pay any political contribution
for any candidate, elected official or political organization while in any
room or building occupied in the discharge of official duties. This
section shall include solicitation or acceptance of political contributions
made over the telephone or by use of a computer, including private
telephones and computers, if the person soliciting or accepting the
political contribution, or using the telephone or computer for purposes
of soliciting or accepting the political contribution, is in any room or
building occupied in the discharge of official duties.
B. Prohibition against use of public property for political fund-raising. No
municipal official, employee or appointee may solicit, commit to pay, or
receive payment of or a commitment to pay any political contribution
for any candidate, elected official or political organization while
utilizing public property. This section shall not be construed to prohibit
de minimus use of public property such as a government-owned or
leased car, outside of rooms or buildings occupied in the discharge of
§ 221-3 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 221-4
221:448
§ 221-5. Violations and penalties.
Violation of any provision of this article shall be punished by a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days or imprisonment in the county jail
for a term not exceeding 90 days or a fine not exceeding $1,000.
public duties, in connection with political fund-raising, if the public
property is not used in such way as to convey to a reasonable observer
that the fund-raising activity is officially authorized or endorsed.
§ 221-4 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 221-5
221:449

ARTICLE II
Political Contribution Limits for Professional Contracts
[Adopted by the Collingswood voters at the 11-7-2006 General
Election by Ord. No. 142598]
§ 221-6. Prohibition on awarding public contracts to certain
contributors.
A. Any other provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding, the
municipality or any of its purchasing agents or agencies or those of its
independent authorities, as the case may be, shall not enter into an
agreement or otherwise contract to procure professional, banking,
insurance coverage services or any other consulting services, from any
professional business entity, including those awarded pursuant to a fair
and open process, if that entity has solicited or made any contribution
of money, or pledge of a contribution, including in-kind contributions, to
any Collingswood Borough municipal candidate or holder of the public
office having ultimate responsibility for the award of the contract, or
campaign committee supporting such candidate or officeholder, or to
any Collingswood Borough or Camden County party committee, or to
any political action committee that regularly engages in the support of
Borough or county elections and/or Borough or county parties (PAC) in
excess of the thresholds specified in Subsection C within one calendar
year immediately preceding the date of the contract or agreement.
B. No professional business entity which enters into negotiations for or
agrees to any contract or agreement with the municipality or any
department or agency thereof or of its independent authorities for the
rendition of professional, banking or insurance coverage services or
any other consulting services, including those awarded pursuant to a
fair and open process, shall solicit or make any contribution of money,
or pledge of a contribution, including in-kind contributions, to any
Collingswood Borough municipal candidate or holder of the public
office having ultimate responsibility for the award of the contract, or
campaign committee supporting such candidate or officeholder, or to
any Collingswood Borough or Camden County party committee, or to
any PAC that regularly engages in the support of Borough or county
elections and/or Borough or county parties between the time of first
communications between that business entity and the Borough
regarding a specific professional services agreement and the later of
the termination of negotiations or the completion of the contract or
agreement.
C. Contribution limits.
(1) Subject to the limitations in Subsection C(2), any entity meeting the
definition of professional business entity under this section may
98.Editor's Note: Ord. No. 1415, which established political contribution limits for
professional contracts, was adopted by the Borough Commission of the Borough of
Collingwood 9-5-2006.
§ 221-6 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 221-6
221:451
§ 221-7. Contributions made prior to the effective date.
No contribution of money or any other thing of value, including in-kind
contributions, made by a professional business entity to any Borough
candidate for Mayor or Commission or Borough or County party committee
or PAC referenced in this article shall be deemed a violation of this section,
nor shall an agreement for property, goods, or services, of any kind
whatsoever, be disqualified thereby, if that contribution was made by the
professional business entity prior to the effective date of this article.
§ 221-8. Contribution statement by professional business entity.
annually contribute a maximum of $300 for any purpose to each
candidate for Mayor or Council, or $300 to each Collingswood
Borough party committee, or $500 to each Camden County party
committee, or to a PAC referenced in this article, without violating
Subsection A of this section.
(2) However, any entity meeting the definition of "professional
business entity" under this section, including such principals,
partners, and officers of the entity in the aggregate, may not
annually contribute for any purpose in excess of a total of $2,500 to
all Collingswood Borough candidates and officeholders with
ultimate responsibility for the award of the contract and all
Collingswood Borough or Camden County political parties and
PACs referenced in this article combined without violating
Subsection A of this section.
D. For purposes of this article, a "professional business entity" is any entity
seeking or performing a public contract for professional, banking or
insurance coverage services or any other consulting services and which
may be an individual including the individual's spouse, if any, and any
child living at home; a person; firm; corporation; professional
corporation; partnership; organization; or association. The definition of
a business entity includes all principals who own 5% or more of the
equity in the corporation or business trust, partners, and officers in the
aggregate employed by the entity as well as any subsidiaries directly
controlled by the business entity.
E. For purposes of this section, the office that is considered to have
ultimate responsibility for the award of contract shall be:
(1) The Borough of Collingswood Commission and the Mayor of the
Borough of Collingswood, if the contract requires approval or
appropriation from the Commission.
(2) The Mayor of the Borough of Collingswood, if the contract requires
approval of the Mayor, or if a public officer who is responsible for
the award of the contract is appointed by the Mayor.
§ 221-6 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 221-8
221:452
§ 221-9. Return of excess contributions.
A professional business entity or Borough candidate or officeholder or
Borough or county party committee or PAC referenced in this article may
cure a violation of § 221-6 of this article, if, within 30 days after the
contribution, the professional business entity notifies the Borough
Commission in writing and seeks and receives reimbursement of a
contribution from the Borough candidate or Borough or county political
party or PAC referenced in this article.
§ 221-10. Violations and penalties.
A. Prior to awarding any contract or agreement to procure professional
services, or banking or insurance coverage services or any other
consulting services, with any professional business entity, the Borough
or any of its purchasing agents or agencies, as the case may be, shall
receive a sworn statement from the professional business entity made
under penalty of perjury that the bidder or officer has not made a
contribution in violation of Section 1 of this article;
B. The professional business entity shall have a continuing duty to report
any violations of this article that may occur during the negotiation or
duration of a contract. The certification required under this subsection
shall be made prior to entry into the contract or agreement with the
Borough and shall be in addition to any other certifications that may be
required by any other provision of law.
A. It shall be a breach of the terms of the Collingswood Borough
professional service agreement for a business entity to:
(1) Make or solicit a contribution in violation of this article;
(2) Knowingly conceal or misrepresent a contribution given or
received;
(3) Make or solicit contributions through intermediaries for the
purpose of concealing or misrepresenting the source of the
contribution;
(4) Make or solicit any contribution on the condition or with the
agreement that it will be contributed to a campaign committee of
any candidate or holder of the public office of Collingswood
Borough;
(5) Engage or employ a lobbyist or consultant with the intent or
understanding that such lobbyist or consultant would make or
solicit any contribution which, if made or solicited by the business
entity itself, would subject that entity to the restrictions of this
article;
(6) Fund contributions made by third parties, including consultants,
attorneys, family members, and employees;
§ 221-8 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 221-10
221:453
(7) Engage in any exchange of contributions to circumvent the intent
of this article; or
(8) Directly or indirectly, through or by any other person or means, do
any act which would subject that entity to the restrictions of this
article.
B. Furthermore, any professional business entity that violates Subsection
A(1) through (8) shall be disqualified from eligibility for future
Collingswood Borough contracts for a period of four calendar years
from the date of the violation.
§ 221-10 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 221-10
221:454
ARTICLE III
County Contributions and Expenditures
[Adopted 10-2-2006 by Ord. No. 1416]
§ 221-11. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "County Political Contributions and
Expenditures Ordinance."
§ 221-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, unless a clearly different meaning appears from the
context, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CANDIDATE — An individual seeking election to a public office of the
Borough or the Borough's school district at an election, except that the term
shall not include an individual seeking party office; or an individual who
shall have been elected or failed of election to an office, other than a party
office, of which he or she sought election and who receives contributions
and makes expenditures for any of the purposes authorized by N.J.S.A.
19:44A-11.2 during the period of service in that office.
CONTRIBUTIONS and EXPENDITURES — Include all loans and transfer of
money or other thing of value to or by any candidate, municipal candidate
committee, political committee, or political party committee and all pledges
or other commitments or assumptions of liability to make any such transfer;
and for purposes of reports required under the provisions of this article
shall be deemed to have been made upon the date when such commitment
is made or liability assumed.
ELECTION — Any election for municipal office in the Borough of
Collingswood, including school board elections.
POLITICAL COMMITTEE — Any two or more persons acting jointly, or
any corporation, partnership, or any other incorporated or unincorporated
association which is organized to, or does, aid or promote the nomination,
election or defeat of any candidate or candidates for public office.
POLITICAL PARTY COMMITTEE — Any county committee of a political
party, as organized pursuant to N.J.S.A. 19:5-3, or any municipal committee
of a political party, as organized pursuant to N.J.S.A. 19:5-2.
§ 221-13. Contributions by county political committees or county
political party committees to candidates or campaign committees.
A. Limitation on contributions from county political candidates or
organizations. No county political committee or county political party
committee shall pay or make any contribution of money or other thing
of value in excess of $500 annually to a candidate or his or her
municipal candidate committee.
B. Limitation on acceptance of contributions from county political
committee. No candidate who has established a municipal candidate
§ 221-11 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 221-13
221:455
§ 221-14. Contributions to be made by check only.
Any payment by a county political committee or county political party
committee to any municipal candidate or municipal candidate committee or
a municipal political party committee in aid of or to promote the candidacy
of an individual for nomination for election or for election to municipal
public office shall be made by check, and no such payment shall be made in
currency.
§ 221-15. Reporting of contributions from county.
The campaign treasurer of each candidate and each municipal candidate
committee shall make a full cumulative report of all contributions in the
form of moneys, loans, paid personal services or other things of value made
to him or to the deputy campaign treasurers of the municipal candidate
committee by a county political committee or county political party
committee. The time period for the report shall begin on the date of the first
of those contributions, the date of the first of those expenditures, or the date
of the appointment of the campaign treasurer, whichever occurred first,
and run until the second day preceding the date of the cumulative report.
A cumulative report shall be filed on the 29th day preceding the election;
on the 11th day preceding the election; and on the 20th day following
such election. If no moneys, loans, paid personal services or other things
of value were contributed during that period, the report shall so indicate.
The report shall also contain the name and mailing address of each person
or group from whom such moneys, loans, paid personal services or other
things of value were contributed. The campaign treasurer and the candidate
or several candidates shall certify the correctness of the report. Such report
shall be filed with the Borough Clerk.
§ 221-16. Violations and penalties.
A finding of a violation of this article shall be made only upon clear and
convincing evidence. A person who violates any of its provisions shall be
liable to a penalty equal to four times the amount of the contribution
made to the recipient. (Note: Monetary penalty considered as option over
disqualification from future elections.)
committee, his campaign treasurer, deputy campaign treasurer or
candidate committee, shall knowingly accept from a county political
committee or county political party committee any contribution of
money or other thing of value which in the aggregate exceeds $500
annually.
§ 221-13 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 221-16
221:456
Chapter 223
POOLROOMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Coin-operated amusement devices — See Ch.
97.
Development regulations — See Ch. 141.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 193.
Loitering — See Ch. 201.
§ 223-1. License required.
No person or persons, firm, association, club or corporation shall maintain,
operate or conduct any public room or place wherein the games commonly
known as "pool" or "billiards" are played, whether said rooms or place of
business be used solely for the playing of pool or billiards or in conjunction
with some other business, without having first obtained a license therefor
from the Board of Commissioners of the Borough of Collingswood as
hereinafter provided.
§ 223-2. Application for license.
An application for a license shall be filed with the Borough Clerk on forms to
be furnished by him, which forms shall require to be included the following
information:
§ 223-3. Issuance of license; duration.
All licenses herein provided for shall be issued by the Borough Clerk only
after a resolution of the Board of Commissioners of the Borough of
A. The name and address of the applicant.
B. In the case of a partnership, the names and addresses of all partners.
C. In the case of a corporation, the names and addresses of the officers,
directors and all stockholders presently holding stock and all who, for
six (6) months prior to the making of said application, have been
officers, directors or stockholders.
D. In the case of clubs or associations, the names and addresses of all
officers.
E. Whether or not the person or persons named in the application have
ever been convicted of a violation of any federal, state or municipal law.
F. The location of the premises to be licensed.
G. The number of pool tables and billiard tables to be located upon the
premises to be licensed.
§ 221-16 POOLROOMS § 223-3
223:457
Collingswood shall have been adopted approving said application and only
after the payment of the license fee herein provided for. All such licenses
shall be valid from the date of issuance until the 31st day of December
next after the same is issued, unless sooner revoked. Any license issued on
or after August 1 shall be for one-half (1/2) of the annual fees provided in
§ 223-5 hereof.
§ 223-4. Contents of license; transferability.
Such license shall bear the date of issue, the name of the licensee, the
purpose for which issued and the location of the room or building wherein
the licensee is authorized to carry on and conduct any such business.
Such license shall not be transferable by the holder to any other person
or persons, firm, association or corporation; but such license may be
transferred by the holder to another address, provided that the licensee
shall make written application for such transfer to the Borough Clerk and
such transfer is approved by resolution of the Board of Commissioners of
the Borough of Collingswood.
§ 223-5. License fee. [Amended 12-15-1975 by Ord. No. 708]
The annual fees to be paid for such license are hereby fixed at the sum of
two hundred fifty dollars ($250.) for each pool or billiard table located upon
the premises to be licensed.
§ 223-6. Suspension or revocation of license.
A. The Board of Commissioners of the Borough of Collingswood may
suspend or revoke the license of any licensee on any one (1) or more of
the following grounds:
(1) Violation of any of the laws of the State of New Jersey upon the
licensed premises by the licensee or its agent, servants, employees
or representatives.
(2) Violation of any ordinance of the Borough of Collingswood upon the
licensed premises by the licensee or its agents, servants,
employees or representatives.
(3) If said license was procured by fraudulent conduct or false
statement of a material fact or if a fact concerning the applicant
was not disclosed at the time of filing the application, where such
fact would have constituted just cause for refusing to issue said
license.
(4) Permitting or suffering any activity upon the licensed premises
which is or may be detrimental to the public health, safety, welfare
or morals.
B. In all such cases, written notice of the charge or charges and the time
and place of hearing thereon shall be served on the licensee either in
person or by certified or registered mail addressed to the licensed
§ 223-3 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 223-6
223:458
§ 223-7. Unsafe premises ineligible for licensing.99
Any premises which shall be declared to be unsafe by the written report of
the Code Enforcement Officer or to be a fire hazard by the written report
of the Chief of the Fire Department shall be deemed to be ineligible for a
license.
§ 223-8. Location restrictions.
No license shall be issued for the operation of any pool or billiard room
which is located within two hundred (200) feet of any entrance to a school,
church or publicly owned building.
§ 223-9. Hours and days of operation.
The hours of operation of such pool or billiard rooms shall be as follows:
Monday through Saturday, 10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., and shall not operate
on Sunday.
§ 223-10. Presence of minors.
No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be admitted to or
permitted to play pool or billiards in any licensed premises or to frequent or
lounge or congregate or gather in such room or place unless accompanied
by his or her parent or guardian.
§ 223-11. Card playing prohibited.
In no event shall card playing be permitted on premises licensed under this
chapter, even if such card playing is for social purposes.
§ 223-12. Arrangement of premises.
All premises in which the games of pool or billiards are played shall be
on the street floor of any building and shall be so arranged and shall be
so lighted that a full view of the interior may be had from the public
thoroughfare or from adjacent rooms in which the public is admitted at all
hours.
§ 223-13. Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to any religious, charitable, benevolent or
nonprofit association or corporation which operates or maintains any pool
premises. No revocation or suspension shall occur unless the licensee
shall have been afforded an opportunity to be heard to his defense.
C. In the event that any license is suspended or revoked, the licensee shall
not be permitted to a return of any portion of the license fee.
99.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 223-6 POOLROOMS § 223-13
223:459
or billiard table solely for the recreation and amusement of its members,
provided that such organization is bona fide in character and is not intended
as a means or device for evading the terms and provisions of this chapter;
nor shall this chapter apply to the keeping of any pool or billiard table in
private residences.
§ 223-14. Display of license and regulations.
There shall be conspicuously posted and displayed in any premises licensed
under this chapter:
§ 223-15. Employ of minors.
No minor under eighteen (18) years of age shall be employed, permitted or
suffered to work in, about or in connection with any licensed premises.
§ 223-16. Playing for money or other valuables prohibited.
No proprietor nor owner or operator shall permit or allow any person to
play billiards or pool for money or other valuable thing.
§ 223-17. Periodic inspections.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to see that the licensed premises
are inspected periodically by a member of the Police Department to ensure
conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 223-18. Violations and penalties.100
Any person or persons, firm, association, club or corporation violating any
of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject
to a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.), confinement in
the county jail for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days or a period of
community service for not more than ninety (90) days, or any combination
thereof, in the discretion of the Judge of the Municipal Court; and each day
that such violation shall be continued shall be deemed and taken to be a
separate and distinct offense.
Chapter 225
PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS
A. The license issued pursuant to this chapter.
B. A copy of this chapter, which shall be supplied by the Borough Clerk.
C. Not less than one (1) sign giving notice that no person under the age of
eighteen (18) is permitted on the licensed premises unless
accompanied by his or her parent or guardian.
100. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 223-13 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 225-1
225:460
§ 225-1. Findings.
§ 225-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUYER — Any person, partnership or corporation who or which, through
any means, buys, transfers or obtains from consignment gold, silver,
precious or semiprecious metals or gems or other metals, as defined in this
chapter.
DEALER — Any person, partnership or corporation who or which, through
any means, buys, sells, transfers or obtains from consignment gold, silver,
precious or semiprecious metals or gems or other metals, as defined in this
chapter, and includes anyone advertising the purchase or sale of any of the
aforementioned items.
GOLD — Any article or product with a gold content, without regard to the
fineness thereof.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
OTHER METALS — Any item made of aluminum, copper, magnesium or
other ferrous metals.
PRECIOUS OR SEMIPRECIOUS GEMS — Not limited to those categories
known as "diamonds, rubies, pearls and sapphires," and is commonly called
a "jewel."
PURCHASE — Includes any exchange of gold, silver or any precious or
semiprecious gem or other metals, as defined in this chapter, for anything of
value. A payment need not be made by way of money in order to constitute
"purchase" for the purposes of this chapter.
REGULATED ACTIVITY — The purchase of any used item, as defined in
§ 225-1.
A. The Borough Commission hereby finds that there is a need to regulate
and control the buying and selling of gold, silver and precious or
semiprecious gems, in order to prevent the easy disposal of items,
which have been unlawfully obtained as the result of crime, while
protecting and recognizing the legitimate businesses which are
engaged in the buying and selling of gold, silver and precious or
semiprecious gems.
B. The Borough Commission hereby finds that there is a need to regulate
and control the buying and selling of other metals, such as aluminum,
copper, magnesium and ferrous metals, which have been unlawfully
obtained, as the result of crime, while protecting and recognizing the
legitimate businesses which are engaged in the buying and selling of
other metals, such as aluminum, copper, magnesium and ferrous
metals.
§ 225-1 PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS § 225-2
225:461
SELLER — Any person, partnership or corporation who or which, through
any means, sells, transfers or offers by consignment gold, silver, precious or
semiprecious metals or gems or other metals, as defined in this chapter.
SILVER — Any article or product with a silver content, without regard to the
fineness thereof.
USED ITEM CONTAINING GOLD OR SILVER — Any item containing gold
or silver previously sold or transferred to a consumer for the personal use
or enjoyment of such consumer.
§ 225-3. License required.
No person shall engage in a regulated activity, as defined above, without
having first obtained a license therefor from the Borough Clerk, which
license shall bear a number issued by the Borough Clerk and shall be
prominently displayed within the licensed premises. The requirement of a
license shall apply to the business entity and to any individual employee
who engages in a regulated activity on behalf of a business entity.
§ 225-4. License fees.
At the time of filing the application for a license, a license fee of $25 shall
be paid for the annual license for the premises, where the activity is to be
conducted, together with a fee of $25 for each person working under the
premises license. Thereafter, the annual renewal fee for the premises will
be $25, and for each person working under the premises license $10.
§ 225-5. Term of license.
Each license shall be issued from August 1 to July 31.
§ 225-6. Application for license.
An application for a license shall be in writing on forms available from
the Borough Administrator. The application form, and pertinent information
required, shall be developed by the Borough of Collingswood through the
Police Department, and the application shall be amended from time to time,
as necessary, in order to provide the necessary information required by the
Police Department to comply with the intent of this chapter.
§ 225-7. Investigation of applicant; issuance or denial of license;
appeal.
Upon receipt of an application completed pursuant to this chapter, the Clerk
shall refer the application to the Chief of Police, who shall institute such
investigation of the applicant's moral character and business responsibility
as he deems necessary for the protection of the public welfare. Upon
completion of the investigation, which in no case shall take more than 30
days, the Chief of Police shall return the application, or a copy thereof, to
the Clerk, accompanied by his recommendation as to whether the license
should be issued or denied. If the recommendation of the Chief of Police is
§ 225-2 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 225-7
225:462
to deny the license, the grounds for the recommendation shall be stated.
Any person aggrieved by such denial may file a written appeal to the
Borough Commission through the Borough Administrator. The Borough
Commission may confirm or reverse the denial, as deemed advisable.
§ 225-8. Revocation of license; hearing.
Any license may be revoked for any violation of this chapter, in addition
to any other penalty imposed for any violation. Upon any violation, the
Borough Commission may suspend a license upon written notice to the
license holder. Upon receipt of the notice of suspension, the license holder
may, within 10 days, request a hearing on the suspension before the
Borough Commission. The hearing shall be held within 30 days of the
request, at which hearing the license holder shall have the opportunity to
be heard. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Borough Commission shall
either revoke the license or shall reinstate the license. In the event that the
license holder shall not request a hearing, the license shall be automatically
revoked upon the expiration of 10 days, after the notice of suspension has
been given to the license holder.
§ 225-9. License valid for one place of business only.
No person licensed as a dealer in the borough shall, by virtue of one license,
keep more than one place of business for receiving or taking goods.
§ 225-10. Doing business at unlicensed premises prohibited.
No dealer shall, at any time, do business at any place other than the place
for which the license was granted.
§ 225-11. Record of transactions to be maintained.
A. Every licensee shall issue to the seller, and keep for his own records, for
not less than one year, a serialized receipt for each purchase of precious
metals or other metals, as defined, containing the following:
(1) The name and address of the buyer.
(2) The date of the transaction.
(3) The names and specific description of the metals purchased.
(4) The finenesses of the precious metals purchased.
(5) The weights of the precious metals purchased.
(6) The prices paid for the precious metals at the standard measures of
weight and fineness.
(7) The name, address and signature of the seller.
(8) The driver's license number of the seller, and a photocopy of the
driver's license, if available.
§ 225-7 PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS § 225-11
225:463
§ 225-12. Prohibited transactions.
A licensee shall not accept or buy any gold, silver or precious or
semiprecious gem from any person under the age of 18 years, unless such
minor is accompanied by a parent or guardian, and said parent or guardian
gives specific written consent to the transaction and acknowledges the
receipt required by the buyer to be given to the seller.
§ 225-13. Minimum retention of articles.
No dealers shall sell any article until the same has been in their possession
at least 15 days.
§ 225-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person, as defined above, who violates any provision of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000
or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both, within
the discretion of the Municipal Judge. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed in each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 227
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 113.
Littering and dumping — See Ch. 197.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 211.
Rental property — See Ch. 237.
B. The buyer shall maintain the record of transactions in a ledger and
make the ledger available for inspection by any police officer.
§ 225-11 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 225-14
225:464
ARTICLE I
Property Maintenance Code
[Adopted 8-17-1992 by Ord. No. 1014]
§ 227-1. Adoption of code by reference. [Amended 3-21-1994 by
Ord. No. 1051]
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Borough of Collingswood, County of Camden, being marked and designated
as the "BOCA National Property Maintenance Code," Fourth Edition, 1993,
as published by Building Officials and Code Administrators (BOCA)
International, Inc., shall be and is hereby adopted as the Property
Maintenance Code of the Borough of Collingswood, County of Camden, in
the State of New Jersey, for the control of buildings and structures as herein
provided, and each and all of the regulations of the BOCA National Property
Maintenance Code/1993 are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part
thereof as if fully set out in this article.
§ 227-2. Technical amendments. [Amended 3-21-1994 by Ord. No.
1051]
§ 227-3. Exterior inspection upon sale required. [Added 2-22-1994
by Ord. No. 1046101; amended 3-21-1994 by Ord. No. 1051;
10-3-1994 by Ord. No. 1061; 7-3-2006 by Ord. No. 1403; 7-7-2008 by
Ord. No. 1449; 5-6-2013 by Ord. No. 1534]
A. Section PM-111.0 of said code, however, is specifically excluded and not
adopted by this article.
A. It is hereby determined that an exterior housing code inspection and an
exterior property area inspection, as defined in the BOCA National
Property Maintenance Code/1993, shall be required on the sale and/or
resale of residential properties and commercial properties within the
boundaries of the Borough of Collingswood. Further, any repairs
deemed necessary by the Administrative Office of Code Enforcement
shall be completed within 30 days of notification.
B. A fee of $50 shall be paid to the Bureau of Fire Prevention, or the
Borough's designee, upon the receipt of a request for a housing code
exterior inspection. Such fees shall be paid only once and will include
all costs for inspections; to include reinspections of any violations and
the correction thereof.
101. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former §§ 227-3 and
227-4 as §§ 227-4 and 227-5, respectively.
§ 227-1 PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS § 227-4
225:465
§ 227-4. Conformance of rental property with BOCA Code. [Added
7-17-1995 by Ord. No. 1078102; amended 5-6-2013 by Ord. No. 1534]
No person shall rent to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit
for the purpose of living therein, which does not conform to the provisions of
the BOCA National Property Maintenance Code/1993, established hereby as
the standard to be used in determining whether a dwelling is safe, sanitary
and fit for human habitation.
§ 227-5. Certificates of occupancy. [Added 7-17-1995 by Ord. No.
1078; amended 9-5-2000 by Ord. No. 1226; 8-18-1997 by Ord. No.
1129; 5-6-2013 by Ord. No. 1534]
A. No person shall occupy a dwelling or dwelling unit as a residential
tenant or lessee, unless the owner or the owner's agent shall have first
obtained a certificate of occupancy issued by the Administrative Office
of Code Enforcement for the specific dwelling or dwelling unit. The
owner or owner's agent shall apply to the Administrative Office of Code
Enforcement for such certificate of occupancy, which shall be issued by
said office inspector upon compliance by the owner with the applicable
provisions of this article and any rules and regulations adopted
pursuant thereto. No such certificate shall be transferable. Such
certificate shall include the address of the dwelling or dwelling unit, the
name of the owner and the name of the person occupying the dwelling
or dwelling unit. Every owner or owner's agent applying for a certificate
of occupancy shall supply such information as the Administrative Office
of Code Enforcement requires and shall pay a fee for the inspections
that may be required until the dwelling or dwelling unit qualifies for the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy by complying with the applicable
provisions of this article and any rules and regulations adopted
pursuant thereto.
(1) The fee for the initial inspection is $60 per dwelling unit.
(2) There is no fee for the first reinspection.
(3) The fee for the second reinspection is $45 per dwelling unit,
(4) The fee for the third reinspection is $60 per dwelling unit.
(5) The fee for the fourth or subsequent inspection is $80 per dwelling
unit.
B. No person shall occupy any business or commercial unit as a tenant or
lessee, unless the owner or the owner's agent shall have first obtained a
certificate of occupancy issued by the Administrative Office of Code
Enforcement for the specific unit. The owner or owner's agent shall
apply to the Administrative Office of Code Enforcement for a
commercial certificate of occupancy, which shall be issued by said office
102. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former §§ 227-4 and
227-5 and §§ 227-7 and 227-8, respectively.
§ 227-4 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 227-5
225:466
§ 227-6. Power to adopt rules and regulations. [Added 7-17-1995 by
Ord. No. 1078]
The Administrative Office of Code Enforcement is hereby authorized and
empowered to make and adopt such written rules and regulations as he
may deem necessary for the proper enforcement of the provisions of this
article; provided, however, that such rules and regulations shall not be in
conflict with the provisions of this article nor in any way alter, amend or
supersede any of the provisions thereof. The Administrative Office of Code
Enforcement shall file a certified copy of all rules and regulations which
he may adopt in his office and in the office of the Clerk of the Borough of
Collingswood.
§ 227-7. Saving clause. [Amended 3-21-1994 by Ord. No. 1051]
Nothing in this article or in the BOCA National Property Maintenance Code/
1993 hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding
pending in any court or any rights acquired or liability incurred or any cause
or causes of action acquired or existing under any act or ordinance hereby
repealed, nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost,
impaired or affected by this article.
§ 227-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-5-2000 by Ord. No.
1225; 3-6-2006 by Ord. No. 1396]
inspector upon compliance by the owner with the applicable provisions
of this article and any rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
No such certificate shall be transferable. Such certificate shall include
the address of the commercial unit, the name of the owner and the
name of the person occupying the unit. Every owner or owner's agent
applying for a commercial certificate of occupancy shall supply such
information as the Administrative Office of Code Enforcement requires
and shall pay a fee of $25 per commercial unit for the inspections that
may be required until the unit qualifies for the issuance of a commercial
certificate of occupancy by complying with the applicable provisions of
this article and any rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
A. Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any of the
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by one or
more of the following:
(1) A fine of not less than $100 nor more than $2,000 for each violation
of any provisions of this article and for each day on which same is
violated.
(2) Imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 90 days.
(3) A period of community service not to exceed 90 days.
B. Once a summons and complaint for said violation has been issued by a
Borough official by service of regular mail to the owner’s last known
§ 227-5 PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS § 227-8
225:467
§ 227-9. Noncompliance. [Added 9-5-2000 by Ord. No. 1228]
address, this summons and complaint shall be deemed to include a
notice of a violation on that date and notice of a violation of each
day thereafter until the violation has been completely remedied. Each
violation of any provisions of this article and each day on which the
same is violated shall be deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct
offense, and for each such separate and distinct offense a penalty shall
be imposed in accordance with the previous subsection.
C. A fine in excess of $1,250 may not be imposed upon an owner for
violations of housing or zoning codes until such time that the owner has
been provided with a thirty-day period in which to cure or abate the
condition and an opportunity for a hearing before a court of competent
jurisdiction for an independent determination concerning the violation.
A. Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for an owner of property situated
within the Borough to fail to comply with the Property Maintenance
Code of the Borough.
B. Notice. Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer for the Borough, his/
her agent or other representative of the Borough shall determine that a
property is in violation of the Property Maintenance Code, written
notice of the violation(s) shall be provided in the manner set forth in
Subsection C herein. The notice also shall provide that the violation(s)
must be corrected within 30 days after receipt of the notice.
C. Service of notice.
(1) The notice described in Subsection B shall be sent by regular mail
to the owner of the property at his/her/its last known address as
kept on file in the office of the Collector of Taxes for the Borough.
(2) Notice shall be considered to have been provided to the property
owner upon a showing that the regular mailing was not returned to
the Borough.
D. Corrective measures.
(1) In the event that an owner fails to correct the violation(s) to the
satisfaction of the Office of Code Enforcement for the Borough or
otherwise respond in the manner set forth in this article after
notice has been provided, the Borough may correct or cause the
violation(s) to be corrected.
(2) In the event that the Borough is required to act in accordance with
Subsection A, the Office of Code Enforcement for the Borough shall
certify the cost of corrections to the Board of Commissioners.
E. Examination by Board of Commissioners. Upon such certification to the
Board of Commissioners of the cost to correct the violations, the Board
of Commissioners shall examine the certification and, if found correct
§ 227-8 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 227-9
225:468
and reasonable, the cost shall be charged to the owner and against the
property by resolution.
F. Lien on property. Upon the passage of the resolution by the Board of
Commissioners as set forth in Subsection E above, the assessment so
charged shall become a lien on the property and shall be added to and
become a part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon the
property, the same to bear interest at the same rate as allowed for
unpaid taxes, and shall be collected and enforced by the same officers
and in the same manner as unpaid taxes.
§ 227-9 PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS § 227-9
225:469

ARTICLE II
Graffiti
[Adopted 12-1-2008 by Ord. No. 1457]
§ 227-10. Prohibited acts.
No person shall purposely or knowingly vandalize, deface or otherwise
damage the tangible property of another by painting, writing, drawing or
otherwise inscribing in any fashion or materials what is commonly known
as "graffiti." For the purposes of this chapter, "graffiti" shall include any
form of painting, writing or inscription, regardless of the content of same
or the nature of the materials used in the commission of the act. No person
shall place any graffiti on any building, structure or other exposed surface
located in the Borough.
§ 227-11. Notice to remove; property owner responsibilities.
A. The owner of the property on which the graffiti is placed shall remove
that graffiti. If the owners shall fail to remove the graffiti, the proper
personnel of the Borough shall issue an order directing the owners to
remove the graffiti in 30 days from the date that the notice is sent.
Unless the property owner has provided the Borough with a different
address, the notice shall be sent to the address which appears in the tax
records of the Borough of Collingswood.
B. If a property owner does not undertake the removal of the graffiti
within 90 days of the date of the order, unless an action challenging the
order to remove is pending in a court of competent jurisdiction, the
Borough may remove the graffiti from the property, with a detailed
itemization of the cost incurred by the Borough sent by certified and
regular mail for reimbursement from the property owner.
C. Where the Borough undertakes the removal of graffiti and presents the
owner with the detailed itemization of the cost of removal and the
owner fails to reimburse the Borough for the cost of removal within 15
days of the date the itemization is mailed, the Office of Code
Enforcement shall file the itemization with the Tax Collector,
whereupon the total of the amount shown thereon shall be recorded as
a lien against the premises. The Code Enforcement Officer for the
Borough shall certify the cost of corrections to the Board of
Commissioners. Upon such certification to the Board of Commissioners
of the cost to correct the violations, the Commissioners shall examine
the certification and, if found correct and reasonable, the cost shall be
charged to the owner and against the property by resolution.
D. In addition to or in lieu of the filing of a lien against the property, the
Borough may file an action for the collection of the debt in the Superior
Court of the State of New Jersey as authorized by P.L. 2006, c. 31.103
103. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.59.
§ 227-10 PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS § 227-12
225:471
§ 227-12. Parents and guardians responsible for damage.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:53A-15, any parent, guardian or other person having
legal custody of an child under 18 years of age who fails or neglects to
exercise reasonable supervision and control of such child shall be liable in
a civil action for any destruction or damage caused by such child offender
under § 227-10 above.
§ 227-13. Violations and penalties; restoration of property;
restitution.
A. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or
to performance of 90 days of community service and/or to a fine not
exceeding $1,000, at the discretion of the Municipal Court.
B. As a condition of sentencing, the Municipal Court shall have the
authority to order that the offender be responsible for cleaning,
repairing, painting or otherwise restoring the damaged property to the
condition it was in prior to being damaged. In the event that the
offender is unable, for any reason, to comply with the above, the
Municipal Court shall have the authority to order that said offender
make the necessary monetary restitution to restore the property to its
original undamaged condition.
§ 227-12 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 227-13
225:472
ARTICLE III
Upkeep of Vacant and Abandoned Residential Properties
[Adopted 10-6-2014 by Ord. No. 1556]
§ 227-14. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CREDITOR — Consistent with Section 3 of P.L. 2008, c. 86,104 a statechartered
bank, savings bank, savings and loan association or any credit
union, any person required to be licensed under the provisions of the New
Jersey Residential Mortgage Lending Act,105 and any entity acting on behalf
of the creditor named in the debt obligation, including but not limited to,
servicers.
VACANT AND ABANDONED — Consistent with Section 1 of P.L. 2010, c.
70 (N.J.S.A. 2A:50-73), residential real estate for which a notice of violation
has been issued pursuant to § 227-16 of this chapter and Subsection b. of
Section 1 of P.L. 2014, c. 35.106 Residential property shall further be deemed
"vacant and abandoned" where a mortgaged property is not occupied by a
mortgagor or tenant and at least two of the following conditions exist:
A. Overgrown or neglected vegetation;
The accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers or mail on the
property;
B.
C. Disconnected gas, electric, or water utility services to the property;
The accumulation of hazardous, noxious, or unhealthy substances or
materials on the property;
D.
E. The accumulation of junk, litter, trash or debris on the property;
F. The absence of window treatments such as blinds, curtains or shutters;
G. The absence of furnishings and personal items;
Statements of neighbors, delivery persons, or government employees
indicating that the residence is vacant and abandoned;
H.
Windows or entrances to the property that are boarded up or closed off
or multiple window panes that are damaged, broken and unrepaired;
I.
Doors to the property that are smashed through, broken off, unhinged,
or continuously unlocked;
J.
A risk to the health, safety or welfare of the public, or any adjoining
or adjacent property owners, exists due to acts of vandalism, loitering,
K.
104. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:10B-38.
105. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 17:11C-51 et seq.
106. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12s.
§ 227-14 PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS § 227-14
225:473
§ 227-15. Creditor responsibility.
§ 227-16. Notice.
criminal conduct, or the physical destruction or deterioration of the
property;
An uncorrected violation of a municipal building, housing, or similar
code during the preceding year, or an order by municipal authorities
declaring the property to be unfit for occupancy and to remain vacant
and unoccupied;
L.
The mortgagee or other authorized party has secured or winterized the
property due to the property being deemed vacant and unprotected or
in danger of freezing;
M.
A written statement issued by any mortgagor expressing the clear
intent of all mortgagors to abandon the property; and
N.
O. Any other reasonable indicia of abandonment.
A. A creditor filing a summons and complaint in an action to foreclose on a
residential property within the Borough shall be immediately
responsible for the care, maintenance, security, and upkeep of the
exterior of the property, after the property becomes vacant and
abandoned as defined in this article.
B. Where a creditor is located out-of-state, the creditor shall be
responsible for appointing an in-state representative or agent to act on
the creditor's behalf for the purpose of satisfying the requirements of
Subsection A of this section. Notice of said representative or agent shall
be provided to the Borough clerk in a manner that is consistent with
Subsection a. of Section 17 of P.L. 2008, c. 127 (the Save New Jersey
Homes Act of 2008),107 and shall further include the full name and
contact information of the in-state representative or agent.
A. Any public officer designated by the Borough or authorized municipal
official responsible for the administration of any property maintenance
or public nuisance code shall be authorized to issue a notice to a
creditor that has filed a summons and complaint in an action to
foreclose on a residential property within the Borough, if the public
officer determines that the creditor has violated this article by failing to
provide for the care, maintenance, security, and upkeep of the exterior
of the property. Where a creditor is an out-of-state creditor, the notice
shall be issued to the representative or agent that has been identified
by the creditor pursuant to § 227-15 of this chapter and the Save New
Jersey Homes Act of 2008.108
107. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:10B-36 et seq.
108. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:10B-36 et seq.
§ 227-14 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 227-16
225:474
§ 227-17. Violations and penalties.
B. The notice referenced in Subsection A of this section shall require the
creditor to correct the violation(s) within 30 days of receipt of the
notice, or within 10 days of receipt of the notice if the violation presents
an imminent threat to public health and safety.
C. The issuance of a notice pursuant to Subsection A of this section shall
constitute proof that a residential property is vacant and abandoned for
the purposes of this article.
A. A creditor subject to this article that is found by the municipal court of
the Borough, or by any other court of competent jurisdiction, to be in
violation of the requirement to correct a care, maintenance, security, or
upkeep violation cited in a notice issued pursuant to this article shall be
subject to a fine of $1,500 for each day of the violation. Any fines
imposed pursuant to this subsection shall commence 31 days following
the creditor's receipt of the notice, except where the violation is
deemed to present an imminent risk to the public health and safety, in
which case any fines shall commence 11 days following receipt of the
notice.
B. An out-of-state creditor subject to this article that is found by the
Municipal Court of the Borough, or by any other court of competent
jurisdiction, to be in violation of the requirement to appoint an in-state
representative or agent shall be subject to a fine of $2,500 for each day
of the violation. Any fines imposed on an out-of-state creditor for the
failure to appoint an in-state representative or agent shall commence
on the day after the ten-day period set forth in Paragraph (1) of
Subsection a. of Section 17 of P.L. 2008, c. 127 (N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51) for
providing notice to the Municipal Clerk that a summons and complaint
in an action to foreclose on a mortgage has been served.
C. No less than 20% of any money collected by the Borough pursuant to
this section shall be utilized by the Borough for municipal Code
enforcement purposes.
§ 227-16 PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS § 227-17
225:475
Chapter 228
PROPERTY, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 227. Rental property — See Ch. 237.
§ 228-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED PROPERTY — Any property that is determined to be
abandoned pursuant to P.L. 2003, N.J.S.A. 55:19-81.
BUILDING — Any building, or structure, or part thereof, whether used
for human habitation or otherwise, and includes any outbuildings, and
appurtenances belonging thereto.
COMMISSIONERS — The Board of Commissioners of the Borough of
Collingswood.
INTERESTED PARTIES — Includes any resident of the Borough of
Collingswood, any owner or operator of a business within the Borough of
Collingswood, or any organization representing the interests of residents,
business owners or otherwise engaged in furthering the revitalization and
improvement of the neighborhood in which the property is located.
LIENHOLDER or MORTGAGE HOLDER — Any person or entity holding a
note, mortgage, or other interest secured by a building or any part thereof.
OWNER — The holder or holders of title in fee simple.
PROPERTY — Any building or structure and the land appurtenant thereto.
PUBLIC OFFICER — A person designated or appointed by the Board of
Commissioners pursuant to P.L. 1942, N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.5, or any officer
of the municipality qualified to carry out the responsibilities set forth in
N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq. as designated by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners.
QUALIFIED REHABILITATION ENTITY — An entity organized or authorized
to do business under the New Jersey statutes which shall have as one of its
purposes the construction or rehabilitation of residential or nonresidential
buildings, the provision of affordable housing, the restoration of abandoned
property, the revitalization and improvement of urban neighborhoods, or
similar purpose, and which shall be well qualified by virtue of its staff,
professional consultants, financial resources, and prior activities to carry
out the rehabilitation of vacant buildings, as set forth under N.J.S.A.
55:19-80.
§ 228-2. Determination that property is abandoned; nuisance.
§ 227-17 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 228-2
225:476
A. Except as provided under N.J.S.A. 55:19-83, any property that has not
been legally occupied for a period of six months and which meets any
one of the following additional criteria may be deemed to be abandoned
property upon a determination by the public officer, that:
(1) The property is in need of rehabilitation in the reasonable judgment
of the public officer, and no rehabilitation has taken place during
that same six-month period; or
(2) Construction was initiated on the property and was discontinued
prior to completion, leaving the building unsuitable for occupancy,
and no construction has taken place for at least six months as of the
date of a determination by the public officer;
(3) At least one installment of property tax remains unpaid and
delinquent on that property as of the date of a determination by the
public officer; or
(4) The property has been determined to be a nuisance by the public
officer, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 55:19-82 for one or more of the
following reasons:
(a) The property has been found to be unfit for human habitation,
occupancy or use pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3;
(b) The condition and vacancy of the property materially increases
the risk of fire to the property and adjacent properties;
(c) The property is subject to unauthorized entry leading to
potential health and safety hazards; the owner has failed to
take reasonable and necessary measures to secure the
property; or the municipality has secured the property in order
to prevent such hazards after the owner has failed to do so;
(d) The presence of vermin or the accumulation of debris, uncut
vegetation or physical deterioration of the structure or
grounds have created potential health and safety hazards and
the owner has failed to take reasonable and necessary
measures to remove the hazards; or
(e) The dilapidated appearance or other condition of the property
materially affects the welfare, including the economic welfare,
of the residents of the area in close proximity to the property,
and the owner has failed to take reasonable and necessary
measures to remedy the conditions.
B. A property which contains both residential and nonresidential space
may be considered abandoned pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq., so
long as 2/3 or more of the total net square footage of the building was
previously legally occupied as residential space and none of the
residential space has been legally occupied for at least six months at
the time of the determination of abandonment by the public officer.
§ 228-2 PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS § 228-3
225:477
§ 228-3. Abandoned property list; notice to owner of record;
challenge by owner.
A. The Commissioners may direct the public officer to identify abandoned
property for the purpose of establishing an abandoned property list
throughout the Borough, or within those parts of the Borough as the
Commissioners may designate. Each item of identified abandoned
property shall include the tax block and lot number, the name of the
owner of record, if known, and the street address of the property lot.
B. The public officer shall establish and maintain a list of abandoned
property, known as the "abandoned property list." The Commissioners
may add properties to the abandoned property list at any time, and may
delete properties at any time when the public officer finds that the
property no longer meets the definition of an abandoned property.
C. Notice to owner.
(1) The public officer shall establish the abandoned property list or any
additions/deletions thereto in the official newspaper designated by
the Borough of Collingswood. Within 10 days after publication in
said newspaper, the public officer shall send a notice by certified
mail, return receipt requested, and by regular mail, to the owner of
record of every property included on the abandoned property list.
The published and mailed notices shall identify property
determined to be abandoned setting forth the owner of record and,
if known, the tax lot and block number and street address. The
public officer, in consultation with the Tax Collector, shall also send
out a notice by regular mail to any mortgagee, servicing
organization, or property tax processing organization that receives
a duplicate copy of the tax bill pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:4-64(d).
(2) When the owner of record is not known for a particular property
and cannot be ascertained by the exercise of reasonable diligence
by the Tax Collector, notice shall not be mailed but instead shall be
posted on the property in the manner as provided in N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.7. The mailed notice shall indicate the factual basis for the
finding of the public officer, that the property is abandoned
property as that term is defined herein and in N.J.S.A. 55:19-54, and
shall specify the information relied upon in making such finding. In
all cases, a copy of the mailed or posted notice shall also be filed by
the public officer, in the office of the Clerk, County of Camden. This
filing shall have the same force and effect as a formal notice under
N.J.S.A. 2A:15-6. The notice shall be captioned with the name of the
Borough of Collingswood as "Plaintiff" and the name of the
property owner as "Defendant," as though an action had been
commenced by the Borough against the owner.
D. An owner or lienholder may challenge the inclusion of his property on
the abandoned property list by appealing that determination to the
Commissioners within 30 days of the owner's receipt of the certified
§ 228-3 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 228-3
225:478
§ 228-4. Requests for additions to abandoned property list.
notice or 40 days from the date upon which the notice was sent. An
owner whose identity was not known to the public officer shall have
40 days from the date upon which notice was published or posted,
whichever is later, to challenge the inclusion of a property on the
abandoned property list. For good cause shown, the Commissioners
shall accept a late filing of an appeal. Within 30 days of receipt of
a request for an appeal of the findings contained in the notice, the
Commissioners shall schedule a hearing for redetermination of the
matter. Any property included on the list shall be presumed to be
abandoned property unless the owner, through the submission of an
affidavit or certification asserting that the property is not an abandoned
property, can demonstrate that the property was erroneously included
on the list. The affidavit or certification shall be accompanied by
supporting documentation, such as, but not limited to, photographs,
repair invoices, bills and construction contracts. The sole ground for
appeal shall be that the property in question is not abandoned property
as that term is defined herein and in N.J.S.A. 55:19-54. The
Commissioners shall decide any timely filed appeal within 10 days of
the hearing on the appeal and shall promptly, by certified mail, return
receipt requested, and by regular mail, notify the property owner of the
decision and the reasons therefor.
E. The property owner may challenge an adverse determination of an
appeal with the Commissioners, by instituting, in accordance with the
New Jersey Court Rules, a summary trial proceeding in the Superior
Court, County of Camden. Such action shall be instituted within 20 days
of the date of the notice of decision mailed by the Commissioners. The
sole ground for appeal and new hearing before the Superior Court shall
be that the property in question is not an abandoned property as that
term is defined in N.J.S.A. 55:19-54. The failure to institute an action of
appeal on a timely basis shall constitute a jurisdictional bar to
challenging the adverse determination, except that, for good cause
shown, the court may extend the deadline for instituting the action.
F. The Borough shall promptly remove any property from the abandoned
property list that has been determined by the Commissioners or on
appeal not to be abandoned and may, in its discretion, remove
properties from said list whenever the Commissioners deem such
removal appropriate under the circumstances.
G. The abandoned property list shall become effective, and the Borough
shall have the right to pursue any legal remedy with respect to
properties on the list, at any time after at least one property has been
placed on the list and following the expiration of the period for appeal
with respect to that first property or upon the denial of an appeal
brought by the property owner of that first property.
A. Any interested party may submit a written request to the
Commissioners asserting that any property within the Borough of
§ 228-3 PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS § 228-4
225:479
§ 228-5. Sale of tax lien; remediation costs.
Collingswood should be included on the abandoned property list. The
written request must specify the street address and block and lot
number of the property to be included and the grounds for its inclusion.
Within 30 days of receipt of any such request, the Commissioners
shall provide a written response to the party, either indicating that the
property will be added to the abandoned property list or otherwise
stating the Commissioners' reasons for not adding the property. For
the purposes of this section, the term "interested parties" shall include
any resident of the Borough of Collingswood, any owner or operator
of a business within the Borough of Collingswood, or any organization
representing the interests of residents, business owners or otherwise
engaged in furthering the revitalization and improvement of the
neighborhood in which the property is located.
B. Any interested party may participate in a redetermination hearing
regarding the inclusion of a property on the abandoned property list.
Upon written request by any interested party, the Commissioners shall
provide that party with at least 20 days' notice of any such hearing. The
party shall provide the Commissioners with notice at least 10 days
before the hearing of its intention to participate and the nature of the
testimony or other information that it proposes to submit at the
hearing.
A. Sale of tax lien on abandoned property.
(1) Notwithstanding N.J.S.A. 54:5-19 or the provisions of any other law
to the contrary, if a property is included on the abandoned property
list and the property taxes or other Borough liens due on the
property are delinquent six or more quarters as of the date of
expiration of the right to appeal inclusion on the list, or, if an appeal
has been filed, as of the date that all opportunities for appeal of
inclusion on the list have been exhausted, then the tax lien on the
property may be sold in accordance with the procedures in the "Tax
Sale Law," N.J.S.A. 54:5-1 et seq., on or after the 90th day following
the expiration of that time of appeal or final determination on an
appeal, as appropriate.
(2) The Borough may, at its option, require that the sale of the tax sale
certificate or any subsequent assignment or transfer of a tax sale
certificate held by the Borough be subject to the express condition
that the purchaser or assignee shall be obliged to perform and
conclude any rehabilitation or repairs necessary to remove the
property from the abandoned property list pursuant to N.J.S.A.
55:19-55. The Borough may further require that the purchaser or
assignee post a bond in favor of the Borough to guarantee the
rehabilitation or repair of the property. The cost of rehabilitation
and repairs and the cost of the bond shall be added to the amount
required to be paid by the owner for redemption of the property.
§ 228-4 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 228-5
225:480
(3) The public officer may waive a requirement to post a bond imposed
by the Borough for any purchaser, assignee or transferee of a tax
sale certificate that provides documentation acceptable to the
public officer that the purchaser, assignee or transferee is a
qualified rehabilitation entity as defined herein.
(4) The purchaser, assignee or transferee of the tax sale certificate
who is required to rehabilitate and repair the property shall be
required to file the appropriate affidavits with the Tax Collector,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-62, representing the amounts of monies
expended periodically toward the rehabilitation or repair of the
property. A purchaser, assignee or transferee shall be entitled to
interest on the amounts expended, as set forth in the affidavits, at
the delinquent rate of interest for delinquencies in excess of $1,500
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:4-67, in effect for the time period when the
amounts were expended.
(5) The tax sale certificate purchaser, assignee or transferee, under
the auspices and with the authority of the Borough, shall be
permitted to enter in and upon the property for the purposes of
appraising the costs of rehabilitation and repair and to perform all
other acts required to guarantee the completion of the
rehabilitation or repair of the property. No rehabilitation or repair
work shall be commenced, however, until proof of adequate liability
insurance and an indemnification agreement holding the Borough
harmless is filed with the public officer. If the tax sale certificate is
not purchased at the initial auction of the tax sale certificate and
the Borough purchases the certificate pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-34,
then the Borough is authorized and empowered to convey and
transfer to the authority or any of its subsidiaries, without
receiving compensation therefor, all of its right, title and interest in
that certificate; however, any portion of the amount paid to the Tax
Collector to redeem the tax sale certificate that represents tax or
other Borough lien delinquencies and subsequent Borough liens,
including interest, shall be returned by the Tax Collector of the
Borough.
B. If the Borough acquires the tax sale certificate for a property on the
abandoned property list then, upon 10 days' written notice to the
property owner and any mortgagee as of the date of the filing of the lis
pendens notice under Subsection d. of N.J.S.A. 55:19-55, that entity
shall be permitted to enter upon the property and remediate any
conditions that caused the property to be included on the abandoned
property list. No remediation shall be commenced, however, if within
that ten-day period the owner or mortgagee shall have notified the
Borough or authority or its subsidiary, as appropriate, in writing that
the owner or mortgagee has elected to perform the remediation itself.
When the owner or mortgagee elects to perform the remediation itself,
it shall be required to post bond in favor of the Borough in order to
§ 228-5 PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS § 228-5
225:481
§ 228-6. Removal of property from list of abandoned properties;
remediation.
ensure performance. The amount and conditions of the bond shall be
determined by the public officer.
C. The cost of remediation incurred by the Borough pursuant to this
section, as so certified by the entity incurring the cost upon completion
of the remediation, shall constitute a lien upon the property first in time
and right to any other lien, whether the other lien was filed prior to, or
after the filing of any lien by the Borough, except for Borough taxes,
lien and assessments and any lien imposed pursuant to the Spill
Compensation and Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.11 et seq., together
with any interest thereon. The certification of cost shall be filed and
recorded as a lien by the entity incurring the cost with the county clerk
or register of deeds and mortgages, as appropriate, in the county in
which the property is located.
D. Failure of an owner or lienholder to remove a property from the
abandoned property list within the period of time for appeal of inclusion
of the property on the abandoned property list pursuant to this
subsection shall be prima facie evidence of the intent of the owner to
continue to maintain the property as abandoned property.
E. The clearance, development, redevelopment, or repair of property
being maintained as an abandoned property pursuant to this chapter
shall be a public purpose and public use, for which the power of
eminent domain may be exercised.
A. An owner may remove a property from the abandoned property list
prior to sale of the tax sale certificate by paying all taxes and Borough
liens due, including interest and penalties and:
(1) By posting cash or a bond equal to the cost of remediating all
conditions because of which the property has been determined to
be abandoned pursuant to Section 36 of P.L. 1996, N.J.S.A. 55:19-55
and posting cash or a bond to cover the cost of any environmental
cleanup required on the property, evidenced by a certification by a
licensed engineer retained by the owner and reviewed and
approved by the public officer stating that the cash or bond
adequately covers the cost of the cleanup; or
(2) By demonstrating to the satisfaction of the public officer that the
conditions rendering the property abandoned have been
remediated in full; provided, however, that where the public officer
finds that the owner is actively engaged in remediating the
conditions because of which the property was determined to be
abandoned pursuant to Section 36 of P.L. 1996, N.J.S.A. 55:19-55,
as evidenced by significant rehabilitation activity on the property,
the public officer may grant an extension of time of not more than
120 days for the owner to complete all work, during which time no
§ 228-5 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 228-6
225:482
§ 228-7. Property deemed not abandoned; criteria; certification of
abandonment.
further proceedings will be taken against the owner or the
property.
B. If the owner has posted cash or a bond in order to have a property
removed from the abandoned property list and the conditions because
of which the property was determined to be abandoned have not been
fully remediated within one year of the date of posting the cash or bond,
or, in the case of a property which requires a remediation of any known,
suspected or threatened release of contaminants, if the owner has
failed to enter into a memorandum of agreement with the Department
of Environmental Protection or an administrative consent order, as the
case may be, or if an agreement or order is in effect but the owner has
failed to perform the remediation in conformance with the agreement
or order, then the cash or bond shall be forfeited to the Borough which
shall use the cash or bond and any interest which has accrued thereon
for the purpose of demolishing or rehabilitating the property or
performing the environmental remediation. Any funds remaining after
the property has been demolished, rehabilitated or cleaned up shall be
returned to the owner.
A. An abandoned property shall not be included on the abandoned
property list if rehabilitation is being performed in a timely manner, as
evidenced by building permits issued and the furtherance of
rehabilitation work as authorized by said permits.
B. If an entity or person other than the Borough has purchased or taken
assignment for the Borough of a tax sale certificate on a property that
has not been legally occupied for a period of six months, that property
shall not be placed on the abandoned property list if:
(1) The owner of the certificate has continued to pay all Borough taxes
and liens on the property in the tax year when due; and
(2) The owner of the certificate takes action to initiate a foreclosure
proceeding within six months after the property is eligible for
foreclosure pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-86, and diligently pursues
foreclosure proceedings in a timely fashion thereafter.
C. A property which is used on a seasonal basis shall be deemed to be
abandoned only if the property meets any two of the additional criteria
set forth under N.J.S.A. 55:19-81.
D. Upon request of a purchaser or assignee of a tax sale certificate seeking
to bar the right of redemption on an abandoned property pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 54:5-86, the public officer or the Borough Tax Collector shall, in
a timely fashion, provide the requester with a Certification of
Abandonment that the property satisfies the definition of an abandoned
property in accordance with this chapter.
§ 228-6 PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS § 228-8
225:483
§ 228-8. Acquisition of tax sale certificate; action to foreclose right
of redemption.
§ 228-9. Special tax sale; criteria for bidders.
A. When a person other than the Borough acquires a tax sale certificate
for a property on the abandoned property list at tax sale, the purchaser
may institute an action to foreclose the right of redemption at any time
after the expiration of six months following the date of the sale of the
tax sale certificate.
B. When the Borough is the purchaser at tax sale of any property on the
abandoned property list pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-34, an action to
foreclose the right of redemption may be instituted in accordance with
the provisions of Subsection b. of N.J.S.A. 54:5-77. After the foreclosure
action is instituted, the right to redeem shall exist and continue to exist
until barred by the judgment of the Superior Court; provided, however,
that no redemption shall be permitted except where the owner:
(1) Posts cash or a bond equal to the cost of remediating the conditions
because of which the property was determined to be abandoned
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-56, as determined by the court; or
(2) Demonstrates to the court that the conditions because of which the
property was determined to be abandoned pursuant to N.J.S.A.
55:19-56 have been remedied in full.
A. The Borough may hold special tax sales with respect to those properties
eligible for tax sale pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-19 which are also on the
abandoned property list.
B. The Commissioners shall establish criteria for eligibility to bid on
properties at the sale, which may include, but need not be limited to:
(1) Documentation of the bidder's ability to rehabilitate or otherwise
reuse the property consistent with Borough plans and regulations;
commitments by the bidder to rehabilitate or otherwise reuse the
property, consistent with Borough plans and regulations;
(2) Commitments by the bidder to take action to foreclose on the tax
lien by a date certain; and
(3) Such other criteria as the Commissioners may determine are
necessary to ensure that the properties to be sold will be
rehabilitated or otherwise reused in a manner consistent with the
public interest.
C. The Commissioners may establish minimum bid requirements for a
special tax sale that are less than the full amount of the taxes, interest
and penalties due to help ensure that the properties will be
rehabilitated or otherwise utilized in a manner consistent with the
public interest.
§ 228-8 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 228-9
225:484
§ 228-10. Expedited action to foreclose right of redemption.
D. The Commissioners may combine properties in said special tax sale into
bid packages and require that bidders place a single bid on each
package, rejecting any and all bids on individual properties that are
submitted.
E. The Commissioners may sell said properties subject to the provision
that, if the purchaser fails to carry out any commitment that has been
set forth as a condition of sale or misrepresents any material
qualification that has been established as a condition of eligibility to bid
pursuant thereto, then the properties and any interest thereto acquired
by the purchaser shall revert to the Borough, and any amount paid by
the purchaser at the special tax sale shall be forfeit to the Borough.
F. In the event there are two or more qualified bidders for any property or
bid package in a special tax sale, the Borough may designate the
unsuccessful qualified bidder whose bid was closest to the successful
bid, as an eligible purchaser. In the event that the selected purchaser of
that property or bid package fails to meet any of the conditions of sale
established by the Borough pursuant to this section and their interest in
the property or properties reverts to the Borough, the Borough may
subsequently designate the entity previously designated as an eligible
purchaser as the winning bidder for the property or properties, and
assign the tax sale certificates to that entity on the basis of that entity's
bid at the special tax sale, subject to the terms and conditions of the
special tax sale.
G. The Borough shall provide notice of a special tax sale pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 54:5-26. The notice shall include any special terms of sale
established by the Borough pursuant to this section. Nothing shall
prohibit the Borough from holding a special tax sale on the same day as
a standard or accelerated tax sale.
A. When a person or entity other than the Borough acquires a tax sale
certificate for a property on the abandoned property list at tax sale, the
purchaser may institute an action to foreclose the right of redemption
at any time after the expiration of just six months following the date of
the sale of the tax sale certificate.
B. When the Borough is the purchaser at tax sale of any property on the
abandoned property list pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-34, an action to
foreclose the right of redemption may be instituted in accordance with
the provisions of Subsection b. of N.J.S.A. 54:5-77.
(1) After the foreclosure action is instituted, the right to redeem shall
exist and continue to exist until barred by the judgment of the
Superior Court; provided, however, that no redemption shall be
permitted except where the owner:
§ 228-9 PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS § 228-10
225:485
§ 228-11. Transfer of possession and control to Borough.
(a) Posts cash or a bond equal to the cost of remediating the
conditions because of which the property was determined to be
abandoned pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-56, as determined by the
Court; or
(b) Demonstrates to the Court that the conditions because of
which the property was determined to be abandoned have
been remedied in full.
A. Transfer of possession.
(1) A summary action or otherwise to transfer possession and control
of abandoned property in need of rehabilitation to the Borough may
be brought by the Borough in the Superior Court, County of
Camden. If the court shall find that the property is abandoned
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-81, and the owner or party in interest
has failed to submit and initiate a rehabilitation plan, then the court
may authorize the Borough to take possession and control of the
property and develop a rehabilitation plan.
(2) If the Borough is granted possession, it may commence and
maintain those further proceedings for the conservation, protection
or disposal of the property or any part thereof that are required to
rehabilitate the property, necessary to recoup the cost and
expenses of rehabilitation and for the sale of the property;
provided, however, that the court shall not direct the sale of the
property if the owner applies to the court for reinstatement of
control of the property as provided in N.J.S.A. 55:19-92.
(3) Failure by the owner, mortgage holder or lien holder to submit
plans for rehabilitation to the municipality, obtain appropriate
construction permits for rehabilitation or, in the alternative, submit
formal applications for funding the cost of rehabilitation to local,
state or federal agencies providing such funding within that sixmonth
period shall be deemed prima facie evidence that the owner
has failed to take any action to further the rehabilitation of the
property.
B. A complaint filed pursuant to section N.J.S.A. 55:19-84 and Subsection
A of this section shall include:
(1) Documentation that the property is on the municipal abandoned
property list or a certification by the public officer that the property
is abandoned; and
(2) A statement by an individual holding appropriate professional
qualifications that there are sound reasons that the building should
be rehabilitated rather than demolished based upon the physical,
aesthetic or historical character of the building or the relationship
§ 228-10 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 228-11
225:486
of the building to other buildings and lands within its immediate
vicinity.
C. Within 10 days of filing a complaint, the plaintiff shall file a notice of lis
pendens with the County of Camden recording officer.
(1) At least 30 days before filing the Complaint, the Borough shall
serve a notice of intention to take possession of an abandoned
building. The notice shall inform the owner and interested parties
that the property has not been legally occupied for six months and
of those criteria that led to a determination of abandonment
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-81.
(2) The notice shall provide that unless the owner or a party in interest
prepares and submits a rehabilitation plan to the appropriate
Borough officials, the Borough will seek to gain possession of the
building to rehabilitate the property and the associated cost shall
be a lien against the property, which may be satisfied by the sale of
the property, unless the owner applies to the court for
reinstatement of control of the property as provided in N.J.S.A.
55:19-92.
(3) After the complaint is filed, the complaint shall be served on the
parties in interest in accordance with the New Jersey Rules of
Court.
(4) After serving the notice of intention pursuant to this subsection, the
Borough may enter upon that property after written notice to the
owner by certified mail, return receipt requested, in order to
secure, stabilize or repair the property, or in order to inspect the
property for purposes of preparing the plan to be submitted to the
court pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-89.
D. Any owner may defend against a complaint filed pursuant to this section
by submitting a plan for the rehabilitation and reuse of the property
which is the subject of the complaint and by posting a bond equal to
125% of the amount determined by the public officer or the court to be
the projected cost of rehabilitation.
(1) Any plan submitted by an owner to defend against a complaint shall
be submitted within 60 days after the complaint has been filed,
unless the court provides the owner with an extension of time for
good cause shown.
(2) A plan submitted by an owner pursuant to this subsection shall
include, but not be limited to:
(a) A detailed financial feasibility analysis, including
documentation of the economic feasibility of the proposed
reuse, including operating budgets or resale prices, or both, as
appropriate;
§ 228-11 PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS § 228-11
225:487
(b) A budget for the rehabilitation of the property, including
sources and uses of funds, based on the terms and conditions
of realistically available financing, including grants and loans;
(c) A timetable for the completion of rehabilitation and reuse of
the property, including milestones for performance of major
steps leading to and encompassing the rehabilitation and reuse
of the property; and
(d) Documentation of the qualifications of the individuals and
firms that will be engaged to carry out the planning, design,
financial packaging, construction, and marketing or rental of
the property.
E. The court shall approve any plan that, in the judgment of the court, is
realistic and likely to result in the expeditious rehabilitation and reuse
of the property, which is the subject of the complaint.
(1) If the court approves the owner's plan, then it may appoint the
public officer to act as monitor of the owner's compliance. If the
owner fails to carry out any step in the approved plan, then the
Borough may apply to the court to have the owner's bond forfeited,
possession of the building transferred to the Borough to complete
the rehabilitation plan and authorization to use the bond proceeds
for rehabilitation of the property.
(2) The owner shall provide quarterly reports to the Borough on its
activities and progress toward rehabilitation and reuse of the
property. The owner shall provide those reports to the court on its
activities that the court determines are necessary.
(3) The court may reject a plan and bond if it finds that the plan does
not represent a realistic and expeditious means of ensuring the
rehabilitation of the property or that the owner or his
representatives or agents, or both, lack the qualifications,
background or other criteria necessary to ensure that the plan will
be carried out successfully.
F. If an owner is unsuccessful in defending against a complaint filed
pursuant to this section, the mortgage holder or lien holder may seek to
be designated in possession of the property by submitting a plan and
posting a bond meeting the same conditions as set forth in N.J.S.A.
55:19-87. The plan shall be submitted within 60 days after the court has
rejected the owner's plan, unless the court provides the mortgage
holder or lienholder with an extension of time for good cause shown. If
the court approves any such mortgage holder or lien holder's plan, it
shall designate that party to be in possession of the property for
purposes of ensuring its rehabilitation and reuse and may appoint the
public officer to act as monitor of the party's compliance. The mortgage
holder or lien holder, as the case may be, shall provide quarterly reports
to the court and the Borough on its activities and progress toward
rehabilitation and reuse of the property.
§ 228-11 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 228-11
225:488
§ 228-12. Borough rehabilitation of property; submission of plan to
court.
§ 228-13. Borough exercise of rights to further rehabilitation and
reuse of property; designation of qualified rehabilitation entity.
G. If the mortgage holder or lien holder fails to carry out any material step
in the approved plan, then the public officer shall notify the court,
which may order the bond forfeit, grant the Borough possession of the
property, and authorize the Borough to use the proceeds of the bond for
rehabilitation of the property. Any sums incurred or advanced for the
purpose of rehabilitating the property by a mortgage holder or lien
holder granted possession of a property pursuant to this section,
including court costs and reasonable attorney's fees, may be added to
the unpaid balance due that mortgage holder or lien holder, with
interest calculated at the same rate set forth in the note or security
agreement; or, in the case of a tax lien holder, at the statutory interest
rate for subsequent liens.
A. If no mortgage holder or lienholder meets the conditions of N.J.S.A.
55:19-88, then the Borough shall submit a plan to the court which
conforms with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 55:19-87.
B. The court shall grant the Borough possession of the property if it finds
that:
(1) The proposed rehabilitation and reuse of the property is
appropriate and beneficial;
(2) The Borough is qualified to undertake the rehabilitation and reuse
of the property; and
(3) The plan submitted by the Borough represents a realistic and
timely plan for the rehabilitation and reuse of the property.
C. The Borough shall take all steps necessary and appropriate to further
the rehabilitation and reuse of the property consistent with the plan
submitted to the court. In making its findings pursuant to this section,
the court may consult with qualified parties, including the Department
of Community Affairs, and, upon request by a party in interest, may hold
a hearing on the plan.
A. The Borough may exercise its rights under N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et al.
directly, or may designate a qualified rehabilitation entity to ACT as its
designee for the purpose of exercising the Borough's rights where that
designation will further the rehabilitation and reuse of the property
consistent with Borough's plans and objectives. This designation shall
be made by resolution of the Commissioners.
B. Regardless of whether the Borough exercises its rights directly or
designates a qualified rehabilitation entity pursuant to this section,
while in possession of a property, the Borough shall maintain,
§ 228-11 PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS § 228-13
225:489
§ 228-14. Petition for reinstatement of control and possession by
owner.
safeguard, and maintain insurance on the property. Notwithstanding
the Borough's possession of the property, nothing in this chapter shall
be deemed to relieve the owner of the property of any civil or criminal
liability or any duty imposed by reason of acts or omissions of the
owner.
C. If the Borough has been granted possession of a property, the Borough
shall be deemed to have an ownership interest in the property for the
purpose of filing plans with public agencies and boards, seeking and
obtaining construction permits and other approvals, and submitting
applications for financing or other assistance to public or private
entities.
D. For the purposes of any state program of grants or loans, including but
not limited to programs of the Department of Community Affairs and
the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency, possession of a
property under this section shall be considered legal control of the
property.
E. The court may approve the borrowing of funds by the Borough to
rehabilitate the property and may grant a lien or security interests with
priority over all other liens or mortgages other than municipal liens. For
the purposes of this section, the cost of rehabilitation shall include
reasonable non-construction costs such as architectural fees or
construction permit fees customarily included in the financing of the
rehabilitation of residential property.
F. The Borough shall file a notice of completion with the court, and shall
also serve a copy on the owner and any mortgage holder or lien holder,
at such time as the Borough has determined that no more than six
months remain to the anticipated date on which rehabilitation will be
complete. This notice shall include an affidavit of the public officer
attesting that rehabilitation can realistically be anticipated to be
complete within that time period, and a statement setting forth such
actions as it plans to undertake to ensure that reuse of the property
takes place consistent with the plan.
G. Notwithstanding the granting of possession to the Borough, nothing in
this chapter shall be deemed to relieve the owner of the property of any
obligation the owner or any other person may have for the payment of
taxes or other Borough liens and charges, or mortgages or liens to any
party, whether those taxes, charges or liens are incurred before or after
the granting of possession. The granting of possession shall not
suspend any obligation the owner may have as of the date of the
granting of possession for payment of any operating or maintenance
expense associated with the property, whether or not billed at the time
of the granting of possession.
§ 228-13 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 228-14
225:490
§ 228-15. Obligations of owner prior to grant of petition.
A. An owner may petition for reinstatement of the owner's control and
possession of the property at any time after one year from the grant of
possession, but no later than 30 days after the Borough has filed a
Notice of Completion with the court or, in the event the Notice of
Completion is filed within less than one year of the grant of possession,
within 30 days after the Borough has filed notice. The court may allow
additional time for good cause if that additional time does not
materially delay completion of the rehabilitation, place undue hardship
on the Borough, or affect any of the terms or conditions under which the
Borough has applied for or received financing for the rehabilitation of
the property.
B. Any petition for reinstatement of the owner's control and possession of
the property shall:
(1) Include a plan for completion of the rehabilitation and reuse of the
property consistent with the plan previously approved by the court;
(2) Provide legally binding assurances that the owner will comply with
all conditions of any grant or loan secured by the Borough or repay
those grants or loans in full, at the discretion of the maker of the
loan or grant; and
(3) Be accompanied by payment equal to the sum of 1) all Borough
liens outstanding on the property; 2) all costs incurred by the
Borough in bringing action with respect to the property; 3) any
costs incurred by the Borough not covered by grants or loans to be
assumed or repaid pursuant to this section; and 4) any costs
remaining to complete rehabilitation and reuse of the property, as
determined by the public officer, which payment shall be placed in
escrow with the Clerk of the Court, County of Camden, pending
disposition of the petition.
A. Prior to the granting of a petition on the part of the owner by the court
pursuant to § 228-14, the owner may be required to post a bond or
other security in an amount determined by the court, after consultation
with the public officer, as likely to ensure that the owner will continue
to maintain the property in sound condition. That bond or other security
shall be made available to the Borough to make any repair on the
property in the event of a code violation which is not corrected in timely
fashion by the owner.
B. The owner may seek approval of the court to be relieved of this
requirement after five years, which shall be granted if the court finds
that the owner has maintained the property in good repair during that
period, that no material violations affecting the health and safety of the
tenants have occurred during that period, and that the owner has
remedied other violations in a timely and expeditious fashion.
§ 228-14 PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS § 228-16
225:491
§ 228-16. Procedure of Borough seeking to gain title to property;
authorization to sell; proceeds.
A. If the owner fails to petition for the reinstatement of control and
possession of the property within 30 days after the Borough has filed a
notice of completion or in any event within two years after the initial
grant of possession, or if the owner fails to meet any conditions that
may be set by the court in granting a reinstatement petition, upon
petition from the Borough, the court may grant the Borough title or
authorize the Borough to sell the property, subject to the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 55:19-96.
B. Where the Borough seeks to gain title to the property, it shall purchase
the property for fair market value on such terms as the court shall
approve, and may place the proceeds of the sale in escrow with the
court.
C. The court may authorize the Borough to sell the building free and clear
of liens, claims and encumbrances, in which event all such liens, claims
and encumbrances shall be transferred to the proceeds of sale with the
same priority as existed prior to resale in accordance with the
provisions of this section, except that municipal liens shall be paid at
settlement. The proceeds of the purchase of the property shall be
distributed as set forth in N.J.S.A. 55:19-97.
D. The Borough may seek approval of the court to sell the property to a
third party when the court finds that such conveyance will further the
effective and timely rehabilitation and reuse of the property.
E. Upon approval by the court, the Borough shall sell the property on such
terms and at such price as the court shall approve, and may place the
proceeds of sale in escrow with the court. The court shall order a
distribution of the proceeds of sale after paying court costs in the order
of priority set forth in N.J.S.A. 55:19-97. The proceeds paid pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 55:19-96 shall be distributed in the following order of priority:
(1) The costs and expenses of sale;
(2) Other governmental liens;
(3) Repayment of principal and interest on any borrowing or
indebtedness incurred by the Borough and granted priority lien
status pursuant to Subsection a. of N.J.S.A. 55:19-98;
(4) A reasonable development fee to the Borough consistent with the
standards for development fees established for rehabilitation
programs by the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs or
the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency;
(5) Other valid liens and security interests, in accordance with their
priority; and
(6) The owner.
§ 228-16 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 228-17
225:492
§ 228-17. Public officer; authority to place lien on property;
remedies.
The public officer, with the approval of the court, may place a lien on the
property to cover any costs of the Borough in connection with a proceeding
under this chapter, incurred prior to the grant by the court of an order
of possession, which may include costs incurred to stabilize or secure the
property to ensure that it can be rehabilitated in a cost-effective manner.
§ 228-18. Eminent domain proceedings; establishment of fair
market value.
Chapter 233
RECYCLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 113
Littering and dumping — See Ch. 197.
Solid waste — See Ch. 261.
A. With respect to any eminent domain proceeding carried out under
section N.J.S.A. 55:19-56, the fair market value of the property shall be
established on the basis of an analysis which determines independently:
(1) The cost to rehabilitate and reuse the property for such purpose as
is appropriate under existing planning and zoning regulations
governing its reuse or to demolish the existing property and
construct a new building on the site, including all costs ancillary to
rehabilitation such as, but not limited to, marketing and legal costs;
(2) The realistic market value of the reused property after
rehabilitation or new construction, taking into account the market
conditions particular to the neighborhood or subarea of the
Borough in which the property is located; and
(3) The extent to which the cost exceeds or does not exceed the market
value after rehabilitation, or demolition and new construction, and
the extent to which any "as is" value of the property prior to
rehabilitation can be added to the cost of rehabilitation or
demolition and new construction without the resulting combined
cost exceeding the market value as separately determined.
B. If the appraisal finds that the cost of rehabilitation or demolition and
new construction, as appropriate, exceeds the realistic market value
after rehabilitation or demolition and new construction, there shall be a
rebuttable presumption in all proceedings under this subsection that
the fair market value of the abandoned property is zero, and that no
compensation is due the owner.
§ 228-17 PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS § 228-18
225:493
§ 233-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALUMINUM/CANS — All products made of aluminum, including aluminum
cans, foil, wrappers, containers for prepared dinners or other foods, screen
frames and lawn chairs.
CONTAINERIZED — The placement of yard waste in a trash can, bucket,
bag or other container, such as to prevent the yard waste from spilling or
blowing out into the street and coming into contact with stormwater.
GLASS — All products made from silica or sand, soda ash and limestone,
the product being transparent or translucent and being used for packaging
or bottling of various matter, and all other material commonly known as
"glass," excluding, however, blue and flat glass and glass commonly known
as "window glass."
METAL — All products made of metal, exclusive of aluminum, including
washers, dryers, refrigerators, stoves, hot-water heaters, tire rims, springs,
bicycles, bimetal cans (tin cans) or scrap metal.
MOTOR OIL — Oil commonly used in automobiles, motor-driven vehicles
and combustion engines.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, association,
or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal jurisdiction.
RECYCLABLES — Any recyclable materials made of metal, glass, plastic,
cardboard, used newspaper, or wastepaper products.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive,
or other way, which is an existing state, county, or municipal roadway,
and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street lines.
USED NEWSPAPER — Includes paper of the type commonly referred to
as "newsprint" and distributed at stated intervals, usually daily or weekly,
having printed therein news and opinions and containing advertisements
and other matters of public interest.
WASTEPAPER PRODUCTS — All uncontaminated paper material, such as
magazines, books, papers, food cartons, cardboard boxes, wrapping paper,
bags and discarded letters and envelopes.
YARD AND VEGETATIVE WASTE — Leaves, brush, roots, weeds, grass
clippings, logs, stumps, vegetative waste, and Christmas trees.
§ 233-2. Preparation of recyclables for collection.
A. The Borough shall collect the recyclables listed in § 233-2 of this
chapter from residential and commercial premises. All persons
§ 228-18 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 233-2
225:494
§ 233-3. Recyclables to be property of Borough; unauthorized
collection.
From the time of placement at the curb or at any place designated by
regulation by any one of the categories described herein for collection by
the Borough of Collingswood in accordance with the terms hereof, items
shall be and become the property of the Borough of Collingswood or its
authorized agent. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person
unauthorized by the Borough of Collingswood to collect or pick up or
cause to be collected or picked up any such items, including recycling
occupying residential and commercial premises shall separate
recyclables from solid waste (as defined in Chapter 261 of the Borough
Code) and shall arrange for the disposal and removal of said recyclables
in accordance with this section. Recyclables shall be placed for
curbside collection after 5:00 p.m. on the night prior to the scheduled
pick-up date, or before 6:00 a.m. on the scheduled pickup date.
B. All recyclables shall be placed in labeled recycling containers or paper
bags, in accordance with this section. Recyclables shall be placed at the
curb, no less than two feet away from solid waste.
C. When not placed at the curb in accordance with this chapter, all labeled
recycling containers, bags, or any other receptacles containing
recyclables shall not be placed in an area that is visible from the street.
Labeled recycling containers, bags, and other receptacles containing
recyclables shall be stored in the rear yard or the side yard of
residential and commercial properties. For purposes of this chapter, the
area(s) comprising the rear yard or the side yard shall be in accordance
with § 141-4 of the Borough Code.
D. All recyclables will be commingled in a labeled recycling container.
E. Recyclables shall be washed as clean as possible, and shall have all lids
and caps removed.
F. Only plastics marked as No. 1 (PETE), No. 2 (HDPE), No. 4 (LDPE), No.
5 (PP), and No. 7 (other; containing resin) shall be placed into a labeled
recycling container. Plastic should be crushed before being placed into
a recycling container. The placement of plastic bags and plastic caps
into any recycling container is prohibited.
G. Cardboard boxes shall be flattened prior to placement into a recycling
container. Flattened cardboard boxes shall not be bundled or tied
together any larger than 18 inches by three feet, or in a manner
weighing more than 50 pounds.
H. Used newspaper, magazines, mixed paper, cardboard and pizza boxes,
and junk mail may be placed into a labeled recycling container with
other permissible recyclables. Any used newspaper, magazines, mixed
paper, or junk mail that is not placed in a labeled recycling container
shall be bundled and tied, or placed into paper bags.
§ 233-2 PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS § 233-3
225:495
buckets. Any and each such collection in violation hereof from one or more
residences shall constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable as
hereinafter provided.
§ 233-4. Preparation of yard waste for collection.
A. The Borough shall collect yard waste from residential and commercial
premises. All persons occupying residential and commercial premises
shall separate yard waste from solid waste (as defined in Chapter 261 of
the Borough Code) and shall arrange for the disposal and removal of
said yard waste in accordance with this section, unless yard waste is
stored or recycled for the purpose of composting.
B. Yard waste over four inches in diameter (large brush) shall be placed at
the curb and will be picked up by the Borough Public Works
Department. Residents must contact the Borough Public Works
Department to arrange for the removal of large brush.
C. Yard waste that is less than four inches in diameter (small brush) shall
be placed loose in cans or tied in bundles, between May 1 and
September 30 of any given calendar year. Small brush shall not be
placed in plastic bags and will not be accepted by the Borough. The
placement of small brush into plastic bags shall be a violation of this
chapter.
D. Grass shall be placed in containers with no lids. Grass shall not be
placed in plastic bags and will not be accepted by the Borough. The
placement of grass into plastic bags shall be a violation of this chapter.
E. Leaves shall be collected by the Borough between October and
December in any given calendar year. Advanced notice of said
collections will be provided by the Borough.
F. Christmas trees will be collected by the Borough Public Works
Department. Christmas trees shall be placed at the curb for collection
on the regularly scheduled trash collection date.
G. The owner or occupant of any property, or any employee or contractor
of such owner or occupant engaged to provide lawn care or landscaping
services, shall not sweep, rake, blow or otherwise place yard waste in
the street. If yard waste that is not containerized is placed in the street,
the party responsible for placement of yard waste must remove the yard
waste from the street or said party shall be deemed in violation of this
chapter.
H. Sweeping, raking, blowing or otherwise placing yard waste that is not
containerized at the curb or along the street is only allowed during the
seven days prior to a scheduled announced collection and shall not be
placed closer than 10 feet from any storm drain inlet. Placement of such
yard waste at the curb or along the street at any other time or in any
other manner is a violation of this chapter. If such placement of yard
waste occurs, the party responsible for placement of the yard waste
§ 233-3 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 233-4
225:496
§ 233-5. Motor oil and construction debris prohibited.
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to place motor oil in
any containers used for recyclables or yard waste, or to otherwise comingle
motor oil with recyclables or yard waste. Residents must bring motor oil in
a sealed and labeled container to the Borough Garage, located at 713 North
Atlantic Avenue, between 7:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m., Monday thru Friday.
§ 233-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or neglects to comply with any provisions of
this chapter or any regulation promulgated pursuant thereto shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not to exceed $500 for the first
offense, imprisonment for not more than 90 days or a period of community
service for not more than 90 days, or any combination thereof.
§ 233-7. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department, Public Works
Department, and the Nuisance Officer of the Borough of Collingswood.
Chapter 237
RENTAL PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 105.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 117.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 227.
must remove the yard waste from the street or said party shall be
deemed in violation of this chapter.
§ 233-4 PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS § 233-7
225:497

ARTICLE I
Landlord Responsibility
§ 237-1. Responsibilities of landlords and owners.
§ 237-2. Notice of violation; subsequent violations.
§ 237-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
in the Municipal Court of the Borough of Collingswood, or such other court
having jurisdiction, be liable to a fine not exceeding $1,000, and subject
to revocation of the registration permit. Each day that a violation occurs
shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation, subject to the penalty
provisions of this article.
A. Any landlord and/or owner of leased property located within the
Borough of Collingswood shall be responsible for any activities, actions,
events and conduct of any person and/or animal which occur in, on or
about said premises or property. The landlord/owner's responsibility
shall extend to and include, but not be limited to, any disorderly
conduct, nuisance, offensive language and any other behavior or
conduct which is a violation of any state statute or of any of the
provisions of the Code of the Borough of Collingswood.
B. The landlord/owner of any such property located within the Borough of
Collingswood shall be responsible and liable for the conduct and
actions of any tenant, invitee, guest or any other person who is in, on or
about the premises and/or property with the permission, either express
or implied, of the landlord, owner, tenant, guest or invitee.
A. Upon the occurrence of any violation of this article, the landlord or
owner of the property shall be put on notice by receiving written
notification of said violation from the person so designated by the
Borough Commissioners to forward said notice. Said notice shall
generally inform the landlord and/or owner of the nature of the
violation and the date upon which said violation occurred. Said notice
shall also state that any subsequent violation of this article may result
in said landlord and/or owner being cited and otherwise charged with a
violation of said article, which may result in a hearing on said violation
to be heard in the Borough of Collingswood Municipal Court.
B. If any violation of this article occurs subsequent to written notification
being sent to said landlord and/or owner in accordance with the above
provisions, then said landlord and/or owner shall be cited for violation
of this article and noticed for a hearing to be held in the Borough of
Collingswood Municipal Court.
§ 237-1 PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS § 237-3
225:499

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 237-4. Definitions.
Unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning, the following
words or phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the following
meanings:
AGENT — The individual or individuals designated by the owner as the
person(s) authorized by the owner to perform any duty imposed upon the
owner of this article. The term does not necessarily mean a licensed real
estate broker or salesman of the State of New Jersey, as those terms are
defined by N.J.S.A. 45:15-3; however, such term may include a licensed
real estate broker or salesman of the State of New Jersey, if such person
designated by the owner as his agent is so licensed.
APARTMENT or DWELLING — Any apartment, cottage, bungalow, any room
or rooms, or other dwelling unit, consisting of one or more rooms occupying
all or part of a floor or floors in a building, whether designed with or without
housekeeping facilities for dwelling purposes and notwithstanding whether
the apartment be designed for residence, for office or the operation of any
industry or business or for any other type of independent use. Each dwelling
unit shall contain no more than one kitchen or cooking facility.
COMMERCIAL — Related to or connected with trade and traffic or business
and commerce.
COMMERCIAL UNIT — A building or structure, or any part thereof, used for
the manufacturing, processing or assembling of material or manufactured
products, or for research, office, industrial, commercial, retail, service,
recreational, hotel or motel facilities, or for warehousing purposes, or for
any combination thereof.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or rooms or suite or apartment, including
any room or rooms, whether furnished or unfurnished, which is occupied or
intended, arranged or designed to be occupied for residential use by one
or more persons, including, but not limited to, the owner thereof or any of
his servants, agents or employees, and shall include all privileges, services,
furnishings, furniture, equipment, facilities and improvement connected
with use or occupancy thereof. Each dwelling unit shall contain no more
than one kitchen or cooking facility.
OWNER — Any person or group of persons, firm, corporation or officer
thereof, partnership association or trust who owns, operates, exercises
control over, and is in charge of a rental facility.
OWNER-OCCUPIED — A portion of a rental facility, dwelling, commercial
unit or dwelling unit shall be considered owner-occupied if the owner makes
his primary residence therein. For purposes of this ordinance, a person may
have only one primary residence in the Borough.
PERSON — An individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, trust
or other legal entity, or any combination thereof.
§ 237-4 PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS § 237-4
225:501
RENT or RENTED — Occupied by any person or persons other than the
owner, regardless of whether there is a written or oral agreement and
regardless of whether the owner receives consideration for the occupancy.
RENTAL FACILITY — Every building, group of buildings or a portion thereof
consisting of less than three dwelling units and having sleeping facilities for
less than 25 occupants, kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out to
be a place where living accommodations are supplied, whether furnished or
unfurnished, for pay or other consideration, to one or more individuals.
RENTAL UNIT — A dwelling unit or commercial unit which is available by
lease, rental or otherwise, to persons other than the owner for a period of
not less than 365 days. Rental unit shall not include that portion of a rental
facility, dwelling, commercial unit or dwelling unit that is owner-occupied.
Rental unit shall not include any rooming house or boardinghouse, which
are prohibited as set forth in this chapter.
ROOMING HOUSE or BOARDINGHOUSE — A rooming house or
boardinghouse as defined under P.L. 1979, c. 496, N.J.S.A. 55:13B-1 et seq.
SHORT-TERM RENTAL OWNER — An individual or group of individuals
or legal entity (e.g., trust, family partnership, limited liability company)
owning residential real property which contains a short-term rental unit.
The residential real property which contains the short-term rental unit must
be the primary residence of the owner of the property, or, if it is owned by
a legal entity, it must be the primary residence of at least one of the owners
of the legal entity.
SHORT-TERM RENTAL UNIT — A residential dwelling unit which is made
available for a tenancy by a short-term rental owner no more than 30 days
within a period of 365 days.
TENANCY — Occupancy of a rental unit or short-term rental unit by one or
more tenants.
TENANT — Person occupying a rental unit or a short-term rental unit other
than the owner.
§ 237-4 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 237-4
225:502
ARTICLE III
Rental Registration, Rental Permit, Rental Certificate of Occupancy,
and Rental Inspections
§ 237-5. Registration.
§ 237-6. Registration forms; filing; contents.
In addition to the registration requirements of N.J.S.A. 46:8-28, all rental
units and short-term rental units shall be registered annually, as provided
herein. Every owner shall file with the Borough Clerk or other designated
department in the Borough, a registration form for each rental unit or shortterm
rental unit, which shall include the following information:
A. All rental units and short-term rental units shall be registered annually
with the Borough Clerk or other designated department of the Borough
in accordance with procedures established by the Borough, on forms
which shall be provided for that purpose. Such registration shall occur
on an annual basis, as provided herein.
B. No person shall hereafter occupy any rental unit or short-term rental
unit, nor shall the owner permit occupancy of any rental unit or shortterm
rental unit within the Borough which is not registered in
accordance with this article.
C. In addition to the annual registration, each rental unit shall be
registered with each change in occupancy. The registration term shall
commence on January 1 and shall be valid for a calendar year, at which
time it shall expire, and a new registration shall be required.
A. The name and address of the record owner or owners of the rental
facility and the record owner or owners of the rental business, if not the
same persons. In the case of a partnership, the name and addresses of
all general partners shall be provided, together with the telephone
numbers for each of such individuals, where such individual may be
reached both during the day and evening hours.
B. If the record owner is a corporation or limited liability company, the
name and address of the registered agent, together with a telephone
number of the registered agent, and the name and address of the
corporate officers of said corporation.
C. If the address of any record owner is not located in Collingswood or in
Camden County, the name and address of a person who resides in
Camden County and who is authorized to accept notices from a tenant
and to issue receipts therefor and to accept service of process on behalf
of the record owner.
D. The name and address of the managing agent of the premises, if any.
E. The name and address, including the dwelling unit number, apartment
or room number, of the superintendent, janitor, custodian or other
§ 237-5 PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS § 237-6
225:503
§ 237-7. Registration form; permit; indexing and filing; public
inspection.
individual employed by the owner or managing agent to provide regular
maintenance service, if any.
F. The name, address and telephone number of an individual
representative of the owner or agent or the owner, if domiciled in
Camden County, who may be reached or contacted at any time in the
event of an emergency affecting the rental facility or any rental unit or
short-term rental unit therein, and who has the authority to make
emergency decisions concerning the building and any repair thereto or
expenditure in connection therewith and shall, at all times, have access
to a current list of tenants that shall be made available to emergency
personnel as required in the event of an emergency.
G. The name and address of every mortgagee of the premises and each
person or legal entity identified as the grantee on the deed for the
property.
H. If fuel oil is used to heat the building and the landlord furnishes the heat
in the building, the name and address of the fuel oil dealer servicing the
building and the grade of fuel oil used.
I. As to each rental unit or short-term rental unit, a specification of the
exact number of sleeping rooms and the dimensions of each contained
in the rental unit or short-term rental unit. In order to satisfy this
requirement, an owner shall include a floor plan of each level of the
rental facility, as part of the application and attached to the registration
form when filed with the Borough Clerk or other designated
department.
J. The name, phone number of each tenant of each rental unit and
whether they are a minor (under 18 years of age) or an adult. The shortterm
rental owner of any short-term rental unit shall be responsible for
maintaining a record of each tenant for every tenancy of the short-term
rental unit for a three year period from the termination of each tenancy.
In addition, the short-term rental owner shall maintain a record of each
tenant's permanent address.
K. The number and type of all pets.
L. The submitted registration form shall include proof of a property
liability insurance policy providing coverage for each rental unit or
short-term rental unit for which registration is sought. The property
liability insurance policy shall be valid and in effect for the full term of
the registration period.
M. Such other information as may be required by the Borough of
Collingswood.
§ 237-6 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 237-7
225:504
§ 237-8. Registration form; amendments; filing.
Every person required to file a registration form pursuant to this article
shall file an amended registration form within 20 days after any change in
the information required to be included thereon.
§ 237-9. Periodic inspections and unsatisfactory inspections.
A. The Borough Clerk or designee shall index and file the registration
forms. In doing so, the Borough Clerk or designee shall follow the
mandates of N.J.S.A. 46:8-28.1, as amended and supplemented, so that
the filing of the registration form will also satisfy the registration
requirements of N.J.S.A. 46:8-28 to the extent that it applies to the
property being registered, and will also satisfy the registration
requirements of this article.
B. Upon a determination that the registration application meets the
requirements of § 238-6, and completion of an inspection of the rental
unit or short-term rental unit to the satisfaction of the Borough Fire
Department and any other designated official, the Borough Clerk or
other designated department shall provide a certificate or permit to the
owner. Each rental certificate of occupancy or permit shall correspond
only to the rental unit listed on the registration application even if more
than one rental unit is contained in the rental facility.
C. The owner shall conspicuously post the rental certificate of occupancy
or short-term rental unit certificate of occupancy at the rental unit or
short-term rental unit.
A. Each rental unit or short-term rental unit shall be inspected at least
once every twelve-month period.
B. The landlord of all buildings containing more than 29 rental units shall
be responsible for scheduling annual inspections with the Borough
officials to confirm compliance with the legal occupancy and building,
property maintenance and fire code requirements of the Borough Code
to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of all tenants. The landlord
shall submit to the Borough a certification annually confirming that all
rental units located in the building comply with the occupancy, building,
property maintenance and New Jersey Uniform Fire Safety Act and of
the Borough Code on a form prescribed by Borough officials. Nothing
contained herein shall preclude the Borough of Collingswood from
conducting inspections of any rental unit located within any building
containing more than 29 rental units in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter.
C. Such inspections shall be performed by such person, persons or agency
duly authorized and appointed by the Borough of Collingswood.
D. Such inspection shall be for the purpose of determining zoning
ordinance compliance and, to the extent applicable, to determine if the
§ 237-7 PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS § 237-9
225:505
§ 237-10. Access for inspections; repairs.
§ 237-11. Inspection and reinspection fees.
property complies with the Property Maintenance Code, Uniform
Construction Code, BOCA Maintenance Code, Housing Code and/or
Building Code and/or New Jersey Uniform Fire Safety Act.
E. In the event that the inspection(s) of a rental unit or short-term rental
unit does not result in a satisfactory inspection, such property shall not
thereafter be registered, and the owner of the property or his agent
shall not lease or rent such property, nor shall any tenant occupy the
property, until the necessary corrections have been made, so as to bring
the property and rental unit or short-term rental unit into compliance
with the applicable code, and the property is thereafter subsequently
inspected and registered. In the event that the property is occupied
when such conditions are discovered, all such corrections shall be made
within 30 days, and, if not made within that time period, the owner shall
be deemed in violation of this article, and every day that the violation
continues shall constitute a separate and distinct violation, subject to
the penalty provisions of this chapter. The owner, however, shall be
permitted to apply for an extension of time to make repairs or
corrections so as to comply with this article, for good cause shown.
A. The inspection officers are hereby authorized to make inspections to
determine the condition of every rental facility, rental unit, and shortterm
rental unit, in order that they may promote the purposes of this
article to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the occupants of
every rental facility, rental unit, and short-term rental unit. For the
purposes of making such inspections, every owner(s) and tenant of
every rental facility or rental unit, and short-term rental unit shall
provide access to the Borough's inspecting officers who are hereby
authorized to enter, examine and survey every rental facility, rental
unit, and short-term rental unit at all reasonable times. In the event of
an emergency or when a public health danger is presented, as
determined by the inspecting officers or other Borough public safety
officials, said consent shall not be required prior to the entry and
inspection of any rental facility, rental unit, or short-term rental unit.
B. Every owner shall provide access to the Borough representatives to any
part of such rental facility, rental unit, or short-term rental unit at all
reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations,
as are necessary, to effect compliance with the provisions of this article.
C. Any owner or tenant of any rental facility, rental unit or short-term
rental unit that unreasonably or unlawfully denies access to the
Borough's inspecting officers for the purposes stated herein shall be
subject to immediate termination of the registration permit.
A. At the time of the filing of the registration form the owner or agent of
the owner must pay an inspection fee as follows:
§ 237-9 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 237-11
225:506
§ 237-12. Taxes and other municipal charges; payment precondition
for registration.
No rental unit or short-term rental unit may be registered unless all
municipal taxes, water and sewer charges and any other municipal
assessments are paid on a current basis.
(1) For one to seven nonowner-occupied units: $65 per rental unit or
short-term rental unit.
(2) For eight to 14 nonowner-occupied units: $55 per rental unit.
(3) For 15-21 nonowner-occupied rental units: $50 per rental unit.
(4) For 22-29 nonowner-occupied rental units: $40 per rental unit.
(5) For more than 30 nonowner-occupied rental units or a certificate of
occupancy inspection upon change of tenant or owner: $75.
B. In the event that a reinspection of a rental unit or short-term rental unit
is deemed to be necessary pursuant to § 237-10, the owner or agent of
the owner must pay a reinspection fee as follows:
(1) First reinspection: no charge.
(2) Second reinspection: $50 per unit.
(3) Third reinspection: $70 per unit.
(4) Fourth reinspection: $100 per unit.
C. An inspection fee in the amount of $75 shall be imposed upon each
change of occupancy for each rental unit in rental facilities with 30 or
more rental units.
D. If the owner of the property is a senior citizen who resides in a unit of
the property and rents out the remaining unit and would otherwise
qualify under the State of New Jersey property tax deduction under
N.J.S.A. 54:4-8.41, there shall be no inspection or reinspection fee.
E. If any inspection or reinspection fee is not paid within 30 days of its due
date, a late fee surcharge of $50 will be assessed.
§ 237-11 PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS § 237-12
225:507

ARTICLE IV
Rental Unit and Short-Term Rental Unit Standards and Facilities
Required
§ 237-13. Rental unit; minimum term.
Rental units must be rented for a minimum of 365 consecutive days,
whether by lease or otherwise.
§ 237-14. Insurance.
All properties registered as a rental unit or short-term rental unit must be
insured through an applicable combined property/liability insurance single
limit of no less than policy of $500,000.
§ 237-15. Maintenance standards.
All rental units and short-term rental units shall be maintained in
accordance with the Uniform Construction Code, the BOCA National
Property Maintenance Code, the New Jersey Uniform Fire Safety Act and
the Code of the Borough of Collingswood.
§ 237-16. Occupant(s) standards.
A. Occupants. Only those occupants whose names are on file with the
Borough Clerk, as provided in this article, may reside in the registered
premises. It shall be unlawful for any other person to reside in said
premises, and this provision may be enforced against the landlord,
tenant or other person residing in said premises.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person, including the owner, agent, tenant
or registered tenant, to allow a greater number of persons than the
posted maximum number of occupants to sleep in or occupy overnight
the rental unit or short-term rental unit.
C. Nuisance prohibited. No rental facility shall be conducted in a manner
which shall result in any unreasonable disturbance or disruption to the
surrounding properties and property owners or of the public in general,
such that it shall constitute a nuisance, as defined in the ordinances of
the Borough of Collingswood.
D. Compliance with other laws. The maintenance of all rental facilities and
the conduct engaged in upon the premises by occupants and their
guests shall at all times be in full compliance with all applicable
ordinances and regulations of the Borough of Collingswood, and with
all applicable state and federal laws.
E. Penalties. Any landlord, tenant or other person violating the provisions
of this section shall be subject to the penalty provisions of this chapter.
§ 237-13 PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS § 237-17
225:509
§ 237-17. Facilities required.
Heating and cooling facilities shall be provided in all rental facilities, rental
units, and short-term rental units. This article does not amend, but rather
enhances, the general heating requirements contained in Chapter 211 of
the Municipal Code of the Borough of Collingswood, to impose additional
requirements upon landlords who have agreed, either expressly or
implicitly, to provide their tenants with heating and cooling facilities.
§ 237-18. Residential rental structures.
Every rental unit or short-term rental unit located within the Borough
shall be provided with heating and cooling facilities capable of maintaining
certain temperatures within the living area of the rental unit or short-term
rental unit.
§ 237-19. Inspection; remedial measures.
A. Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents,
leases or lets one or more dwelling units, rental units or short-term
rental units, on terms, either express or implied, to furnish heat to the
occupants thereof shall supply sufficient heat during the period from
October 1 to April 30 to maintain the room temperature at no less than
65° F. in all living areas of the rental units or short-term rental units
during the hours between 6:30 a.m. and 10:30 p.m. of each day and not
less than 60° F. during all other hours.
B. Cooling supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents,
leases or lets one or more dwelling units, rental units or short-term
rental units, on terms, either express or implied, to furnish air
conditioning or cooling mechanisms to the occupants thereof shall
supply sufficient cool air during the period from May 1 to September 30
to maintain the room temperature at no more than 74° F. in all living
areas of the rental units or short-term rental units.
A. Landlords shall provide heating and/or cooling facilities to their tenants
and shall be bound to such obligation. Failure of heating and/or cooling
facilities, mechanical, electrical or otherwise, shall not excuse a
landlord's obligation to provide such facilities.
B. Borough officials, accompanied by trained medical and/or emergency
response personnel, shall have the right to enter and inspect any and all
rental units and short-term rental units located within the Borough
during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., with or without notice to the
landlord, or at any other time if the Borough officials are advised of
conditions within the rental unit(s) or short-term rental unit(s) which do
not meet the standards set forth in § 237-18 or which otherwise may
present a danger to the health and safety of the tenants of such unit(s).
C. Upon notice by the Borough after the aforementioned inspection, the
landlord shall be obligated to promptly repair the heating or cooling
§ 237-17 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 237-19
225:510
§ 237-20. Short-term rental units.
This section is intended to regulate short-term rental units to preserve the
health, safety, and public enjoyment of all residents and tenants within the
Borough.
systems for the affected rental units or short-term rental units or, in
the alternative, provide for alternate, temporary housing for the tenants
of the rental unit(s) or short-term rental units affected by the failed
system.
D. In the event that any landlord in the Borough fails to act in accordance
with the requirements contained in this § 237-31, the Borough shall
have the authority to act immediately to protect the health and safety of
the tenants if, following consultation with trained medical and/or
emergency response personnel, it is determined that extreme hot or
cold weather conditions exist which may present a danger to the health
and safety of Borough residents. To this end, the Borough may either
cause the repair of the failed system or provide for alternate temporary
housing for the tenants of the rental units or short-term rental units
affected by the failed system. All expenses incurred by the Borough
pursuant to this section shall be the responsibility of the landlord of the
subject rental unit(s) or short-term rental units.
A. The requirements, prohibitions, restrictions, and all other provisions of
this chapter shall apply to the rental of short-term rental units and the
short-term rental owners.
B. In addition to the requirements, prohibitions, and restrictions set forth
in this chapter, short-term rental units shall comply with each of the
following regulations:
(1) The person offering a dwelling unit for rent as a short-term rental
unit shall be the owner of the dwelling unit. The rental facility
containing the short-term rental unit shall be the primary residence
of the owner.
(2) Advertisements for the availability of short-term rental units shall
not contain any language that is inconsistent with the requirements
and prohibitions set forth in this section.
(3) A short-term rental unit shall be limited to a maximum tenancy of
30 days within a period of 365 days. No short-term rental unit shall
be rented for more than 14 consecutive days. A short-term rental
owner shall be limited to one tenancy of a short-term rental unit at
any one time.
(4) No tenancy of a short-term rental unit shall be permitted if such
tenancy causes the rental facility to violate the Borough's
residential occupancy requirements.
§ 237-19 PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS § 237-20
225:511
(5) No accessory buildings on a property may be used for a short-term
rental unit.
(6) Short-term rentals shall not be conducted in a manner that is
disruptive or adverse to the safety, well-being and quiet enjoyment
of the Borough's residents and visitors;
(7) Short-term rentals shall not be permitted for the purpose of hosting
commercial or social events.
(8) Short-term rental units shall not be rented to any person younger
than 21 years of age.
(9) Signs or any other type of advertisement indicating a dwelling unit
is available for occupancy as a short-term rental unit shall not be
placed on the property where the short-term rental unit is located.
(10) Any short-term rental owner shall be responsible for providing
parking for any tenant of the short-term rental unit.
(11) Every rental facility with a short-term rental unit shall contain the
requisite number of smoke detectors and carbon monoxide
detectors as required by the New Jersey Uniform Fire Safety Act
and the Borough's ordinances. In the event that the short-term
rental owner of the rental facility is not present during the tenancy
of the short-term rental unit, each smoke detector and carbon
monoxide detector within the rental facility shall be hardwired in
such a manner that the activation of one detector will activate all of
the detectors in the rental facility.
(12) The short-term rental owner of a short-term rental unit shall post
the following information in a prominent location therein:
(a) The telephone number of the short-term rental owner and
person responsible for building maintenance issues of the
short-term rental unit.
(b) The telephone number(s) for the Borough Police Department,
the Borough Fire Department, and the Borough Code
Enforcement Department.
(c) A floor plan indicating the locations of all emergency exit
routes, fire extinguishers, and CO alarms within the short-term
rental unit.
(d) The maximum number of parking spaces available on-site.
(e) Notification that any short-term renter shall be subject to fines
and penalties for any violations of this chapter or for violations
of the Borough Municipal Code.
§ 237-20 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 237-20
225:512
ARTICLE V
Revocation of Rental Unit or Short-Term Rental Unit Certificate of
Occupancy
§ 237-21. Revocation of rental permit; procedure.
A. Grounds. In addition to any other penalty prescribed herein, an owner
may be subject to revocation or suspension of the permit or certificate
of occupancy issued pursuant to § 237-8 upon the occurrence of one or
more of the following, after a hearing before the Borough Commission
or the Commission's designee, as set forth below:
(1) Conviction of a violation of this article in the Municipal Court or
any other court of competent jurisdiction.
(2) Continuously renting the rental unit(s) to a tenant or tenants who
are convicted of a violation of the Noise Ordinance.109
(3) Continuously permitting the rental unit or short-term rental unit to
be occupied by more than the maximum number of occupants as
defined in this article.
(4) Maintaining the rental unit(s) or short-term rental unit(s) or the
rental facility in a dangerous condition.
(5) Continuous violations or conviction of a violation under the New
Jersey State Housing Code; the New Jersey Uniform Fire Safety
Act; the Uniform Construction Code; the BOCA Maintenance Code;
and the New Jersey Building Code.
(6) Conviction under Chapter 227 of the Borough's Code, entitled
"Property Maintenance."
(7) Continuously renting the rental unit(s) or short-term rental units to
a tenant or tenants who are convicted of local ordinance violations,
disorderly persons offenses or other crimes.
(8) Soliciting, advertising, offering and/or permitting, allowing, or
failing to discontinue the use or occupancy of any rental unit for a
period of 365 days or less or any short-term rental unit for a period
of more than 30 days annually or 14 days consecutively.
(9) Soliciting, advertising, offering and/or permitting, allowing, or
failing to discontinue the use or occupancy of any rooming house
and/or boardinghouse.
(10) Failing to otherwise comply with the requirements of this
ordinance, including occupancy limits or time periods for any
tenancy.
B. Procedures; written complaint; notice; hearing; appeal.
109. Editor's Note: See Ch. 207, Noise.
§ 237-21 PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS § 237-21
225:513
(1) Notice. Whenever the Borough or any other person or office
authorized to file a notice determines that there has been a
violation of this chapter, he or she shall serve a written notice of the
violation of the owner or agent, which written notice shall include a
statement of the reason or reasons why it is being issued and what
action, if any, the owner or agent must make to abate the violation.
Said notice shall also state that the violation(s) must be corrected
within 15 days (unless an imminent hazard in which case it shall be
immediate) and if such violations are not corrected, that the
certificate of occupancy for the subject property may be revoked
after a hearing before the Borough Commissioners.
(2) Written complaint. If a violation is not corrected within 10 days of
the service of the notice thereof, the individual issuing the written
notice shall file a written complaint with the Borough Clerk or
designee and with the owner or agent by certified and regular mail
or by personal service at the address indicated on the registration
form. The complaint shall apprise the landlord, owner and/or agent
of the charges, so as to permit said individuals to present a defense.
The individual(s) filing the complaint may do so on the basis of
information and belief and need not rely on personal information.
Upon the filing of such written complaint, the Borough Clerk or
designee shall immediately inform the Borough Commission, and a
date for a hearing shall be scheduled, which shall not be sooner
than 10, nor more than 30 days, thereafter, unless the landlord,
owner and/or agent requests a waiver of the thirty-day requirement
and the Borough Commission authorized said waiver. The Borough
Clerk or designee shall forward a copy of the complaint and a
notice, as to the date of the hearing, to the landlord, owner or
agent, if any, at the address at which the written complaint was
served.
(3) Hearing. The hearing required by this section shall be held before
the Borough Commission unless, in its discretion, the Borough
Commission determines that the matter should be heard by a
Hearing Officer, who shall be appointed by the Borough
Commission. If the matter is referred to a Hearing Officer, such
officer shall transmit his findings of fact and conclusions of law to
the Borough Commission within 30 days of the conclusion of the
hearing. The Borough Commission shall then review the matter and
accept, reject or modify the recommendations of the Hearing
Officer based on the record before such Hearing Officer. In the
event that the matter is not referred to a Hearing Officer and is
heard by the Borough Commission, then the Borough Commission
shall render a decision within 30 days of the conclusion of the
hearing. Following the hearing, a decision shall be rendered
dismissing the complaint, revoking or suspending the rental permit
or determining that the rental permit shall not be renewed or
reissued for one or more subsequent calendar years.
§ 237-21 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 237-21
225:514
(4) A stenographic transcript shall be made of the hearing. All
witnesses shall be sworn prior to testifying. The strict rules of
evidence shall not apply, and the evidential rules and burden of
proof shall be that which generally controls administrative
hearings.
(5) The Borough Solicitor, his designee or appointed special counsel
shall appear and prosecute on behalf of the complainant in all
hearings conducted pursuant to this section.
(6) Appeals. If a rental permit is revoked, suspended or the Borough
Commission determines that the rental permit shall not be renewed
or reissued for one or more subsequent years, the landlord, owner
and/or agent may appeal said decision to the New Jersey Superior
Court-Law Division in Camden County in accordance with the New
Jersey Court Rules.
C. Defenses. It shall be a defense to any proceeding for the revocation,
suspension or other disciplinary action involving a rental permit by
demonstrating that the owner has taken appropriate action and has
made a good faith effort to abate the conditions or circumstances giving
rise to the revocation proceeding.
§ 237-21 PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS § 237-21
225:515
Chapter 241
REPORTS, DOCUMENTS AND PHOTOGRAPHS
§ 237-21 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 237-21
225:516
ARTICLE I
Fees for Copies
[Adopted 8-16-1971 by Ord. No. 662 as Ch. 7 of the 1971 Code]
§ 241-1. Fee schedule. [Amended 6-7-1993 by Ord. No. 1035;
4-5-2004 by Ord. No. 1328; 3-7-2005 by Ord. No. 1370; 3-6-2006 by
Ord. No. 1395; 10-4-2010 by Ord. No. 1483]
The following fees and charges are hereby established pursuant to statutory
authority for copies of photographs, reports and other documents to be
furnished by the Borough of Collingswood.
§ 241-2. Collection of fees; receipts. [Amended 8-15-1994 by Ord.
No. 1058]
All fees and charges established by § 241-1 hereof shall be collected by the
appropriate department of the Borough of Collingswood, which shall issue
consecutively numbered receipts therefor.
A. The fee charged for copies of government records shall be the actual
cost incurred for photocopying such records and the actual cost
incurred for postage.
B. Fees for copies of documentary materials.
(1) For CDs: actual cost incurred in making the copy. [Amended
3-6-2006 by Ord. No. 1395]
(2) For audio and videotape reproduction: actual cost incurred in
making the copy. [Amended 3-6-2006 by Ord. No. 1395]
(3) Actual costs incurred for postage.
C. Whenever the nature, format, manner of collation, or volume of a
government record embodied in the form of printed matter to be
inspected, examined, or copied is such that the record cannot be
reproduced by ordinary document copying equipment in ordinary
business size or involves an extraordinary expenditure of time and
effort to accommodate the request, the Borough will charge, in addition
to the actual cost of duplicating the records, a special service charge
that shall be based upon the actual direct labor cost of providing the
copy or copies. The service charge must be paid in advance. The
requestor shall have the opportunity to review and object to the charge
prior to it being incurred. The requestor shall have the opportunity to
review the special service charge prior to payment. In the event the
amount paid exceeds the actual cost incurred in accommodating the
request, the Borough shall refund the balance to the requestor. In the
event that the actual cost incurred in accommodating the request is
more than the amount paid, the requestor shall pay the balance due
prior to the release of the documents.
§ 241-1 PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS § 241-3
225:517
§ 241-3. Retention of copies of receipts.
The copies of the receipts issued hereunder shall be retained by the
Treasurer and the Chief of Police until such time as they shall be ordered to
be destroyed by the governing body or by the Borough Auditor.
§ 241-4. Examination and copying of files.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent any person from examining and
making copies of any public record not otherwise restricted without charge.
§ 241-5. Restricted and confidential records.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed as giving to anyone the right
to obtain copies of photographs, information, statements or reports when,
in the opinion of the Chief of Police, the same should be restricted and
held as confidential in the interest of justice. In any such case where a
restriction is imposed by the Chief of Police, said restriction may be lifted
by an order of a court of competent jurisdiction or by the written order of
the Attorney General, the County or Municipal Prosecutor or the Director of
Public Safety.
§ 241-6. Exemption from charges.
No charge shall be made for copies of photographs, reports, statements
or other documents which the Police Department shall be required to give
or make to any public officer or law enforcement authority or which may
be given to aid any public officer or law enforcement authority in the
enforcement of the law.
§ 241-3 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 241-6
225:518
ARTICLE II
Duplicate Tax Bills
[Adopted 3-1-1993 by Ord. No. 1028]
§ 241-7. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish a fee for providing duplicate tax
bills pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:4-64.
§ 241-8. Fees for duplicate copies.
If a mortgagee, servicing organization or property tax processing
organization requests a duplicate copy of a tax bill, the Tax Collector shall
issue a duplicate copy and may charge $5 for the first duplicate copy and
$25 for each subsequent duplicate copy of the same tax bill in the same tax
year.
§ 241-7 PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS § 241-8
225:519

ARTICLE III
Tax Sale Certificates
[Adopted 7-21-1997 by Ord. No. 1122]
§ 241-9. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to permit the Tax Collector to provide
duplicates of tax sale certificates to third-party lienholders and to establish
a fee for providing such duplicates pursuant to P.L. 1997, c. 99 (amendment
to N.J.S.A. 54:5-52.1).
§ 241-10. Fee.
If a third-party lienholder requests a duplicate copy of a tax sale certificate,
the Tax Collector shall be permitted to issue a duplicate copy for a charge
of $100.
§ 241-9 PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS § 241-10
225:521

ARTICLE IV
License and Permit Fees
[Adopted 4-5-2004 by Ord. No. 1328; amended in its entirety
7-7-2008 by Ord. No. 1449]
§ 241-11. Fees established.
The following fees are hereby established:
Type of License, Permit or
Document
Fee
Marriage license, issuance $28
Certified copy of vital statistics
record
$15
Burial permit $5
Information copy $8
Notary fee $2
§ 241-11 PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS § 241-11
225:523
Chapter 244
ROOMING AND BOARDING HOUSES
§ 244-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to license rooming and boardinghouses, as
authorized by the Laws of 1993, c.290.110
§ 244-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LICENSING AUTHORITY — The governing body, the Borough Commission
of the Borough of Collingswood.
OPERATOR — Any person, including for the purposes of this chapter any
corporation or association of persons and any agency or instrumentality of
state or local government, which operates or proposes to operate a rooming
or boarding house.
OWNER — The holder of title in fee simple to premises and any lessor or
sublessor of whom an operator is, or proposes to become a sublessor in
connection with an application for a license or for renewal thereof, pursuant
to this act.
ROOMING or BOARDING HOUSE — A rooming or boarding house licensed
pursuant to P.L.1979, c.496 (N.J.S.A. 55:13B-1 et al.).
§ 244-3. Licensing requirement.
No rooming or boarding house shall hereafter be located or operated except
upon premises licensed for that purpose by the licensing authority.
§ 244-4. Application for license.
A. Application for a license shall be made by the owner and filed with the
Borough Clerk. The application shall be in such form and shall contain
such information as is authorized by the enabling legislation and shall
be accompanied by an application fee of $200 or such fee as may be
prescribed by resolution of the licensing authority. The licensing
authority shall require the submission of such information and
supporting documentation, as to provide a basis upon which the
licensing authority may conduct an investigation and reach the
conclusions required under the enabling legislation for the issuance or
denial of a license. The licensing authority shall require that
information required from the operator be duly sworn to by the
operator in order to form a valid part of the application.
110. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:52-1 et seq.
§ 241-11 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 244-4
244:524
§ 244-5. Investigation of premises, owners and operators.
It shall be the duty of the licensing authority to receive applications made
pursuant to § 244-4 of this chapter and to conduct such investigations as
may be necessary to establish:
B. An application filed pursuant to Subsection A of this section shall
include a deposit in full of the prescribed application fee, of which 90%
shall be refunded if the application is denied and 10% retained and
employed in defraying the expenses of the licensing authority in
carrying out its functions under this chapter.
C. All applications by a natural person, partnership or unincorporated
association of natural persons shall be duly sworn to by each of the
applicants. An application by a corporation shall be duly sworn to by the
president or vice president of the corporation. All statements in an
application shall be deemed material, and any person who knowingly
misstates any material fact therein shall be guilty of a crime of the
fourth degree.
D. Every applicant for a license shall, after filing the application, cause
notice of the pendency of the application to be published in a form
prescribed by the licensing authority once a week for two weeks
successively in a newspaper printed in the English language, published
and circulated in Camden County. The notice shall include the time and
place of the public hearing prescribed in § 244-6 of this chapter, and the
second publication thereof shall be made not less than one week, nor
more than two weeks, prior to the date set by the licensing authority for
that hearing.
A. With respect to the premises for which a license is sought: (1) that they
are in compliance with all applicable building, housing, health and
safety codes and regulations; (2) that the location of the premises will
not, in conjunction with the proximity of other rooming and boarding
houses, lead to an excessive concentration of such facilities in the
municipality or a particular section thereof.
B. With respect to the owner or owners of the premises:
(1) If a natural person or persons, that he or they are 21 years of age or
older, citizens of the United States and residents of the State of
New Jersey and never convicted, in this state or elsewhere of a
crime involving moral turpitude, or of any crime under any law of
this state licensing or regulating a rooming or boarding house and
have never had a license required pursuant to P.L. 1979, c.496
(N.J.S.A. 55:13B-1 et al.) revoked; (2) if a corporation, that all
officers and members of the board of directors and every
stockholder holding 10% or more of the stock of the corporation,
directly or indirectly having a beneficial interest therein, have the
same qualifications, as set forth in this subsection for an applicant,
who is a natural person.
§ 244-4 ROOMING AND BOARDING HOUSES § 244-5
244:525
§ 244-6. Public hearing.
§ 244-7. Term of license; application for renewal.
C. With respect to the operator or proposed operator, that he meets the
requirements for licensure by the Department of Community Affairs.
D. That the owner and operator, either individually or jointly, have
established sufficient guarantee of financial and other responsibility to
assure appropriate relocation of the residents of the rooming or
boarding house to suitable facilities in the event that the license is
subsequently revoked or its renewal denied. The Department of
Community Affairs shall determine, in the case of each type of rooming
and boarding house under its jurisdiction, what constitutes suitable
facilities for this purpose.
A. In conducting its investigations pursuant to § 244-5 of this chapter, a
licensing authority shall hold a public hearing, at which the applicant,
the operator or proposed operator and all other parties in interest,
including members of the general public, shall be entitled to be heard
upon the merits of the application and the suitability of the premises
proposed for licensing. The time and place of the public hearing shall be
determined within 30 days of receipt of the application and shall be
communicated to the applicant in sufficient time to enable compliance
with the publication requirement under § 244-4 of this chapter.
B. No license shall be issued which would result in increasing the total
number of persons authorized to be residents in rooming or boarding
houses within the municipality to more than 100 in the Borough of
Collingswood, which presently has a population of 20,000 or fewer.
Nothing in this subsection shall warrant refusal of a license or license
renewal for premises where a rooming or boarding house has been in
lawful operation prior to the enactment of this chapter.
C. No license shall be issued for premises when any part of the boundary
line of the premises is within 1,000 feet of the boundary line of any
other premises for which a license is in force. Nothing in this subsection
shall warrant refusal of a license or license renewal for premises where
a rooming or boarding house has been in lawful operation prior to the
enactment of this chapter.
A. After the public hearing, pursuant to § 244-6 of this chapter, the
licensing authority shall determine, in accordance with the
requirements hereunder, whether to grant the license. A license, when
issued, shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance and until
such time as the licensing authority has acted upon an application for
renewal, unless sooner terminated by revocation pursuant to the terms
of this chapter.
B. Not later than the 60th day preceding the anniversary date of issuance,
the holder of a license shall make application to the licensing authority
§ 244-5 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 244-7
244:526
§ 244-8. Revocation of license.
§ 244-9. Appeal.
Upon determination by the licensing authority to refuse the granting or
renewal of a license or to revoke a license, the licensee affected shall
be entitled to appeal to the Commissioner of Community Affairs for a
review of that determination; and the Commissioner shall have authority
to reverse the licensing authority's determination if it concludes that the
application was improperly denied or the revocation improperly imposed.
for its renewal. Application for a renewal shall follow the same
procedure and requirements as prescribed for a new application and
shall necessitate de novo consideration and determination by the
licensing authority in he same manner as a new application.
A. A licensing authority may revoke a license granted under this chapter
for any of the following reasons:
(1) A finding that there was any misstatement of material fact in the
application upon which the license was issued.
(2) The occurrence of any fact which, had it occurred and been known
to the licensing authority before issuance of the license, would have
resulted in the denial of the application.
(3) Repeated violations or prolonged failure to correct any violation of
any applicable building, housing, health or safety code or
regulations.
(4) Refusal to allow access to any portion of the licensed premises at
all reasonable times, with or without advance notice, in order that
officers or agents of the licensing authority or any official charged
with enforcement within the municipality of any building, housing,
health or safety code or regulations applicable to the premises, may
determine compliance with such codes or regulations.
(5) Revocation by the Department of Community Affairs of the
operator's license or other authorization to operate a rooming or
boarding house on the premises.
(6) Notification by the Department of community Affairs that the
premises are not or are no longer suitable for operation of a
rooming or boarding house on the premises.
(7) Failure or refusal to comply with any lawful regulation or order of
the licensing authority.
B. A license shall not be revoked until five days' prior notice of the grounds
therefor has been served upon the licensee, either personally or by
certified mail, addressed to the licensee at the licensed premises, and a
reasonable opportunity given to the licensee to be heard thereon.
§ 244-7 ROOMING AND BOARDING HOUSES § 244-9
244:527
Such review by the Commissioner shall be in conformity with the provisions
of the Administrative Procedure Act, P.L.1968, c.410 (N.J.S.A. 52:14B-1 et
seq.). The decision of the Commissioner in such cases shall be subject to
appeal to the Appellate Division of the Superior Court. If an applicant for
license renewal has made timely and sufficient application for a renewal,
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the rules of licensing
pursuant thereto, his license shall not expire until any appeals under this
section have been finally determined and disposed of.
Chapter 247
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Development regulations — See Ch. 141. Water — See Ch. 301.
§ 244-9 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 244-9
244:528
ARTICLE I
Rates and Charges
[Adopted 8-16-1971 by Ord. No. 662 as Ch. 82 of the 1971 Code;
amended in its entirety 11-19-1973 by Ord. No. 680]
§ 247-1. Connection permit required.
From and after the passage of this article, no person, persons, firm,
corporation, association or organization shall make any connection with the
sanitary sewer system of the Borough of Collingswood until he, they or it
shall first obtain a permit therefor from the Borough Clerk.
§ 247-2. Charges for installation of sewer connections. [Added
12-15-1975 by Ord. No. 706; amended 1-16-1978 by Ord. No. 740111
]
A charge of $150, plus the cost of removing and replacing the street, shall
be made for the installation of a "sewer connection," hereby defined for
purposes of this section to be that portion of the sewer line running from the
sewer main to the sewer trap immediately back of the curbline. The cost of
removing and replacing the street shall be not less than $200, in the case of
bituminous surface streets, and $300 for portland cement concrete streets.
§ 247-3. Compliance required.
Any such person connecting with or heretofore connected to said sanitary
sewer system shall pay the charges and rentals hereinafter provided for
and shall comply with and be subject to all the terms and conditions of this
article.
§ 247-4. Rates for residence units. [Amended 1-7-1974 by Ord. No.
685; 12-15-1975 by Ord. No. 706; 1-16-1978 by Ord. No. 740;
12-20-1982 by Ord. No. 800; 11-18-1985 by Ord. No. 854;
12-21-1987 by Ord. No. 906; 4-5-1999 by Ord. No. 1181; 5-1-2000 by
Ord. No. 1212; 6-3-2002 by Ord. No. 1288; 5-5-2003 by Ord. No.
1315; 6-5-2006 by Ord. No. 1401; 6-1-2009 by Ord. No. 1462;
6-6-2011 by Ord. No. 1497112; 12-2-2013 by Ord. No. 1541;
12-7-2015 by Ord. No. 1584; 12-4-2017 by Ord. No. 1630]
"Residence units," which are hereby defined to be all single-family dwelling
units and each dwelling unit or apartment for the use of one family in
multifamily dwellings and apartments, shall pay a minimum annual sewer
rental of $267 for the connection of one bathtub or one shower stall,
one toilet, one washstand, one kitchen sink/dishwasher and one automatic
washing machine/laundry tray to said sanitary system. All additional
connections thereto shall be at the rate of $17 for each additional fixture.
111. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that the rates designated herein would be
retroactive to 1-1-1978.
112. Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 7-1-2011.
§ 247-1 ROOMING AND BOARDING HOUSES § 247-5
244:529
§ 247-5. Rate for nonresidence units. [Amended 12-15-1975 by Ord.
No. 706; 1-16-1978 by Ord. No. 740; 11-18-1985 by Ord. No. 854;
12-21-1987 by Ord. No. 906; 4-5-1999 by Ord. No. 1181; 5-1-2000 by
Ord. No. 1212; 6-3-2002 by Ord. No. 1288; 5-5-2003 by Ord. No.
1315; 6-5-2006 by Ord. No. 1401; 6-1-2009 by Ord. No. 1462;
6-6-2011 by Ord. No. 1497113; 12-2-2013 by Ord. No. 1541;
12-7-2015 by Ord. No. 1584; 12-4-2017 by Ord. No. 1630]
Any store, office, shop or building other than a residence or apartment
shall be subject to a minimum annual charge of $267 for any connection to
and use of the sanitary sewer system, which such minimum charge may be
applied against the payment of the charge for individual fixture connections
as set forth below.
§ 247-6. Rates for installation of plumbing fixtures in nonresidence
units. [Amended 9-3-1974 by Ord. No. 694; 12-15-1975 by Ord. No.
706; 1-16-1978 by Ord. No. 740; 11-18-1985 by Ord. No. 854;
4-18-1988 by Ord. No. 919]
All installations of plumbing fixtures in nonresidence units connected with
the sanitary sewer system shall be subject to the following sewer rentals:
Item Rental Fee
Sink $30.00
Toilet $40.00
Bathtub $20.00
Shower stall $20.00
Washstand $10.00
Urinal $20.00
Wash trap $41.00
Floor drain $33.00
Soda fountain $0.00
Washing machine, home-laundry-type $23.00
Commercial washing machine $83.00
Water-cooled air-conditioning equipment, for each
100 square feet of floor space
$10.00
Sump pump $25.00
All other fixtures $10.00
§ 247-7. Rates for excess water consumption.
In nonresidence units, where 80% of the cost of excess water consumed
exceeds the sewer rentals above provided, the sewer rental shall be 80% of
the costs of such excess water and shall be determined as follows:
113. Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 7-1-2011.
§ 247-5 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 247-7
244:530
§ 247-8. Payment of charges; penalty for late payment.
The sewer service or rental charge established and fixed herein shall be
an annual charge for each calendar year, effective as of January 1, 1974,
and shall be payable semiannually in advance on or before the first days of
January and July of each year. If any such service or rental charge shall not
be paid within one month after the same shall be due, a penalty shall be
added thereon at the rate of 8% per annum from the due date to the date of
payment.
§ 247-9. Lien; collection of costs, interest and penalties.
All services or rental charges established herein shall be payable to the
Collector of Taxes of the Borough of Collingswood or such other person as
may be designated by the Board of Commissioners and shall be and remain
a lien upon the premises served by such sewer connection, the same as
all other taxes and municipal charges upon real estate under the laws of
the State of New Jersey. The Borough of Collingswood shall have the same
remedy for the collection thereof, with interests, costs and penalties as fixed
by the Board of Commissioners, as said Borough now has or may hereafter
have under the laws of the State of New Jersey for the collection of the taxes
and other municipal liens upon real estate.
§ 247-10. Commencement of rents.
Where any structure or improvement is completed and sewer service is
available, sewer rental shall commence immediately; and the charge shall
be based on the proportion which the sewer rental bears to the balance of
the year during which the sewer service is furnished.
§ 247-11. Determination of charges.
Where there shall be construction of or the establishment of any new or
additional business units, the rental charge shall be made upon a rate
comparable to existing business units; and if there shall exist any question
or dispute in respect to said rental charge, the final determination shall be
made by the Board of Commissioners of the Borough of Collingswood.
§ 247-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-15-1994 by Ord. No.
1058]
Any person violating § 247-1 of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000, imprisonment in the county jail not
exceeding 90 days or a period of community service for not more than 90
days, or any combination thereof, in the discretion of the court.
A. On billings due January 1 of each year, 80% of the cost of excess water
for the first two quarters of the previous calendar year.
B. On billings due July 1 of each year, 80% of the cost of excess water for
the last two quarters of the previous calendar year.
§ 247-7 ROOMING AND BOARDING HOUSES § 247-12
244:531

ARTICLE II
Sewer Use
[Adopted 3-5-2001 by Ord. No. 1250]
§ 247-13. Connection required; payment of costs.
§ 247-14. Individual sewage disposal systems prohibited where
public sewer available.
The construction or maintenance of any privy, cesspool, septic or other
individual sewage disposal system within areas of the Borough adequately
serviced by the Borough sewer system is not permitted.
§ 247-15. Regulations concerning sewer system; enforcement and
penalties.
A. The owners of all homes, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes situated within
the Borough and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which
there is now located or may in the future be located a sanitary sewer
are hereby required, at the owner's expense, to connect the drainage of
all sources of sewage to the sewer in accordance with the provisions of
this article, within 30 days after date of official notice to do so, provided
that the sewer is within a reasonable distance.
B. All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of
the building sewer shall be borne by the owner.
A. Sump pumps. No person shall connect any sump pump to a sewer line.
The record title owner shall be responsible under this subsection and
shall be presumed to have caused any such connections.
B. Infiltration into sewer system. No person shall permit, allow or suffer or
cause the infiltration of water or any other substance which is not
normal sewage into the sewer system. The record title owner shall be
responsible under this subsection and shall presumed to have caused
any such connection.
C. Grease traps required. All commercial and institutional establishments,
including but not strictly limited to all food preparation establishments,
shall install and maintain grease traps in accordance with the following
provisions: [Amended 5-9-2011 by Ord. No. 1491]
(1) All grease traps shall be installed in conformance with the most
current National Standard Plumbing Code, or successor code, as
may be applicable for such installations.
(2) The installation of all grease traps shall be subject to the inspection
and approval of the Plumbing Subcode Inspector.
(3) Each facility requiring a grease trap shall be inspected twice a year
or as may be deemed necessary by the Borough of Collingswood.
§ 247-13 ROOMING AND BOARDING HOUSES § 247-15
244:533
Such inspection shall be performed by the Borough Licensed
Collection System Operator, the Borough Plumbing Subcode
Inspector, the Camden County Health Inspector, the Collingswood
Health Inspector, the Camden County Municipal Utilities Authority
Inspector, the Fire Code Inspector and/or the Collingswood
Department of Public Works Inspector. [Amended 5-5-2014 by
Ord. No. 1548]
(4) The purpose of the inspection(s) required by Subsection C(3) above
shall be to certify that the grease trap is being properly maintained
in one of the following ways:
(a) By the submission of receipts from a registered hauler that the
grease trap has been acceptably cleaned on a monthly basis by
said hauler; in addition to this submission, the grease trap is
subject to unscheduled verification to determine that the
grease trap is not obstructed by over 20% of volume being
occupied by residues to assure its acceptable operation;
(b) By the submission of monthly analysis report results from a
certified laboratory showing oil and grease testing of the
effluent discharge, which results shall meet acceptable limits,
and testing of the grease content of the trap, which acceptable
limits must be that the volatile acid contents are below 25
milligrams per liter and are therefore not rancid; or
(c) By the appropriate recordkeeping certified by a responsible
executive of the facility indicting the self-cleaning or the solid
and floating residues from the grease trap on at least a monthly
basis. Such residues are to be shown as acceptable for
processing as a byproduct-usable substance, able to be
incinerated in an acceptable, licensed burning facility or able
to be transported off site by a registered hauler.
(5) No grease residue may be disposed of in trash receptacles, floor
drains, outside sewers and inlets, or any other location that does
not flow or discharge into a grease trap or grease interceptor.
Commercial and industrial equipment, including but not limited to
griddles, ovens, hood vents, and any surface upon which grease
collects, shall be cleaned and maintained in a manner so that all
effluent, wastewater, and grease residue shall flow or discharge
into a grease trap or grease interceptor. Any maintenance or
cleaning of said equipment that takes place outdoors or in violation
of this provision shall be deemed a violation of this section. All
grease traps and grease interceptors shall be cleaned at least every
30 days and recycled by a registered hauler. [Amended 5-5-2014
by Ord. No. 1548]
(6) All recycled grease shall be reported to the Director of the Sewer
Utility on a quarterly basis, no later than February 15, May 15,
§ 247-15 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 247-15
244:534
August 15, and November 15 for the preceding calendar quarter,
on forms to be provided by the Borough.
(7) The following records must be maintained on the premises, for
inspection as part of the inspections to be conducted as set forth in
Subsection C(3) above:
(a) The date or dates the grease trap is cleaned.
(b) The quantity and amount of grease removed from the trap.
(c) The name of the person, firm or entity cleaning the trap.
(d) The date and quantity of grease removed from the premises by
a registered hauler.
(e) The name, address, telephone number and registration
number of the registered hauler.
(f) The place (including address) of disposal of the grease utilized
by the registered hauler.
(g) Any commercial or industrial establishment that violates this
section or that has previously violated this section shall be
subject to additional requirements, as deemed appropriate by
the Borough Licensed Collection System Operator, the
Borough Plumbing Subcode Inspector, the Camden County
Health Inspector, the Collingswood Health Inspector, the
Camden County Municipal Utilities Authority Inspector, the
Fire Code Inspector, and/or the Collingswood Department of
Public Works Inspector. [Added 5-5-2014 by Ord. No. 1548]
D. Failure of owner to connect; assessment of costs incurred by Borough.
If the owner of any house, building or structure referred to herein shall
fail to make any installation or connection required by this chapter
within the time herein required, the Borough may proceed to make
such installation or connection or cause the same to be made and
assess the cost thereof as a lien against such house, building or
structure. [Amended 5-9-2011 by Ord. No. 1491]
E. Failure of owner to maintain and/or repair; assessment of cost incurred
by Borough. If the owner of any house, building or structure referred to
herein shall fail to maintain or make necessary repairs to any
connection required under this chapter, the Borough may proceed to
make such maintenance or repair or cause the same to be made and
assess the cost thereof as a lien against such house, building or
structure. [Added 5-9-2011 by Ord. No. 1491]
F. Violations and penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to any combination of
the following. [Added 5-9-2011 by Ord. No. 1491]
(1) A fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000; and/or
§ 247-15 ROOMING AND BOARDING HOUSES § 247-15
244:535
§ 247-16. Prohibited discharges; violations and penalties.
No person shall discharge, deposit or cause to allow to be discharged or
deposited any of the following described water or wastes to any sanitary
sewers:
(2) A term of imprisonment not exceeding 90 days; and/or
(3) A period of community service not exceeding 90 days.
(4) In addition to or in lieu of the above fines and penalties, any person
who violates the provisions contained in § 247-15 above shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the mandatory fines established by
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection for each
instance of noncompliance, including the provisions for escalation
of penalties for the occurrence of repeat violations within a period
of four months, all pursuant to the New Jersey Clean Water
Enforcement Act. Willful gross violations, including false
certification, may be prosecuted by the Borough as perjury,
including the cessation of the commercial or institutional
operation, with a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $5,000
and/or a term of imprisonment not exceeding 90 days.
A. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel, oil, mineral oil or other flammable
or explosive liquid, solid or gas.
B. Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in
sufficient quantity, either singularly or by interaction with other wastes,
to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, to
constitute a hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment
process, to constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public
nuisance or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater
treatment plant.
C. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.5 or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the wastewater
system.
D. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size to be capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewer or other interference with the
proper operation of the wastewater facilities, such as but not limited to
ashes, bones, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, personal hygiene wipes, feminine
products, etc. [Amended 4-4-2016 by Ord. No. 1592]
E. Any unpolluted waters, such as stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff,
subsurface drainage or cooling water.
F. Any waters or waste containing an odor-producing substance which
either singularity or by interaction with other waste is capable of
§ 247-15 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 247-16
244:536
§ 247-17. Establishment of Sewer Utility; disposition of revenues.
creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or which prevents entry into
sewers for their inspection, maintenance and repair.
G. Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both, which constitute a slug.
H. Any water or wastes which, by interaction with other water or wastes in
the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, develop color of
undesirable intensity, form suspended solids which interfere with the
collection system or create a condition deleterious to structures and
treatment processes.
I. Any wastes containing viable pathogenic bacteria other than those
normal to domestic sewage.
J. Any waste containing grease, oil or fats that will solidify or become
viscous at temperatures between 32° F. and 150° F. or contains more
than 100 milligrams penicillin.
K. Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment
process, such as but not limited to dye wastes, de-inking wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions.
L. Violations and penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not less than
$100 nor more than $1,000. [Added 4-4-2016 by Ord. No. 1592]
A. There shall be a Sewer Utility for the Borough which shall be controlled
by Borough Commissioners.
B. All revenue and accounting therefor by the Sewer Utility shall be on a
dedicated utility basis pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:4-35. All moneys derived
from the operation of the Sewer Utility and other moneys applicable to
its support shall be segregated and kept in a separate fund, which shall
be known as the "Sewer Utility Fund." Disbursements for the operation
and maintenance of the Sewer Utility shall be taken from the fund.
C. Budgets shall provide appropriations for operating expenses, capital
improvements, debt service for the payment of all sanitary sewer
bonds, principal and interest and all other deferred charges and
statutory expenditures as may be required.
§ 247-16 ROOMING AND BOARDING HOUSES § 247-17
244:537
Chapter 255
SKATEBOARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 265. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 293.
§ 255-1. Use and operation of skateboards.
§ 255-2. Placement of skateboard ramps.
No person shall place, locate or leave a skateboard ramp in any public
roadway (including the entire paved and improved surface thereof,
including gutter areas, from curb to curb where curbs exist) or on any
public sidewalk in any manner which constitutes a traffic hazard or which
endangers or creates a risk to any person or property.
§ 255-3. Prohibited skateboarding locations.
A. No person shall use or operate or ride on a skateboard upon or in any of
the places stated in § 255-3A hereof.
B. No person shall use or operate or ride on a skateboard in a careless
manner without due caution and circumspection or while endangering
or in any manner to create a risk or danger to any person or property or
in any manner to impede or interfere with pedestrian or vehicular
traffic upon or in any of the places stated in § 255-3B hereof.
A. The places referred to in § 255-1A are:
(1) All public and private sidewalks, roadways (including the entire
paved and improved surface thereof, including gutter areas, from
curb to curb where curbs exist), curbs, parking lots, driveways and
courtyards within the boundaries being Haddon Avenue from the
boundary of the City of Camden to the boundary of Haddon
Township; Collings Avenue from White Horse Pike to Richey
Avenue; and the White Horse Pike, from the Collingswood Circle to
the boundary of the Borough of Oaklyn; Ferry Avenue, from
Haddon Avenue to the boundary of the City of Camden; and the
portions of all real property lots abutting and/or adjoining said
streets.
(2) The municipal parking lots at Collings Avenue and behind Haddon
Avenue; the borough garage; the public works facilities adjacent to
Atlantic Avenue; and all sidewalks, curbs, ramps and courtyards at,
around, leading to and/or adjacent to the Collingswood Public
Library; Collingswood Borough Hall; and all Collingswood public
schools.
§ 247-17 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 255-3
255:538
§ 255-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SKATEBOARD — Has its usual and common meaning; it includes a single
platform mounted on wheels designed or suitable or in fact used for riding
underfoot, or a board with rollerskate wheels or other similar wheels
attached to the underside, without a mechanism or other device for steering
while being used, operated or ridden.
SKATEBOARD RAMP — Includes all ramps commonly referred to as such,
platforms manufactured or contrived surfaces of any and every pattern or
configuration, and other similar devices and things designed for use for
riding a skateboard upon or above any area.
§ 255-5. Enforcement; confiscation of skateboards; summons and
complaint.
A police officer of the borough who shall observe any person using,
operating or riding upon a skateboard in violation of this chapter shall:
§ 255-6. Violations and penalties.114
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a fine, the amount of which shall be within the discretion of and
shall be fixed by the Municipal Court or other court or judicial officer having
appropriate jurisdiction but which shall in no case be greater in amount
B. The places referred to in § 255-1B are all public roadways situate in the
Borough of Collingswood.
A. Upon the first violation, take possession of the skateboard for a
minimum period of forty-eight (48) hours, after which the skateboard
shall be returned to the parent or guardian of a minor violator or, in the
case of an adult violator, to the violator himself.
B. Upon the second violation, take possession of the skateboard for a
minimum of seventy-two (72) hours and issue a summons and complaint
to the violator providing for a fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.) payable
to the Borough Municipal Court in accordance with § 255-6. After said
seventy-two-hour period, the skateboard shall be returned to the parent
or guardian of a minor violator or, in the case of an adult violator, to the
violator himself.
C. Upon a third violation and upon each subsequent violation, issue a
summons and complaint to the violator, returnable before the Borough
Municipal Court, which shall treat and dispose of such complaint in
accordance with § 255-6.
114. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 255-3 SKATEBOARDS § 255-6
255:539
than that permitted by N.J.S.A. 40:49-5, as amended and supplemented, and
other applicable law or a period of imprisonment and/or community service
within the meaning and limits of and as referred to in N.J.S.A. 40:49-5, as
amended and supplemented, and other applicable law, or any combination
of such fine, period of imprisonment or period of community service.
§ 255-7. Removal of unlawful skateboard ramps.
With respect to every skateboard ramp on a public street or sidewalk, which
a police officer observes to be a traffic hazard or to endanger or create a
risk to any person or property and in violation of this chapter, if the violator
or violators of this chapter can be identified and notified immediately, he,
she or they shall be given reasonable opportunity to remove the ramp to
a lawful place. If the ramp is not so removed within a reasonable time
or if the notice cannot be immediately given for any reason, the Borough
Department of Public Works shall remove the ramp; and if unclaimed within
seven (7) days thereafter, the ramp shall be deemed abandoned and shall be
disposed of in accordance with law and borough procedures as appropriate.
Chapter 258
SMOKING
§ 258-1. Smoking prohibited on public property.
Smoking, which shall mean the burning of, inhaling from, exhaling the
smoke from, or the possession of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or any other
matter or substance which contains tobacco or any other matter than can
be smoked, or the inhaling or exhaling of smoke or vapor from an electronic
smoking device, is prohibited inside or on any municipally owned public
property in the Borough of Collingswood.
§ 258-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MUNICIPALLY OWNED PUBLIC PROPERTY — Includes municipal buildings
that include all structures owned, leased, rented and/or operated by the
Borough, and/or occupied by Borough employees and used for official
business of the Borough, public open space, parks and recreational facilities
that include all areas adjacent to such municipal buildings, including, but
not limited to, any parking area, driveway or drive aisle and any and all
public parks, playgrounds, ball fields, publicly owned or leased by the
Borough and all property owned or leased by the Borough upon which the
public is invited or upon which the public is permitted and where individuals
gather for enjoyment and recreational activities.
§ 255-6 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 258-3
255:540
§ 258-3. Smoking prohibited in municipal buildings.
Smoking shall be prohibited in all municipal buildings as defined herein.
No-smoking signs or the international no-smoking symbol (consisting of a
pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with
a diagonal red line through its cross section) shall be clearly, sufficiently
and conspicuously posted at each municipal building entrance and within
each closed area where smoking is prohibited by this chapter. The signs
shall be clearly visible to the public and shall contain letters or a symbol
which contrast in color with the sign, indicating that smoking is prohibited
therein. The sign shall also indicate that violators are subject to a fine.
§ 258-4. Smoking prohibited near entrance of municipal buildings.
Smoking shall be prohibited within a thirty-five-foot radius of the front
entrance of all municipal buildings. No-smoking signs or the international
no-smoking symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning
cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a diagonal red line through its cross
section) shall be clearly, sufficiently and conspicuously posted both on the
building and at the thirty-five-foot perimeter of the front entrance of all
municipal buildings where smoking is prohibited by this chapter. The signs
shall be clearly visible to the public and shall contain letters or a symbol
which contrast in color with the sign, indicating that smoking is prohibited
therein. The sign shall also indicate that violators are subject to a fine.
§ 258-5. Smoking prohibited in public spaces, parks and recreation
facilities.
Smoking shall be prohibited in all municipally owned public spaces, parks
and recreation facilities and all property owned or leased by the Borough
upon which the public is invited or upon which the public is permitted
and where individuals gather for recreational activities, including all areas
adjacent to municipal buildings, including, but not limited to, any parking
area, driveway or drive aisle, which have been designated with no-smoking
signs. No-smoking signs or the international no-smoking symbol (consisting
of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle
with a diagonal red line through its cross section) shall be clearly,
sufficiently and conspicuously posted in all areas regulated by this chapter.
The signs shall be clearly visible to the public and shall contain letters or
a symbol which contrasts in color with the sign, indicating that smoking is
prohibited at the designated area. The sign shall also indicate that violators
are subject to a fine.
§ 258-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a
fine of not less than $250 for the first offense, $500 for the second offense
and $1,000 for each subsequent offense. Any municipal employee found in
violation of this chapter may also be subject to discipline in accordance with
the Borough's employment policies and procedures.
§ 258-3 SKATEBOARDS § 258-7
255:541
§ 258-7. Severability.
If any section of provision of this chapter shall be determined to be nonenforceable
by a court of competent jurisdiction, the same shall not affect
the other sections or provisions of this chapter except so far as the section
or provision so declared invalid shall be inseparable from the remainder or
any portion thereof.
Chapter 261
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 113
Littering and dumping — See Ch. 197.
Recycling — See Ch. 233.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 265.
§ 261-1. Definitions.
The following items shall have the meanings indicated and shall be
recognized as forms of solid waste in accordance with this chapter:
BULKY WASTE — Large items of solid waste, such as household appliances,
furniture, large auto parts, trees, branches and other oversized items,
whose size precludes or complicates handling by normal collection.
COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE — Solid waste generated by stores, offices
and other activities that do not actually turn out a product.
INDUSTRIAL SOLID WASTE — Solid waste that results from industrial
processes and manufacturing.
INSTITUTIONAL SOLID WASTE — Solid waste originating from religious,
educational, health care and research facilities, from parks, playgrounds
and pools and from public buildings, including the Borough buildings and
structures.
NONRESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE — Solid waste from an agricultural,
commercial, industrial or institutional agency, or a building or group of
buildings consisting of five or more dwellings.
RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE — Solid waste that normally originates in a
residential environment.
RUBBISH — A general term for solid waste, excluding food waste and ashes
taken from residences, commercial establishments and institutions.
§ 261-2. Curbside collection to be provided by private waste hauler.
The Borough shall collect and dispose of certain curbside rubbish, including
bulky waste, residential solid waste, commercial solid waste and
institutional solid waste, but excluding industrial solid waste, as defined
§ 258-7 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 261-2
255:542
in this chapter, within the boundaries of the Borough of Collingswood by
means of soliciting bids and awarding a contract to a properly qualified
private waste hauler.
§ 261-3. Preparation of bid specifications.
The Borough Administrator is authorized to prepare specifications in
conformance with this chapter and in conformance with statutory and
other lawful regulation of solid waste disposal in order to secure the most
economical and beneficial methodology of curbside solid waste collection.
§ 261-4. Receptacles and plastic disposal bags.
§ 261-5. Separation of solid waste from recyclables and yard waste.
It shall be unlawful for any housekeeper, tenant, property owner or
occupant of any property to place or cause to be placed any solid waste
A. All owners or tenants of any property shall provide suitable watertight
receptacles and place therein, from time to time, all swill and slop
which shall accumulate on or about their property; and they shall also
provide proper receptacles and place therein all residential solid waste
and rubbish which shall so accumulate. Said receptacles shall be placed
by such owner or tenant on the sidewalks in front of or alongside of
their property on the days and times when collections of the same are
made.
B. Receptacles shall be no larger than three feet by three feet by three feet
and shall be watertight and of metal or plastic with a tight-fitting cover
and handles. Each container shall have a capacity of not less than 15
gallons or more than 32 gallons and shall not exceed 50 pounds when
containing solid waste material. Receptacles that are badly broken or
otherwise fail to meet the requirements of this chapter shall be classed
as solid waste and disposed of by the contracted private waste hauler.
Receptacles must be maintained in a manner that is not a danger to
health or safety.
C. Watertight plastic disposal bags not less than three mil thick will be
accepted as solid waste receptacles. Residential and nonresidential
users shall remove any solid waste spilled by animals or vandals as a
result of defective or inadequate covers of receptacles.
D. When not placed at the curb in accordance with this chapter, all solid
waste, bags, or any other receptacles containing solid waste shall not
be placed in an area that is visible from the street. Labeled recycling
containers, bags, and other receptacles containing solid waste shall be
stored in the rear yard or the side yard of residential and commercial
properties. For purposes of this chapter, the area(s) comprising the rear
yard or the side yard shall be in accordance with § 141-4 of the Borough
Code.
§ 261-2 SKATEBOARDS § 261-5
255:543
in the same container as recyclables and yard waste (as those terms are
defined in Chapter 233 of the Borough Code).
§ 261-6. Obstruction of sidewalks.
No person, storekeeper, merchant or corporation shall encumber or
obstruct or permit to be encumbered or obstructed the sidewalk in front of
or alongside of his or its residence or place of business with solid waste,
including signs, boxes, baskets, barrels, goods, wares or merchandise or
any other obstacles, articles or things.
§ 261-7. Curbside location required; restrictions on commercial
property; permissible times.
§ 261-8. Tampering with materials placed for collection.
It shall be unlawful for any ragpicker, scavenger or other person to cut,
untie or otherwise unbundle on any street, highway or public place any
paper or other rubbish so tied or fastened together and placed for collection
by any householder, owner or occupant or tenant on the sidewalk in front of
or alongside of the property of such householder, owner, occupant or tenant.
§ 261-9. Littering by refuse collectors.
No employee or contractor of the Borough of Collingswood engaged in the
collection of solid waste shall, in the course of his employment, negligently
or carelessly distribute or cause to be distributed any papers, ashes or other
solid waste in or along any of the streets, highways or public places.
§ 261-10. Motor oil prohibited.
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to place motor oil in
any receptacles used for solid waste, or to otherwise comingle motor oil
with solid waste. Residents must bring motor oil in a sealed and labeled
container to the Borough Garage, located at 713 North Atlantic Avenue,
between 7:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m., Monday thru Friday.
A. All residential unit solid waste will be picked up, provided that there is a
curbside location to place the same for collection. Solid waste for
commercial properties, where there is a curbside location, will be
picked up, subject to a limitation of six fifty-pound packages per pickup
per property or 300 pounds per pickup per property. Solid waste must
be placed for curbside collection in solid waste containers, as defined
herein. Solid waste shall be placed at the curb, no less than two feet
away from recyclables.
B. Solid waste shall be placed for curbside collection after 5:00 p.m. on the
night prior to the scheduled pick-up date, or before 6:00 a.m. on the
scheduled pickup date.
§ 261-5 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 261-11
255:544
§ 261-11. Promulgation of rules and regulations.
The Borough Administrator is hereby authorized to promulgate rules and
regulations governing curbside rubbish collection and disposal, subject to
approval of such rules and regulations by the Borough Commissioners.
§ 261-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons, partnership or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000,
imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed 90 days or a period of
community service for not more than 90 days, or any combination thereof,
in the discretion of the court. Each day that any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be violated shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
subject to be punished by fine, imprisonment and/or community service as
above provided.
§ 261-13. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department, Public Works
Department, and the Nuisance Officer of the Borough of Collingswood.
Chapter 263
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 167.
Littering and dumping — See Ch. 197.
Sewers — See Ch. 247.
Water — See Ch. 301.
§ 261-11 SKATEBOARDS § 261-13
255:545

ARTICLE I
Illegal Storm Sewer Connections
[Adopted 9-7-2004 by Ord. No. 1344]
§ 263-1. Definitions and word usage.
A. For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use
in the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or
household operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or nonphysical connection that
discharges domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Borough of
Collingswood, unless that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES
permit other than the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit
(NJDES Permit Number NJ0141852). Nonphysical connections may
include, but are not limited to, leaks, flows, or overflows into the
municipal separate storm sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Nondomestic waste, including, but not limited
to, those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the
Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b), or (c).)
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A
conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the
Borough of Collingswood or other public body and is designed and used
for collecting and conveying stormwater.
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATERS — Water used to reduce
temperature for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into
direct contact with any raw material intermediate product (other than
heat) or finished product. Noncontact cooling water may, however,
contain algaecides or biocides to control fouling of equipment such as
heat exchangers, and/or corrosion inhibitors.
B. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular
number, and words used in the singular number include the plural
number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
§ 263-1 SKATEBOARDS § 263-2
255:547
§ 263-2. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the
Borough of Collingswood any domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water,
process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater).
§ 263-3. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Construction Code Official of the
Borough of Collingswood.
§ 263-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000 and be required to correct
said violation.
§ 263-2 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 263-4
255:548
ARTICLE II
Prohibited Discharges to Storm Sewers
[Adopted 9-7-2004 by Ord. No. 1346]
§ 263-5. Definitions and word usage.
§ 263-6. Prohibited conduct.
The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other than stormwater to
the municipal separate stormwater system operated by the Borough of
Collingswood is prohibited. The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials
other than stormwater in such a manner as to cause the discharge of
pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system is also prohibited.
§ 263-7. Exceptions to prohibition.
Exceptions to the prohibition include:
A. For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use
in the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A
conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the
Borough of Collingswood or other public body and is designed and used
for collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain
and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or
drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
B. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular
number, and words used in the singular number include the plural
number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
A. Water line flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
B. Uncontaminated groundwater (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation of footing drains, rising
groundwaters).
C. Air-conditioning condensation (excluding noncontact cooling water).
D. Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff).
§ 263-5 SKATEBOARDS § 263-7
255:549
§ 263-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.
E. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows.
F. Residential car washing water and residential swimming pool
discharges.
G. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
H. Flows from fire-fighting activities.
I. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water:
(1) Beach maintenance equipment immediately following their use for
their intended purposes.
(2) Equipment used in the application of salt and deicing materials
immediately following salt and deicing material applications. Prior
to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt and deicing materials
must be removed from the equipment and vehicles to the maximum
extent practicable using dry cleaning methods (e.g., shoveling and
sweeping). Recovered materials are to be returned to storage for
reuse or properly discarded. Rinsing of equipment as noted in the
above situation is limited to exterior, undercarriage, and exposed
parts and does not apply to engines or other enclosed machinery.
§ 263-7 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 263-8
255:550
ARTICLE III
Stormwater Control Requirements
[Adopted 2-6-2006 by Ord. No. 1393]
§ 263-9. Adoption of minimum control requirements for storm
sewer system.
It is the purpose of this ordinance115 to establish minimum stormwater
management requirements and controls for major development in the
Borough of Collingswood. This ordinance shall be applicable to all site
plans and subdivisions for the major developments that require preliminary
or final site plan or subdivision review. Development approvals issued for
subdivisions and site plans pursuant to this ordinance are to be considered
an integral part of development approvals under the subdivision and site
plan review process and do not relieve the applicant of the responsibility to
secure required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any other
applicable code, rule, act, or ordinance.
§ 263-10. Adoption of municipal stormwater management plan.
[Added 6-5-2006 by Ord. No. 1399116]
A. The purpose of this ordinance is to adopt a Municipal Stormwater
Management Plan as required pursuit to N.J.S.A. 7:14A-25 and the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection. The Borough has
determined that adopting the plan is in the best interest of the
Borough's residents.
B. It is the purpose of the plan to address the groundwater recharge,
stormwater quantity and stormwater quality by incorporating
stormwater design and performance standards for new major
development and to describe long-term operation and maintenance
measures for existing and future stormwater facilities.
115. Editor's Note: A complete copy of Ord. No. 1393 is on file and available to the public in the
office of the Borough Clerk.
116. Editor's Note: A complete copy of this ordinance and the Municipal Stormwater
Management Plan is on file and available to the public in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 263-9 SKATEBOARDS § 263-10
255:551

ARTICLE IV
Dumpsters and Refuse Containers
[Adopted 8-3-2010 by Ord. No. 1484]
§ 263-11. Purpose.
This article requires dumpsters and other refuse containers that are
outdoors or exposed to stormwater to be covered at all times and prohibits
the spilling, dumping, leaking, or otherwise discharge of liquids, semiliquids
or solids from the containers to the municipal separate storm sewer
system(s) operated by the Borough of Collingswood and/or the waters of
the state so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe
penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 263-12. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of Collingswood or
other public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
REFUSE CONTAINER — Any waste container that a person controls
whether owned, leased, or operated, including dumpsters, trash cans,
garbage pails, and plastic trash bags.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or artificial, within
the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction.
§ 263-13. Prohibited conduct and other requirements.
A. Any person who controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster is
§ 263-11 SKATEBOARDS § 263-13
255:553
§ 263-14. Exceptions to prohibition.
Exceptions are as follows:
§ 263-15. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department, Public Works
Department and/or Code Enforcement of the Borough of Collingswood.
§ 263-16. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.
covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out or
overflowing.
B. Any person who controls, whether owned, leased or operated, a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that the dumpster is maintained in
accordance with all local and state health codes. [Amended 3-9-2012
by Ord. No. 1512]
C. Any person who controls, whether it is owned, leased or operated, a
refuse container or dumpster shall be required to thoroughly wash the
interior and exterior no less than one time every seven days. The
method of cleaning and the cleaners or solvents used shall not
discharge any hazardous liquid or material into the Borough's storm
sewer system. [Added 3-9-2012 by Ord. No. 1512]
D. Any person who controls, whether it is owned, leased or operated, a
refuse container or dumpster shall replace each container or dumpster
within his or her control every 180 days with a clean refuse container or
dumpster. [Added 3-9-2012 by Ord. No. 1512]
A. Permitted temporary demolition containers;
B. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers);
C. Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers;
D. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid NJPDES permit;
E. Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, white
goods placed curbside for pickup).
§ 263-13 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 263-16
255:554
ARTICLE V
Private Storm Drain Retrofitting
[Adopted 8-3-2010 by Ord. No. 1485]
§ 263-17. Purpose.
This article requires the retrofitting of existing storm drain inlets which are
in direct contact with repaving, repairing, reconstruction, or resurfacing
or alterations of facilities on private property, to prevent the discharge of
solids and floatables (such as plastic bottles, cans, food wrappers and other
litter) to the municipal separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the
Borough of Collingswood so as to protect public health, safety and welfare,
and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 263-18. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of Collingswood or
other public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to collect
stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curbopening
inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or artificial, within
the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction.
§ 263-19. Prohibited conduct.
No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with one
single-family house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the
repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip
sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing
or altering any surface that is in direct contact with an existing storm drain
inlet on that property unless the storm drain inlet either:
§ 263-17 SKATEBOARDS § 263-19
255:555
§ 263-20. Design standard.
Storm drain inlets identified in § 263-19 above shall comply with the
following standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials
through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this paragraph, "solid and
floatable materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating,
suspended, or settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard see
Subsection C below.
A. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid
and floatable materials; or
B. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in § 263-20 below prior
to the completion of the project.
A. Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever they
use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water body
under that grate:
(1) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicycle
safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle
Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design
Guidelines (April 1996); or
(2) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate has an
area of no more than 7.0 square inches, or is no greater than 0.5
inches across the smallest dimension.
(3) Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate
inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination
inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates,
and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains.
(4) Examples of ground surfaces include surfaces of roads (including
bridges), driveways, parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks,
lawns, fields, open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
B. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in
that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening
has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than 7.0
square inches, or be no greater than 2.0 inches across the smallest
dimension.
C. This standard does not apply:
(1) Where the municipal engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably
be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
(2) Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end of pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin
§ 263-19 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 263-20
255:556
§ 263-21. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department, Public Works
Department, Construction and Code Enforcement of the Borough of
Collingswood.
§ 263-22. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000 for each storm drain inlet that
is not retrofitted to meet the design standard.
hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all
solid and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the
following:
(a) A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches wide
(this option does not apply for outfall netting facilities); or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
(3) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars; or
(4) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an
undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New-Jersey-Register-listed historic property.
§ 263-20 SKATEBOARDS § 263-22
255:557
Chapter 265
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 113.
Development regulations — See Ch. 141.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 193.
Littering and dumping — See Ch. 197.
Skateboards — See Ch. 255.
Solid waste — See Ch. 261.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 285.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 293.
§ 263-22 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 263-22
255:558
ARTICLE I
Excavations and Obstructions in Streets
[Adopted 8-16-1971 by Ord. No. 662 as Ch. 55 of the 1971 Code;
amended in its entirety 8-15-1994 by Ord. No. 1058]
§ 265-1. Street opening permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, corporation or corporations
to cut, break into, excavate or open any of the streets, highways or alleys
of the Borough of Collingswood or any portion thereof for any purpose
whatever without first making written application to and receiving written
permission from the Commissioner of Public Works of the Borough of
Collingswood; and the permit herein provided for shall be known and
designated as a "street opening permit."
§ 265-2. Information to be provided; permit fees; bond.
§ 265-3. Refilling and ramming.
All openings are to be refilled and thoroughly rammed to the street level to
the satisfaction of the Superintendent of Public Works.
§ 265-4. Opening of newly paved streets; performance bonds.
It shall be unlawful for the Commissioner of Public Works to grant any
written permission authorizing the disturbance of any newly paved street
from and after the completion of the laying thereof to any person or
persons, corporation or corporations unless such person or persons,
corporation or corporations shall first take out a street opening permit as
aforesaid and have entered into a bond with the Borough of Collingswood,
which bond shall be in the sum of $500, such bond to cover openings in
streets as described in § 265-2, provided that in the case of opening a sheet
asphaltum street, the bond shall be as provided for in § 265-2B, conditioned
that such excavations shall be refilled and rammed and such openings
repaved to the satisfaction of the Commissioner of Public Works and further
A. The Commissioner of Public Works as aforesaid may require a detailed
statement of the kind and character of the proposed excavation, and
upon the granting of any such permission as herein provided, there
shall be paid by the party obtaining the same, to the Commissioner of
Public Works of said Borough, for the use of the Borough of
Collingswood, a permit fee.
B. To open any street or pavement, there shall be paid the sum of $150 for
an opening of 25 feet or less; and for an opening of 26 to 250 linear feet,
the applicant shall enter into a bond with the Borough of Collingswood
for $500; and for the opening of 251 to 500 linear feet, the applicant
shall enter into a bond with the Borough of Collingswood for the sum of
$1,000 for the payment of the cost of repairing any such openings.
[Amended 6-1-2009 by Ord. No. 1463]
§ 265-1 SKATEBOARDS § 265-4
255:559
that if, at any time within four years from such refilling, ramming and
repaving, the same shall settle or repairs become necessary by reason
of defective refilling, ramming or repaving, then the person or persons,
corporation or corporations taking out such permit shall repair and repave
the same within five days after notice from the Commissioner of Public
Works and, upon failure so to do, then after the expiration of said five
days, the Commissioner of Public Works shall be authorized to do so at
the expense of such person or persons, corporation or corporations. Said
bond shall be from an approved corporation authorized to become surety
on bonds; said bond shall be approved by the Borough Commissioners as
to the responsibility of the sureties and by the Borough Solicitor as to form
and shall be filed in the office of the Commissioner of Public Works before
any permit is issued, provided that in case more than two openings are
or shall be made by any person or persons, corporation or corporations
in any street or streets, in such case the Commissioner of Public Works
may require a bond in such sum over and above the amounts stated above
as, in his opinion, will sufficiently guarantee the proper refilling, ramming
and repaving of such openings over a period of four years. The date of
the final payment of the contract price for the pavement of a street or
streets of the Borough of Collingswood shall be considered as the date of
the completion of said work, provided that on all newly paved streets on a
concrete foundation, no street opening permits shall be granted within five
years after the paving of the same except on the payment of an additional
permit fee of $50; and in addition to all and every such permit fee, the
applicant shall pay the cost of repaving every such opening, and such
payment shall be a condition in which every such permit shall be issued.
§ 265-5. Length and duration of excavation restricted; obstruction
of traffic; work performed by utilities.
No person or corporation shall be allowed permission to excavate or open
a street or highway for a greater distance than 500 feet at one time or to
keep the same opened for a longer period than one week, and during all
that period while such street or highway is being excavated, occupied or
used in any manner under permit from the Commissioner of Public Works,
there shall be provided by the person or corporation obtaining such permit
a space or street level of at least 10 feet in width for the purpose of allowing
carriages and other vehicles free and unimpeded use of the same; and all
persons or corporations making openings as aforesaid along the line of any
street or highway in the Borough of Collingswood and any corporation or
corporations possessing or controlling the right to lay wires, pipes or other
conduits in any street or highway, which shall desire to make connections,
lay or relay wires, pipes or other conduits or to make repairs under the
highway or any section or sections of any highway, street or alley shall be
and are hereby required to complete all of said work within 90 days from
the date of the granting of the permit therefor.
§ 265-4 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 265-6
255:560
§ 265-6. Bond for continuous opening of streets; conditions.
For a continuous opening of the streets paved as described in § 265-2, any
person or persons, corporation or corporations shall enter into a bond with
the Borough of Collingswood for the sum of $500, conditioned that said
street or highway so opened shall be properly refilled and resurfaced and
within the time provided for in § 265-5 and also to the satisfaction of the
Commissioner of Public Works of the Borough of Collingswood; and said
bond as to sureties shall be approved by the Borough Commissioners of the
Borough of Collingswood and, as to form, shall be approved by the Borough
Solicitor of the Borough of Collingswood.
§ 265-7. Water conducted to sewers or street gutters.
It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any building along the
line of any paved street to allow the water from the leaders or conductors
of water from the roof of said buildings to flow over or upon the sidewalk
adjacent to such paved streets, but such water shall be conducted by pipes
to the proper sewer in said street or streets, if any there be; and if there
shall be no sewer in said street or streets for the reception of such water,
then and in such case, the water from said leaders or conductors shall be
connected by water pipes or channel irons below the surface of the sidewalk
or sidewalks to the street gutters or gutters.
§ 265-8. Barricades around dangerous excavations; warning lights.
All persons or corporations excavating, occupying or in any manner using
any of the streets or highways of the Borough of Collingswood for any
purpose whatever under permission granted as aforesaid shall, wherever
any excavation would be dangerous if left exposed, erect a suitable fence
or railing around such excavation in such a manner as to prevent danger
to pedestrians or vehicles and satisfactory to the Superintendent of Public
Works and shall place upon such fence or railing and upon any building
materials and appliances suitable and sufficient lights as may be required
by the Superintendent of Public Works at twilight in the evening and to be
kept burning until sunrise during the time of such excavation, occupation or
use of the streets as aforesaid.
§ 265-9. Condition of completed work; supervision over work.
All persons or corporations excavating, occupying or using the streets,
highways or alleys as aforesaid shall replace them in the same condition as
they were before such excavation, occupation or use; and all replaced earth
shall be properly tamped and all paving material carefully kept aside and
the street or highway refilled, repaired and repaved to the satisfaction of
the Superintendent of Public Works of the Borough of Collingswood; and all
refilling and repairs of any unimproved street so excavated or disturbed as
aforesaid, when the party excavating the same fails to do so, shall be made
by and under the supervision of the Superintendent of Public Works of the
Borough of Collingswood and to the satisfaction of said Commissioners.
§ 265-6 SKATEBOARDS § 265-10
255:561
§ 265-10. Duty to arrest and prosecute violators.
The Borough of Collingswood shall prosecute any person or persons,
corporation or corporations violating any of the provisions of this article,
and it shall also be the duty of any police officer or other person or persons
authorized to make arrests in the Borough of Collingswood to arrest anyone
whom he or they may detect in the violation of any of the provisions of the
same.
§ 265-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons, corporation or corporations violating any of the
provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000,
imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed 90 days or a period of
community service for not more than 90 days, or any combination thereof,
in the discretion of the court.
§ 265-12. Erection or placement of building in streets prohibited.
No person or corporation shall erect or place any building in whole or in
part upon any highway, street or alley in the Borough of Collingswood.
§ 265-13. Removal of encroachments and obstructions.
The owner of any building, fence or other encroachment or obstruction now
standing or which may hereafter be erected or placed upon any street,
highway or alley or other public ground within the Borough of Collingswood
shall, within 30 days after the service of a notice, in writing, signed by
the Superintendent of Public Works of said Borough so to do, remove said
obstruction.
§ 265-10 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 265-13
255:562
ARTICLE II
Depositing Injurious Liquids on Pavement
[Adopted 8-16-1971 by Ord. No. 662 as Ch. 84, Art. V, of the 1971
Code]
§ 265-14. Prohibited acts.
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person or persons to pour or deposit
on any of the improved streets in the Borough of Collingswood any salt
water or other liquid, the ingredients of which are injurious to such paving.
§ 265-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-15-1994 by Ord. No.
1058]
Every person or persons violating the provisions of this article, upon
conviction, shall pay a fine not exceeding $1,000 for each offense and the
costs of the prosecution or be committed to county jail for a period of not
more than 90 days or serve a period of community service for not more than
90 days, or any combination thereof.
§ 265-14 SKATEBOARDS § 265-15
255:563

ARTICLE III
Vehicles on Sidewalks
[Adopted 8-16-1971 by Ord. No. 662 as Ch. 84, Art. IV, of the 1971
Code; amended in its entirety 6-1-1998 by Ord. No. 1154]
§ 265-16. Prohibited acts; violations and penalties.
No person or persons shall place, park or store any cart, wagon, automobile
or other vehicle on any portion of the sidewalks within the Borough of
Collingswood, under a penalty of a fine of not more than $1,000,
imprisonment for not more than 90 days or a period of community service
for not more than 90 days, or any combination thereof. It shall also be
a violation of this article for any person to place, park or store any cart,
wagon, automobile or other vehicle partially on a public street and partially
over the curb of said street or upon the sidewalk of said street.
§ 265-16 SKATEBOARDS § 265-16
255:565

ARTICLE IV
Driveways and Passageways Over Sidewalks on Haddon Avenue
[Adopted 8-16-1971 by Ord. No. 662 as Ch. 84, Art. III, of the 1971
Code]
§ 265-17. Prohibited acts.
From and after the passage of this article, it shall be unlawful for any person
or persons to build or construct any driveway or passageway upon, over
or through any of the sidewalks on either side of Haddon Avenue, between
Collings Avenue and Fern Avenue within said Borough of Collingswood.
§ 265-18. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-15-1994 by Ord. No.
1058]
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this article shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $1,000, imprisonment in the county jail
for a period not to exceed 90 days or a period of community service for not
more than 90 days, or any combination thereof.
§ 265-17 SKATEBOARDS § 265-18
255:567

ARTICLE V
Foliage Over Sidewalks
[Adopted 8-16-1971 by Ord. No. 662 as Ch. 84, Art. II, of the 1971
Code]
§ 265-19. Height restrictions. [Amended 8-15-1994 by Ord. No.
1058]
It shall be unlawful for the owner or owners of lands and premises fronting
on sundry streets in the Borough of Collingswood, County of Camden, to
permit branches or limbs of their trees and foliage to extend over the
sidewalk or public passageway at a height under seven feet.
§ 265-20. Notice to comply. [Amended 8-15-1994 by Ord. No. 1058]
A Borough representative shall notify all offending parties, and it will be the
duty of such offending parties, within 10 days after receiving such notice,
to remove branches, limbs or foliage extending over the sidewalk less than
seven feet in height.
§ 265-21. Failure to comply; removal by Borough; assessment of
costs; lien.
Should any offending party refuse to remove said limbs, branches or foliage
within said 10 days after due notice, they shall be removed under the
direction of an officer of the municipality. Such officer shall certify the cost
thereof to the governing body, which shall examine the certificate and, if
found correct, shall cause the cost as shown thereon to be charged against
the lands abutting or bordering such lands, premises, sidewalk or gutter.
The amount so charged shall forthwith become a lien upon such land and
shall be added to and become and form a part of the taxes next to be
assessed and levied upon such lands, the same to bear interest at the same
rate as taxes, and shall be collected and enforced by the same officer and in
the same manner as taxes.
§ 265-22. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-15-1994 by Ord. No.
1058]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article or who shall fail to
comply with the requirements hereof shall be subject to a maximum fine of
$1,000, imprisonment for not more than 90 days or a period of community
service for not more than 90 days, or any combination thereof.
§ 265-19 SKATEBOARDS § 265-22
255:569

ARTICLE VI
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 8-16-1971 by Ord. No. 662 as Ch. 86 of the 1971 Code]
§ 265-23. Responsibility to remove snow and ice.
The owner or owners, tenant or tenants of lands abutting or bordering upon
the sidewalks and gutters of the public streets, avenues and highways shall
remove all snow and ice from the same within 12 hours of daylight after the
same shall be formed or fall thereon.
§ 265-24. Failure to comply; removal by Borough; assessment of
costs; lien. [Amended 4-18-1988 by Ord. No. 917; 8-15-1994 by Ord.
No. 1058]
In cases where the owner or owners, tenant or tenants shall have refused or
neglected to remove the same in the manner and within the time provided
above, the snow and ice shall be removed from any sidewalk or gutter of
the offending owner or owners, tenant or tenants under the direction of the
Superintendent of Public Works, who shall certify the cost thereof to the
governing body, which shall examine the certificate and, if found correct,
shall cause the cost as shown thereon to be charged against the lands
abutting or bordering such sidewalk or gutter. The amount so charged shall
forthwith become a lien upon such land and shall be added to and form part
of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon such lands, the same to
bear interest at the same rate as taxes, and shall be collected and enforced
by the same officers and in the same manner as taxes.
§ 265-25. Violations and penalties. [Added 4-18-1988 by Ord. No.
917; amended 8-15-1994 by Ord. No. 1058]]
In addition thereto, any person violating any provision of this article shall
be deemed to be a disorderly person and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000, imprisonment in the county jail
for a period not to exceed 90 days or a period of community service for not
more than 90 days, or any combination thereof.
§ 265-23 SKATEBOARDS § 265-25
255:571

ARTICLE VII
Removal of Grass and Weeds
[Adopted 8-16-1971 by Ord. No. 662 as Ch. 42, Art. II, of the 1971
Code]
§ 265-26. Notice to remove grass, weeds and other impediments.
The owner or owners, tenant or tenants of lands abutting or bordering upon
the sidewalks and gutters of public streets, avenues and highways shall
remove all grass, weeds and other impediments therefrom within 10 days
after notice to remove the same.
§ 265-27. Failure to comply; removal by Borough; assessment of
costs; lien. [Amended 8-15-1994 by Ord. No. 1058]
In cases where the owner or owners, tenant or tenants shall have refused or
neglected to remove the same in the manner and within the time provided
above, the grass, weeds and other impediments shall be removed from any
sidewalk or gutter of the offending owner or owners, tenant or tenants
under the direction of the Superintendent of Public Works, who shall certify
the cost thereof to the governing body, which shall examine the certificate
and, if found correct, shall cause the cost as shown thereon to be charged
against the lands abutting or bordering such sidewalk or gutter. The amount
so charged shall forthwith become a lien upon such land and shall be added
to and be formed a part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon
such lands, the same to bear interest at the same rate as taxes, and shall
be collected and enforced by the same officers and in the same manner as
taxes.
§ 265-28. Violations and penalties. [Added 8-15-1994 by Ord. No.
1058]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article or who shall fail to
comply with the requirements hereof shall be subject to a maximum fine of
$1,000, imprisonment for not more than 90 days or a period of community
service for not more than 90 days, or any combination thereof.
§ 265-26 SKATEBOARDS § 265-28
255:573

ARTICLE VIII
Sidewalk and Curb Construction and Repairs
[Adopted 8-16-1971 by Ord. No. 662 as Ch. 84, Art. I, of the 1971
Code]
§ 265-29. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this article, shall have the following
meanings:
ABUTTING OWNER — In addition to its generally accepted meaning, the
owner of the real estate in front of which any sidewalk and/or curb
improvement is made or is to be made in the Borough of Collingswood.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Collingswood.
BOROUGH CLERK — The Clerk of the Borough of Collingswood.
BOROUGH ENGINEER — The duly designated or appointed Engineer of
the Borough of Collingswood or any person employed by the Borough
of Collingswood to perform any engineering services for the Borough of
Collingswood.
COMMISSIONERS — The Board of Commissioners of the Borough of
Collingswood, being the governing body of said Borough.
PUBLIC WORKS COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of the Borough of
Collingswood in charge of the Department of Public Works, being the officer
of said Borough in charge of public improvements.[Amended 8-15-1994
by Ord. No. 1058]
TAX COLLECTOR — The Collector of Taxes and Assessments of the Borough
of Collingswood.
§ 265-30. Word usage.
Whenever in this article any word importing the singular number or
masculine gender is used in describing or referring to any person,
corporation, party, matter or thing, the same shall include and apply to
several persons, corporations or parties as well as to one person,
corporation or party, to females as well as males and to several matters or
things as well as one matter or thing.
§ 265-31. Responsibility of abutting owner for construction, repair
and expense.
Every sidewalk and/or curb in the Borough constructed, reconstructed
or repaired by an abutting owner shall be constructed, reconstructed or
repaired in a good and workmanlike manner at the abutting owner's own
cost and expense. All new sidewalks shall be not less than four feet in width
unless otherwise permitted by the Commissioner of Public Works.
§ 265-29 SKATEBOARDS § 265-32
255:575
§ 265-32. Lines and grades.
All new sidewalks constructed by an abutting owner shall be constructed in
accordance with the line and grade established by the Borough Engineer.
All old or existing sidewalks and/or curbs reconstructed or repaired by an
abutting owner shall be constructed or repaired in accordance with the
existing line and grade unless such line or grade is changed by the Borough
Engineer. It shall be the duty of the abutting owner in all cases to make
inquiry of the Borough Engineer respecting such line and grade. Where
the fill-in is more than one foot, it shall be done in layers, and thoroughly
tamped and compacted.
§ 265-33. Materials and construction standards. [Amended
9-8-1998 by Ord. No. 1164]
§ 265-34. Responsibility for maintenance.
Every abutting owner, at his own cost and expense, shall at all times keep
and maintain his sidewalk and/or curb in good condition and state of repairs
and shall not permit the sidewalk to fall into a state of disrepair or to
become unsafe or unfit to walk upon and the curb to fall into a state of
disrepair and become dangerous to pedestrians and/or motor vehicles. In
the event that any sidewalk or any part thereof becomes broken or in need
of repair and the condition thereof becomes unsafe or hazardous to the
public or unfit to walk upon or in the event that any curb or any part thereof
becomes broken or in need of repair or the condition thereof becomes
unsafe or hazardous to the public or to motor vehicles, the abutting owner,
at his own cost and expense, shall, within 60 days, reconstruct or repair, as
the case may require, said sidewalk and/or curb or that part thereof that
needs reconstruction or repair. Said improvement or work shall be done in
accordance with §§ 265-31, 265-32 and 265-33 of this article.
A. Every sidewalk and/or curb constructed, reconstructed or repaired by
an abutting owner shall be constructed, reconstructed or repaired with
thoroughly mixed concrete composed of one part of the best cement,
preferably portland cement, two parts of clean sharp sand and four
parts of broken trap rock or pebble, three-fourths-inch size, free from
dust and dirt. All such sidewalks shall be four inches in depth when
finished and laid, except driveways and sidewalk aprons which shall be
six inches in depth when finished and laid. All curbs shall be 18 inches
in depth, six inches at top and seven inches at the bottom when
finished. All such concrete, after being placed, shall be tamped,
screeded and finished to true grade.
B. In the event that the existing sidewalk of an abutting owner consists of
bricks, then the reconstruction or repair shall be done with bricks so as
to conform with the existing sidewalk.
C. In the event that an owner chooses to remove cement and reconstruct
with bricks, the bricks will be done in compliance with any applicable
codes and shall be of good workmanship.
§ 265-32 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 265-35
255:576
§ 265-35. Failure to comply; notice; repairs by Borough or
contractor; assessment of costs.
In the event that the abutting owner fails to reconstruct or repair his
sidewalk and/or curb or such part thereof that may require reconstruction
or repair, as provided in this ordinance, the Commissioners may cause said
improvement or work to be made under the supervision of the Public Works
Commissioner or may award a contract therefor. The cost, whether the work
be done by the Borough or by an independent contractor, shall be assessed
upon the property of the abutting owner in accordance with the law in such
case made and provided and after due notice in accordance with the law has
been given. Prior to the Borough making such improvement or awarding
any contract therefor, notice shall be given to the abutting owner or owners
in accordance with the laws providing therefor.
§ 265-36. Work to be done by licensed contractors.
No concrete sidewalk or curb shall be laid on any public street, alley, road
or lane or other public place within the Borough of Collingswood except by
contractors licensed to perform such work.
§ 265-37. Licensing of contractors; qualifications; license fee;
duration.
No license shall be issued to any applicant until such applicant shall have
satisfied the Commissioner of Public Works, either by examination or record
of experience, that he is qualified to do such work. At the time of the
issuance of said license, there shall be paid by the licensee for the first year
a fee of $25 for the use of the Borough, and annually thereafter for renewal
of such license the sum of $10. Said licenses shall run and be in force from
the date of their issuance to the 31st day of December of the year in which
they are issued.
§ 265-38. Permit required. [Amended 1-4-1999 by Ord. No. 1175;
7-3-2006 by Ord. No. 1404]
Prior to the beginning of any such work by any licensee, a permit shall be
obtained from the Department of Public Works for each sidewalk and/or
curb job intended to be done by said licensee.
§ 265-39. Permit fee; contents. [Amended 7-3-2006 by Ord. No.
1404]
The cost of said permit shall be the sum of $10 for each permit and shall
state the location of the property where the work is to be done and the
names of the owners and the contractor. Applicant is required to use form
of application and follow procedures as determined and provided by the
Department of Public Works.
§ 265-35 SKATEBOARDS § 265-40
255:577
§ 265-40. Inspection and approval of work. [Amended 7-3-2006 by
Ord. No. 1404]
All work done shall be subject to inspection and approval or disapproval by
the Superintendent of Public Works or his designated representative.
§ 265-41. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-15-1994 by Ord. No.
1058]
Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to the payment of a fine not exceeding $1,000,
imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days or a period of community
service for not more than 90 days, or any combination thereof.
§ 265-40 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 265-41
255:578
ARTICLE IX
Street Obstructions
[Adopted 12-2-1996 by Ord. No. 1108]
§ 265-42. Street obstructions; penalties.
A. No person or persons shall obstruct any street or streets or alley.
B. Every person convicted of a violation of this provision shall be subject to
a fine of not more than $500.
§ 265-42 SKATEBOARDS § 265-42
255:579

ARTICLE X
Dumpsters, Roll-Off Containers and Pods
[Adopted 7-7-2008 by Ord. No. 1446]
§ 265-43. Permit required; application; placement; duration of
permit; responsibility for compliance; violations and penalties.
A. Prior to the placement of any dumpster, roll-off container, pod or similar
container in or on any property in the Borough, street or right-of-way,
the owner of the property using the container or person contracting for
the use of such container shall apply for and obtain a permit from the
Collingswood Police Department. [Amended 8-6-2012 by Ord. No.
1522]
B. Application for the permit shall be made on a form provided by the
Police Department. The application shall require, among other things,
the full name, address and other contact information for the owner of
the container, the person contracting for use of the container, where
such person is other than the owner of the property for which the
container is to be used, and the owner of the property with which the
use of the container is associated.
C. Any container to be placed on a street or right-of-way shall be placed on
the street in a legal parking space, not designated for use as a handicap
parking space, as designated by the Borough and shall be equipped
with appropriate reflectors or other safety markings so that the
container will not constitute a hazard to traffic. The Borough Police
Department, in the exercise of its discretion, may direct that additional
markings, or their locations, or nature, shall be supplemented or
altered if the Police determine such actions are necessary for the
protection of the motoring public.
D. Permits granted for placement of a container on any property in the
Borough, street, right-of-way or other public property shall he valid for
a period of up to 14 days. Upon a showing of continued need for the
container (such as during the course of major construction projects),
permits may be renewed up to three times for like periods. The Police
Department may require, at its discretion, the immediate removal of a
container if the police determine such actions are necessary for the
protection of the motoring public or if the container's location is
interfering with a community event or gathering. [Amended 8-6-2012
by Ord. No. 1522]
E. The person contracting for use of the container and the owner of the
property associated with its use shall be jointly responsible for
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
F. Violations of this chapter or any conditions pursuant to this chapter
shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500. Any storage container,
storage device, pod, trash dumpster, roll-off container or similar
container placed or maintained on Borough property, streets, or rights-
§ 265-43 SKATEBOARDS § 265-43
255:581
of-way, or left in such a location after expiration of the permit for more
than five days after the mailing of written notice to the owner of the
container, the person contracting for use of the container and the owner
of the affected property may be removed by the Borough at the owner's
expense for removal and storage of the container. Such charge for
removal and storage of the container shall be in addition to any fines
that may otherwise be imposed pursuant to this section.
§ 265-43 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 265-43
255:582
Chapter 269
SWIMMING POOLS, PRIVATE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 135.
Development regulations — See Ch. 141.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 193.
§ 269-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, except where the context requires a
different meaning, the following words shall be defined as follows:
PERSON — Natural persons, firms, corporations, partnerships and
associations, as the case may be.
POOL — Any private swimming pool, stream, plunge-bathing or wading pool
or other body of water or portion thereof of more than two hundred fifty
(250) cubic feet capacity, used by any person for swimming or bathing,
whether located indoors or outdoors and whether natural or of artificial
construction, and shall include all buildings, structures, premises, beaches
and appurtenances used in connection therewith.
§ 269-2. Permit requirements.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to establish or construct any pool in
the Borough of Collingswood without first having obtained a permit
therefor in the manner hereinafter provided.
B. An application for such a permit shall be made to the Board of
Commissioners of the Borough of Collingswood and shall consist of:
(1) A plot plan showing the lines of the premises, all existing houses
and structures thereon, abutting streets and properties and the
location and dimensions of the proposed pool and its auxiliary
structures. A permanent pool shall be located in conformity with
existing borough ordinances.
(2) Plans and specifications for the proposed pool and all auxiliary
structures and appurtenances related thereto.
(3) A description of the method of disinfection, treatment and disposal
of the water to be used by the owner or operator of the pool.
(4) Fees pursuant to the Uniform Construction Code and other
applicable codes.117
117. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 265-43 SWIMMING POOLS, PRIVATE § 269-2
269:583
§ 269-3. Construction and maintenance.
C. The Board of Commissioners shall, within thirty (30) days after
receiving a properly executed application for such permit, act upon the
application in one of the following ways:
(1) Approve the application as submitted and cause the permit to be so
issued.
(2) Approve the application, subject to such additional sanitary
safeguards in respect to the particular premises to be used as the
Board deems that the public health may require, and upon receipt
of an amended application providing for the additional sanitary
safeguards prescribed by the Board, shall cause the permit to be
issued.
(3) Reject the application.
D. No person shall make changes, alterations or modifications in any pool,
if such changes, alterations or modifications are of a nature which may
affect the public health, until such plans and specifications therefor
shall first have been submitted to and approved by the Board of
Commissioners. When granting such approval, the Board of
Commissioners may stipulate such changes, alterations, modifications
or conditions as it deems that the public health may require. The
granting of the permit shall be made subject to the compliance by the
applicant with the provisions of this subsection.
E. The permit shall be on a form prescribed by the Board of
Commissioners, to be issued subject to the provisions of this chapter
and to such additional sanitary safeguards in respect to the particular
premises to be so used as the Board deems that the public health may
require. The permit shall be made available for inspection at the
swimming pool and may be revoked for cause by the Board of
Commissioners or for violation of the terms of this chapter and the
additional sanitary safeguards prescribed by the Board of
Commissioners in granting the permit.
A. Artificial pools shall be so designed and constructed as to facilitate
emptying and cleaning and shall be maintained and operated in such
manner as to be clean and sanitary at all times. Inlets shall be so
located and spaced as to secure satisfactory dispersion of inflowing
waters throughout the pool and to permit the draining, cleaning and
disinfecting of the bottom and sides.
B. Pools with vertical sides less than four (4) feet above ground level shall
be enclosed with a fence at least four (4) feet in height, so constructed
and placed as to prevent access to the pool by small children. Stairs or
steps leading up to the pool edge shall also be enclosed as aforesaid or,
if portable, shall be removed when not in use. All gates in said fence
shall be self-latching.
§ 269-2 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 269-4
269:584
§ 269-4. Sanitation requirements.
§ 269-5. Closing of pools posing hazards; appeal.118
Whenever any pool, by reason of mechanical defects, lack of proper
supervision or failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter, is a
hazard to the health of the users thereof, the Code Enforcement Officer is
authorized to summarily close such pool and to keep such pool closed until
no further hazards to users of the same exist, subject to the right of appeal
to the Board of Commissioners by the owner or operator of such pool, which
appeal shall not stay the action of the Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 269-6. Connection to potable water supply.
There shall be no physical connection between a potable (public or private)
water supply system and a pool at a point below the maximum flow line
of the pool or to a recirculating or heating system of a pool unless such
physical connection is so installed and operated that no pool water can be
discharged into such potable water supply system.
§ 269-7. Discharge of waste water; recirculation or reuse of pool
water.
A. Standards. The physical, chemical and bacterial qualities of the water
shall comply with the latest recommendations made by the American
Public Health Association and by the New Jersey State Department of
Health.
B. Revocation of permit. Failure to maintain the sanitary quality of the
water prescribed by this section or to restore such water to the
required quality within the time directed by the Board of
Commissioners or violation of the terms of this section shall be deemed
sufficient cause for revocation of permit.
C. Pollution of pool. Urinating, defecating, expectorating or blowing the
nose in any pool is prohibited and hereby declared unlawful.
D. Communicable disease. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any
person having skin lesions, sores or inflamed eyes, mouth, nose or ear
discharges or who is the carrier of any communicable disease to
knowingly use any pool.
A. The discharge of any wastewater shall in no case cause a nuisance. The
drainage waste from any pool shall be discharged into a sand-filtering
bed or, if not practicable, into a seepage pit or storm sewer, if accessible
or any other method approved by the Board of Commissioners.
118. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 269-4 SWIMMING POOLS, PRIVATE § 269-7
269:585
§ 269-8. Inspections.119
The Code Enforcement Officer may cause any pool subject to this chapter to
be inspected for compliance with the appropriate codes, and any violation
shall be subject to the enforcement procedures therein.
§ 269-9. Enforcement; right of entry.120
§ 269-10. Violations and penalties.121
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not to exceed the sum of one
thousand dollars ($1,000.), imprisonment in the county jail for a term not
to exceed ninety (90) days or a period of community service not to exceed
ninety (90) days, or any combination thereof. Any corporation or association
violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof,
be subject to a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.), which may
be recovered in an action of debt. Every day that such violation continues
shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
Chapter 271
TATTOOING AND BODY PIERCING
§ 271-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BODY PIERCING — Piercing the skin for the express intention of insertion
of any object, including but not limited to jewelry; provided, however, that
the piercing of the lobes of the ears shall be specifically excluded from the
purview of this chapter.
B. All pools not equipped with facilities for the recirculation and reuse of
the pool water shall be subject to closure by order of the Board of
Commissioners during any period of emergency water shortage.
A. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer, appointed by the
Board of Commissioners, to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
B. The owner or operator of any pool within the Borough of Collingswood
shall allow said Code Enforcement Officer access to any pool and
appurtenances for the purpose of inspection to ascertain compliance
with this chapter at all reasonable times.
119. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
120. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
121. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 269-7 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 271-1
271:586
CERTIFICATE OF INSPECTION — Written approval from the County Health
Officer or his authorized representative that said tattooing and/or body
piercing establishment has been inspected, and meets all of the terms of
this chapter.
CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION — The certificate held by an operator
upon registration with the Camden County Health Department by meeting
the required provisions of this chapter.
COUNTY HEALTH OFFICER — The Camden County Public Health
Coordinator or his authorized representative of the Camden County
Department of Health and Human Services.
ESTABLISHMENT — The premises wherein tattooing or body piercing is
performed.
OPERATOR — Any individual, firm, company, corporation or association
that owns or operates an establishment where tattooing or body piercing is
performed, and any individual who performs or practices the above on the
person of another.
TATTOO, TATTOOED or TATTOOING — Any method of placing designs,
letters, scrolls, figures, symbols or any marks under the skin with ink dye
or any other substance resulting in the coloration of the skin by the aid of
needles or any other instruments designed to puncture the skin.
§ 271-2. Licensing and operator registration; fees.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of
operating an establishment where tattooing or body piercing is
performed without first obtaining a license from the Borough of
Collingswood to engage in such business in accordance with the
provisions hereof. Also, it shall be unlawful for any operator to engage
in the practice of tattooing or body piercing without first obtaining a
certificate of registration from the Camden County Health Department.
B. Persons applying shall submit to the Camden County Health
Department a medical certificate issued by a physician duly licensed to
practice medicine and surgery in the State of New Jersey stating that
the prospective licensee or registrant is free from all contagious or
communicable diseases or conditions which may endanger the health of
the client.
C. Municipal license.
(1) The annual license fee for engaging in the business of operating a
tattooing and/or body piercing establishment within the Borough of
Collingswood shall be $50 per year. Any person, firm or corporation
desiring to engage, or presently engaged, in the tattooing or body
piercing business shall first apply to the Clerk of the Borough of
Collingswood, in writing, on forms supplied by the clerk of this
municipality for said purpose. The application to the municipality
§ 271-1 TATTOOING AND BODY PIERCING § 271-2
271:587
shall be accompanied by the license fee and shall set forth the
following:
(a) The name and address of the applicant.
(b) The local and permanent addresses and telephone number of
the applicant.
(c) The name, local address and telephone number of the manager
of the business if different from the applicant.
(d) If the applicant is a corporation, the name and address of its
registered agent.
(e) The federal employer identification number if the applicant is a
corporation, partnership or firm or the social security number
if the applicant is a sole proprietorship.
(f) The certificate of inspection and certificate of operator
registration issued by the Camden County Health Department
as parts of the application documents.
(2) All licenses shall expire on the last day of each calendar year. Any
change in ownership shall require a new application and license
with payment of fees therefor.
(3) Each tattooing and body piercing business license issued by the
Clerk of the Borough of Collingswood shall contain a license
number, and no such license shall be transferable. If a renovation of
the tattooing or body piercing establishment is anticipated after
acquisition of the annual license, plans must be submitted to the
Camden County Health Department, and the applicant will be
required to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
D. Operating registration. An applicant shall submit a floor plan of the
establishment to the Camden County Health Officer, prior to initiation
or construction, and shall receive a preopening inspection. All
establishments shall be subject to a periodic compliance and/or annual
inspection by the Camden County Health Department. Every operator
shall be registered with the Camden County Health Department and
shall acquire a certificate of registration, upon payment of a fee, prior
to business operation or practice. Fees for a plan review, inspections
and operator registration shall be payable to the county and established
by the Camden County Board of Chosen Freeholders. These fee
schedules are available from the office of the County Health Officer.
E. Nothing in the foregoing shall be construed so as to affect the practice
of medicine and surgery or any other recognized profession or
occupation by a person duly licensed by the State of New Jersey to
engage in such practice, profession or occupation and whose license
would lawfully authorize tattooing or body piercing.
§ 271-2 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 271-3
271:588
§ 271-3. General provisions.
§ 271-4. Sanitary requirements of facility.
No person, partnership, firm or corporation engaged in the tattooing or
body piercing business shall be issued a municipal mercantile license to
engage in such activity unless the premises at which such activity is to be
conducted, and the equipment to be utilized in conjunction therewith, meets
the following standards and is inspected/approved by the Camden County
Health Department:
A. It shall be a violation of this chapter for anyone or any tattooing or body
piercing business to tattoo or pierce the body of an individual under 18
years of age without written authorization signed by the parent or legal
guardian, as witnessed by the operator. The operator shall be
responsible for maintaining the original consent form for a period of
two years beyond the recipient's eighteenth (18th) birthday.
B. If the applicant is suspected to be under the influence of alcohol, drugs
or any other behavior-modifying substances, the operator must refuse
the applicant.
C. Inquiry shall be made for anyone with a history of recent jaundice,
hepatitis B or HIV/AIDS, and the person shall not be tattooed or body
pierced.
D. Each person wishing to be tattooed or pierced must fill out an
application, which will include the name, date of birth, address and
telephone number of the client, as well as the design and locations of
the tattoo(s) or piercing(s). The operator shall verify applicable
information from a valid photo identification of the applicant and so
note on the application. All records regarding tattooing or body
piercing are to be maintained for a minimum of two years.
E. No person or operator shall state or imply, in any advertisement, that
the tattooing or body piercing establishment is endorsed or approved
by the Camden County Health Department in compliance with terms of
this chapter.
A. Each tattooing and/or body piercing facility shall have a bathroom
accessible to the client and staff. Each bathroom shall be equipped with
a commode and a sink being connected to hot and cold running water.
Soap and sanitary towels or other approved hand-drying devices shall
be available at the sink at all times. Common towels are prohibited. In
addition to the above, each tattooing or body piercing cubicle, or work
station, must be provided with a sink connected to hot and cold running
water. This area shall also be provided with soap and appropriate handdrying
devices.
B. The chair, seat or exam table reserved for the person receiving the
tattooing or body piercing shall be of a material that is smooth and
easily cleanable and constructed of material that is nonabsorbent. Any
§ 271-3 TATTOOING AND BODY PIERCING § 271-4
271:589
§ 271-5. Requirements of tattooing and body piercing practices.
surfaces on the chair, seat or exam table that become exposed to blood
or body fluids must be cleaned and sanitized prior to use by the next
customer.
C. The worktable or counter used by the operator shall be smooth and
easily cleanable and constructed of material that is nonabsorbent.
There shall be a covered junction between the table/counter and the
wall if the table/counter is to be placed against the wall. This table/
counter must be cleaned and sanitized, or use single-use disposable
sheets, utilizing a method approved by the Camden County Health
Department, between customers.
D. The walls in the tattooing or body piercing area shall be smooth and
easily cleanable and constructed of nonabsorbent materials. Floors
shall be kept clean.
E. Lighting within the tattooing or body piercing area shall be adequate so
as to provide a minimum of 100 foot candles in all areas.
F. The work area reserved for the tattooing or body piercing shall be not
less than 100 square feet and shall be separated from other areas of the
establishment by walls or durable partitions extending at least six feet
in height.
G. Any surfaces in the establishment that become exposed to blood or
body fluids must be cleaned and sanitized using a method approved by
the Camden County Health Department.
H. Products used in the cleaning, sanitizing and sterilizing procedures
must be clearly marked and stored in an acceptable manner. Smaller
working containers filled on site from larger containers must be clearly
marked with the name of the product.
I. Proper waste receptacles shall be provided and waste disposed of at
appropriate intervals.
A. Tattooing or body piercing operators.
(1) All operators, while performing services, shall neither be under the
influence of alcohol or drugs nor be infected with hepatitis B, HIV/
AIDS, contagious dermatitis or any other communicable disease.
(2) Hepatitis B preexposure vaccination proof of immunity is required
for all operators. If a person cannot obtain the vaccination for
medical reasons, he/she shall submit to the Camden County Health
Department a letter from his/her physician certifying that the
individual does not have hepatitis B and vaccination is
contraindicated. This certification shall be annually renewed. Any
accidental needle stick injury shall be immediately reported to the
Camden County Health Department.
§ 271-4 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 271-5
271:590
(3) All tattooing or body piercing operators shall attend a training
program sponsored by the Camden County Health Department to
assure basic knowledge on sterile technique and universal
precautions.
(4) Before working on each patron, each operator shall scrub and
thoroughly wash his/her hands with hot water and antiseptic soap.
The hands shall be dried with individual, single use towels.
Fingernails shall be kept clean and short.
(5) Disposable vinyl or latex gloves shall be worn by the operator
during tattooing or body piercing preparation and application to
prevent contact with blood or body fluids. Universal precautions, as
described by the United States Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC), shall be followed. All materials shall be disposed
of in accordance with the waste disposal provisions of this chapter,
after contact with each patron. Hands shall be washed immediately
after removal of gloves. Any skin surface that has contact with
blood shall be washed immediately.
(6) Immediately after tattooing or piercing a patron, the operator shall
advise the patron on the care of the site tattooed or pierced and
shall instruct the patron to consult a physician at the first sign of
infection. Printed instructions regarding these points shall be given
to each patron by the operator.
(7) All infections resulting from the practice of tattooing or body
piercing which become known to the operator shall be promptly
reported to the County Health Officer by the person owning or
operating the body piercing establishment or by the operator.
B. Skin preparation.
(1) Tattooing or body piercing shall be done only on normal healthy
skin surface that is free of cuts, wounds, rashes, boils, pimples,
moles or infection or manifests any evidence of unhealthy
conditions.
(2) Only safety razors with disposable blades shall be used for the skin
preparation. Blades shall be disposed of according to the waste
disposal procedure of this chapter after each use and a new blade
used for each person.
(3) Following shaving, the tattooing area shall be thoroughly cleansed
and scrubbed with tincture of green soap, or its equivalent, and
warm water.
(4) Only petroleum jelly (United States Pharmacopeia or National
Formulary) or antiseptic ointment shall be applied to the tattoo
area prior to tattooing. The ointment shall be applied in a sanitary
manner, disposing of the utensil after spreading. Collapsible tubes
of ointment or jelly may also be used.
§ 271-5 TATTOOING AND BODY PIERCING § 271-5
271:591
(5) Design stencils shall be thoroughly cleansed and rinsed in an
approved germicidal solution for at least 20 minutes or disposed of
following each use.
(6) Only nontoxic dyes or pigments may be used. Premixed, sterile
materials are preferred. Premixed dyes shall be used without
adulteration of the manufacturer's original formula. It shall be the
responsibility of the operator to provide certification to the Camden
County Health Department on the nontoxicity of the dyes or inks at
the time of license application and renewal.
(7) No skin area shall be penetrated, abraded or treated with
chemicals for the purpose of removing, camouflaging or altering
any blemish, birthmark, scar or tattoo.
(8) Ear piercing guns may not be used for body piercing but may only
be used for piercing of the ear lobes.
C. Needles, instruments and supplies.
(1) All clean and ready-to-use needles, gloves, gauze and instruments
shall be kept in a closed glass or metal case or storage cabinet
while not in use. Such cabinet shall be maintained in a sanitary
manner at all times.
(2) Single-service sterilized needles shall be used.
(3) If needles and needle bars are to be reused, these items shall be
steam sterilized (autoclave) before reuse on any customer. Any
other method of sterilization shall be approved by the County
Health Officer.
(4) The sterilizer shall be well-maintained with a tight-fitting gasket
and a clean interior.
(5) The manufacturer's operating instructions and the sterilization
specification shall be at hand. The operation of the sterilizer shall
conform to the manufacturer's specifications with regard to
temperature, pressure and time of the sterilization cycle.
(6) Proper functioning of sterilization cycles shall be verified.
(7) Each item to be sterilized shall be individually wrapped using a
chemical indicator or strip to verify steam exposure.
(8) Any needle that penetrates the skin of the operator shall be
immediately disposed of in accordance with the waste disposal
procedure of this chapter.
(9) If the primary source of sterilization malfunctions, the County
Health Officer shall be notified within 24 hours. In an emergency
situation, the Camden County Health Officer may approve alternate
sterilization techniques.
§ 271-5 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 271-5
271:592
§ 271-6. Imminent closure.
When it appears to the County Health Officer that the operation of the
tattooing or body piercing establishment poses an immediate and imminent
threat to the public health and safety such that irreparable harm will occur
if the tattooing or body piercing establishment is not immediately closed,
the County Health Officer shall have the power to order the immediate
closure of the tattooing or body piercing establishment until such time that
the violations complained of have been corrected.
§ 271-7. Violations and penalties; reimbursable fees; revocation and
suspension.
D. Disposal of wastes.
(1) Needles shall not be bent or broken prior to disposal. Operators
shall take precautions to prevent puncture injuries from
contaminated needles. Needles shall be disposed of directly into a
solid puncture-resistant container.
(2) These medical wastes shall be disposed of by an authorized
contractor as per the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection's regulation.
(3) If blood-contaminated gloves, gauze and other materials are
sterilized by autoclaving, these wastes can be placed for off-site
waste collection.
A. Any person, partnership, firm or corporation, who violates any section
of this chapter, shall be subject to a fine of not less than $250 nor more
than $1,000 for each violation of this chapter, or imprisonment in the
county jail for up to 90 days, or both. Each day that the violation exists
is considered to be a separate offense.
B. Reasonable counsel fees incurred by the Camden County Health
Department in the enforcement of this chapter shall be paid by the
defendant. The amount of such reimbursable fees and costs shall be
determined by the Court hearing the matter.
C. In addition to being subject to the penalties provided herein, any
license or certificate of registration issued under this chapter may be
revoked or suspended for any intentional misstatement in any
application or for any violation of this chapter. No license shall be
revoked or suspended until the licensee has been afforded a hearing.
Notice of the filing of a complaint, which seeks to suspend or revoke any
license or certificate of registration issued under this chapter shall be
served on the defendant personally or on the person designated to
receive service of this chapter. This notice will establish a date for a
hearing to be held not more than 10 days from the date of such notice,
at which time the defendant shall have the right to be represented by
counsel, call witnesses, cross-examine witnesses produced in support of
§ 271-5 TATTOOING AND BODY PIERCING § 271-7
271:593
Chapter 273
TAXATION
the complaint as well as such other rights necessary in order to insure
due process. Should any license or certificate of registration be revoked
or suspended, no part of the license or registration fee shall be
returned.
§ 271-7 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 271-7
273:594
ARTICLE I
Tangible Household Personal Property Exemption
[Adopted 8-16-1971 by Ord. No. 662 as Ch. 90, Art. I, of the 1971
Code]
§ 273-1. Exemption granted.
All tangible household personal property and personal effects located within
the Borough of Collingswood shall not be assessed any taxes.
§ 273-2. Applicability.
This article shall apply to taxes on tangible household personal property
and personal effects due and payable in the year 1962 and thereafter, as
long as this article shall be in effect and shall not affect the obligation,
lien or duty to pay any taxes, interest or penalties which have accrued or
may accrue by virtue of any assessment made or which may be made with
respect to taxes levied for any year prior to the year 1962; nor shall this
article affect the legal authority to assess and collect taxes which may be
or have been due and payable prior to January 1, 1962, together with such
interest and penalties as would have accrued thereon under any provisions
of law amended or repealed hereby; nor shall this article invalidate any
assessments or affect any proceedings for the enforcement thereof pending
upon the effective date of this article or upon January 1, 1962, or during the
period between said dates.
§ 273-3. Filing of certified copy.
A certified copy of this article shall be filed with the Division of Taxation
in the Department of the Treasury of the State of New Jersey and with the
County Board of Taxation of Camden County.
§ 273-1 TAXATION § 273-3
273:595

ARTICLE II
Tax Exemption for Improvements
[Adopted 1-4-1999 by Ord. No. 1173122]
§ 273-4. Supersession.
All previous ordinances adopted by the Borough of Collingswood relating
to abatements and exemptions for properties located in areas in need of
rehabilitation are superseded by this article.
§ 273-5. Authority. [Amended 2-7-2000 by Ord. No. 1207]
The Borough Commission hereby determines to utilize the authority granted
under Article VIII, Section I, paragraph 6 of the New Jersey Constitution
to establish the eligibility of residential dwellings, multiple dwellings,
condominiums and cooperatives and the eligibility of commercial and
industrial structures for exemptions and abatements permitted by P.L. 1991,
c. 441,123 throughout areas designated, or to be designated, as in need of
rehabilitation.
§ 273-6. Time of taking effect.
This article authorizes the Borough of Collingswood to grant exemptions
and abatements to commence and take effect in the 1999 tax year and
thereafter.
§ 273-6.1. Residential dwellings.
A. The Borough Commission determines to provide for the exemption from
taxation of improvements to residential owner-occupied, single-family
dwellings and the owner-occupied residential portion of mixed-use
dwellings more than 20 years old. In determining the value of real
property, the Borough shall regard the first $25,000 in the Assessor's
full and true value of improvements for each dwelling unit primarily and
directly affected by the improvements as not increasing the value of the
property for a period of five years, notwithstanding that the value of the
property to which the improvements are made is increased thereby.
During the exemption period, the assessment on the property shall not
be less than the assessment thereon existing immediately prior to the
improvements, except if an additional abatement is granted for the
property pursuant to Subsection B of this section, or there is damage to
the dwelling through action of the elements sufficient to warrant a
reduction. [Amended 2-1-1999 by Ord. No. 1178]
B. The Borough of Collingswood hereby determines to provide an
additional abatement of some portion of the assessed value for a
122. Editor's Note: This ordinance supersedes former Art. II, Tax Abatement for Home
Improvements, adopted 8-1-1977 by Ord. No. 732 (Ch. 90, Art. II, of the 1971 Code), as
amended.
123. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq.
§ 273-4 TAXATION § 273-6.1
273:597
§ 273-6.2. Commercial and industrial structures and multiple
dwellings, condominiums and cooperatives. [Amended 2-7-2000 by
Ord. No. 1207]
residential dwelling eligible for and receiving an exemption under
Subsection A of this section. An abatement for a dwelling may be
granted for a total of up to five years, and the annual amount granted
to any single property shall not exceed 30% of the annual amount of the
exemption granted under Subsection A of this section for each of the
five years subject to the abatement. [Amended 4-2-2001 by Ord. No.
1251]
C. The Borough of Collingswood hereby determines to provide, in addition
to the exemptions provided in this article, an abatement of the assessed
valuation of conversions of buildings and structures to single family
dwelling use, as it existed immediately prior to the conversion
alteration. [Amended 2-1-1999 by Ord. No. 1178]
D. An abatement for a dwelling may be granted for a total of up to five
years, and the annual amount granted to any single property shall not
exceed 30% of the total cost of the conversion alteration. The total
amount of the abatements granted to any single property shall not
exceed the total cost of the conversion alteration. [Amended 2-1-1999
by Ord. No. 1178]
A. The Borough of Collingswood hereby determines to provide an
exemption from taxation of improvements to all commercial and
industrial structures and multiple dwellings, condominiums and
cooperatives. The exemption shall be granted for a five-year period and
shall not increase the value of the property by the value of the
improvement, notwithstanding that the value of the property to which
the improvement is made is increased thereby. During the exemption
period, the assessment on the property shall not be less than the
assessment thereon existing immediately prior to the improvement
unless there is damage to the structure through action of the elements
sufficient to warrant a reduction. [Amended 2-1-1999 by Ord. No.
1178; 4-2-2001 by Ord. No. 1251]
B. Applicants for tax exemption and abatement for new construction of
commercial or industrial structures and multiple dwellings,
condominiums and cooperatives shall provide the governing body of the
Borough of Collingswood with an application setting forth the following
information:
(1) A general description of a project for which exemption and
abatement is sought.
(2) A legal description of all real estate necessary for the project.
§ 273-6.1 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 273-6.2
273:598
§ 273-6.3. Tax agreements.
The governing body of the Borough of Collingswood may enter into a
written agreement with an applicant for the exemption and abatement
of local property taxes. The agreement shall provide for the applicant to
pay the municipality in lieu of full property taxes an amount equal to
a percentage of taxes otherwise due according to any one basis of the
following three authorized by N.J.S.A. 40A:21-10:
(3) Plans, drawings and other documents as may be required by the
governing body to demonstrate the structure and design of the
project.
(4) A description of the number, classes and type of employees to be
employed at the project site within two years of completion of the
project.
(5) A statement of the reasons for seeking tax exemption and
abatement on the project and a description of the benefits to be
realized by the applicant, if a tax agreement is granted.
(6) Estimates of the cost of completing such project.
(7) A statement showing the real property taxes currently being
assessed at the project site; estimated tax payments that would be
made annually by the applicant on the project during the period of
the agreement; and estimated tax payments that would be made by
the applicant on the project during the first full year following the
termination of the tax agreement.
(8) A description of any lease agreement between the applicant and
proposed users of the project and a history and description of the
users' businesses;
(9) Such other pertinent information as the governing body may
require on a case-by-case basis.
A. Cost basis. The agreement may provide for the applicant to pay to the
municipality in lieu of full property tax payments an amount equal to 2%
of the cost of the project or improvement. For the purposes of the
agreement, "the cost of the project" means only the cost or fair market
value of direct labor and all materials used in the construction,
expansion or rehabilitation of all buildings, structures and facilities at
the project site, including the costs, if any, of land acquisition and land
preparation, provision of access roads, utilities, drainage facilities and
parking facilities, together with architectural, engineering, legal,
surveying, testing and contractors' fees associated with the project,
which the applicant shall cause to be certified and verified to the
governing body by an independent and qualified architect following the
completion of the project.
§ 273-6.2 TAXATION § 273-6.3
273:599
§ 273-6.4. Copy of agreement to be forwarded to Director of the
Division of Local Government Services.
The Clerk of the Borough of Collingswood, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:21-11,
shall forward a copy of all tax agreements entered into pursuant to this
article to the Director of the Division of Local Government Services in the
Department of Community Affairs within 30 days of the date of execution.
§ 273-6.5. Disqualification of property owner. [Amended 4-2-2001
by Ord. No. 1251]
If during any tax year prior to the termination of the tax abatement the
property owner ceases to operate or disposes of the property, or fails to
meet the conditions for qualifying for the abatement, the local property
taxes due for all the prior years subject to abatement and for the current
year shall be payable as if no exemption or abatement had been granted.
B. Gross revenue basis. The agreement may provide for the applicant to
pay to the municipality in lieu of full property tax payments an amount
annually equal to 15% of the annual gross revenues from the project.
For the purposes of the agreement, "annual gross revenues" means the
total annual gross rental and other income payable to the owner of the
project from the project. If, in any leasing, any real estate taxes or
assessments on property included in the project, any premiums for fire
or other insurance on or concerning property included in the project, or
any operating or maintenance expenses ordinarily paid by the landlord
are to be paid by the tenant, then those payments shall be computed
and deemed to be part of the rent and shall be included in the annual
gross revenue. The tax agreement shall establish the method of
computing the revenues and may establish a method of arbitration by
which either the landlord or tenant may dispute the amount of
payments so included in the annual gross revenue.
C. Tax phase-in basis. The agreement may provide for the applicant to pay
to the municipality in lieu of full property tax payments an amount
equal to a percentage of taxes otherwise due, according to the following
schedule:
(1) In the first full tax year after completion, no payment in lieu of
taxes otherwise due.
(2) In the second tax year, an amount not less than 20% of taxes
otherwise due.
(3) In the third tax year, an amount not less than 40% of taxes
otherwise due.
(4) In the fourth tax year, an amount not less than 60% of taxes
otherwise due.
(5) In the fifth tax year, an amount not less than 80% of taxes otherwise
due.
§ 273-6.3 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 273-6.5
273:600
The Tax Collector of the Borough of Collingswood shall notify the property
owner within 15 days of the date of disqualification of the amount of taxes
due. In the event that the subject property has been transferred to a new
owner, and it is determined that the new owner will continue to use the
property pursuant to the qualifying conditions, no tax shall be due, the
exemption and abatement shall continue and the agreement shall remain in
effect.
§ 273-6.6. Additional exemption or abatement.
The Borough of Collingswood hereby determines that an additional
improvement, conversion or construction completed on a property already
granted a previous exemption or abatement pursuant to this article during
the period in which the previous exemption or abatement is in effect shall
qualify for an additional exemption or abatement. The additional
improvement, conversion or construction shall be considered as separate
for purposes of calculating the exemption and abatement, except that the
assessed value of any previous improvement, conversion or construction
shall be added to the assessed valuation as it was prior to that improvement,
conversion or construction for the purpose of determining the assessed
value of the property for which any additional abatement is to be
subtracted.
§ 273-6.7. Delinquent taxes.
No exemption or abatement shall be granted or tax agreement entered
into pursuant to this article for any property for which property taxes are
delinquent or remain unpaid, or for which penalties for nonpayment of taxes
are due. As a condition to granting an exemption or abatement, a property
owner shall be required to waive the filing of any tax appeal for the subject
property for the life of the exemption/abatement.
§ 273-6.8. Application form.
Every application submitted pursuant to this article shall be on a form
prescribed by the Director of the Division of Taxation and shall be filed with
the Tax Assessor of the Borough of Collingswood, as a condition to approval,
within 30 days, including Saturdays and Sundays, following the completion
of the improvement, conversion or construction.
§ 273-6.9. Termination of agreement.
At the termination of an agreement for tax abatement or exemption
authorized pursuant to this article, the project shall be subject to all
applicable real property taxes, as provided by state laws and regulations
and local ordinances, provided that nothing herein shall be deemed to
prohibit the project or improvement at the termination of the agreement
for tax abatement from qualifying for and receiving the full benefits of any
other tax preference provided by law.
§ 273-6.5 TAXATION § 273-6.9
273:601

ARTICLE III
Tax Sales
[Adopted 10-6-1997 by Ord. No. 1138]
§ 273-7. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to permit the Tax Collector to hold tax sales in
the current fiscal year, pursuant to P.L. 1997, c. 99.
§ 273-8. Authorization.
The Tax Collector of the Borough of Collingswood shall be permitted to
enforce tax liens by conducting tax sales in the current fiscal year, provided
that any sale is conducted no earlier than in the last month of the fiscal year,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-19.
§ 273-7 TAXATION § 273-8
273:603
Chapter 277
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 193. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 293.
§ 277-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Includes any individual, copartnership, association or
corporation or joint-stock company, its lessees, trustees or receivers.
TAXICAB — Includes any automobile or motorcar, commonly called "taxi,"
engaged in the business of carrying passengers for hire, which is held out,
announced or advertised to operate or run or which is operated or run
over any of the streets within the Borough of Collingswood and particularly
accepts and discharges such persons as may offer themselves for
transportation from points or places to points or places within or without
said borough, provided that nothing herein contained shall be construed to
affect any public conveyance which is by law subject to state and/or federal
regulation exclusively.
§ 277-2. Licenses required.
From and after the effective date of this chapter, no person shall pick up
for hire any passengers for any taxicab within the Borough of Collingswood
unless both the taxicab and the driver thereof are licensed pursuant to the
terms of this chapter and conform to all the provisions hereof.
§ 277-3. Application for taxicab license; fee.
A. Every application for a taxicab license shall be made to the Board of
Commissioners and shall set forth the full name and address of the
owner, lessee or bailee of the taxicab to be licensed, the make and
character of the taxicab, the length of time it has been in use, the
number of persons said vehicle is suitable for carrying, the motor
number and serial number of said vehicle, the then present value of said
vehicle and the place where it may be inspected by the members of the
Board of Commissioners or its duly authorized representative. Each
application shall be accompanied by a license fee of $200 for a single
taxicab to be licensed, together with a license fee of $25 for each
additional taxicab if there shall be more than one taxicab to be licensed.
[Amended 3-9-2012 by Ord. No. 1506]
B. No taxicab license shall be issued to or renewed for any taxicab unless
and until proof shall have been given to the Borough Clerk that the
§ 273-8 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 277-3
273:604
§ 277-4. Eligibility.
No taxicab license or taxicab driver's license shall be issued:
§ 277-5. Liability insurance. [Amended 3-9-2012 by Ord. No. 1506]
No taxicab license shall be issued until the applicant therefor has filed
with the Borough Clerk an insurance policy of a company duly licensed
to transact business under the insurance laws of this state, providing for
not less than $35,000 of motor vehicle liability insurance coverage or the
amount of motor vehicle liability insurance required pursuant to Section 1
of P.L. 1972, c. 197 (N.J.S.A. 39:6B-1), whichever is greater, to satisfy all
claims for damages, by reason of bodily injury to, or death of, any person
or persons, resulting from, or on account of, an accident, by reason of
ownership, operation, maintenance, or use of such autocab upon any public
street.
taxicab license applicant has adequately provided for the safety of
children, under the age of five years, who are passengers in a licensed
taxicab. In the case of a taxicab fleet, such proof shall consist of a
written policy and posted notice, at the base of operation, and in all
fleet taxicabs, conspicuous to drivers, setting forth that, prior to the
operation of the taxicab, children 18 months of age or younger who
are passengers in a taxicab shall be placed in a federally approved
restraint seat, and children over the age of 18 months, but under the
age of five years, must be placed in a car seat, if riding in the front
seat of a taxicab, or in a lap and/or lap-and-shoulder-harness seat belt,
if riding in the rear seat of a taxicab. A taxicab fleet must at all times
keep and maintain, in fleet vehicles or at the base of operating, a total
number of federally approved car seats equal to 25% of the number of
licensed taxicabs in its fleet, which shall at all times be available for
use by drivers of fleet taxicabs. In the case of an independent owner,
such proof shall consist of proof that the independent owner keeps and
maintains a federally approved car seat in the passenger compartment
or trunk of the licensed vehicle at all times, for use in accordance with
this section. [Amended 1-3-1995 by Ord. No. 1067]
A. To an individual who is not a citizen of the United States or who has
been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude.
B. To a copartnership unless all the members thereof are citizens of the
United States and none has been convicted of a crime involving moral
turpitude.
C. To a corporation unless each of the officers, directors and stockholders
thereof is a citizen of the United States and none has been convicted of
a crime involving moral turpitude.
§ 277-3 TAXATION § 277-6
273:605
§ 277-6. Power of attorney.
No taxicab license shall be issued until the applicant therefor shall have
delivered to said Borough Clerk, concurrently with the filing of the
insurance policy referred to in § 277-5 hereof, a power of attorney executed
by said applicant wherein and whereby said applicant shall appoint the
Treasurer of the Borough of Collingswood his, her or its true and lawful
attorney for the purpose of acknowledging service of any process out of a
court of competent jurisdiction to be served against the insured by virtue of
the indemnity granted under the insurance policy filed; and any license for
a taxicab issued upon any such application shall continue effective and the
operation of any taxicab thereunder shall be permitted only so long as said
power of attorney shall remain in effect and unrevoked.
§ 277-7. License card for taxicab; contents; display of license card
and schedule of charges; transferability.
If the application for a taxicab license shall be granted, there shall be
issued to the applicant a license card in evidence thereof, setting forth
the name and address of the licensee, the number of the license and the
make and character of the taxicab licensed, together with the motor number
and serial number of said vehicle and the maximum number of passengers
to be carried therein at any one time. Said license card shall be signed
by the Borough Clerk and shall at all times be prominently displayed and
adequately protected in the interior of any taxicab so licensed so that the
fact thereof shall be at all times in full view and plainly legible to any
passenger seated on the rear seat of such taxicab. There shall also be
displayed in the interior of said taxicab so licensed a statement or schedule
of the charges for the use thereof. (Any taxicab license issued pursuant to
this chapter may be transferred to another vehicle owned or in the custody
of the same licensee, upon the payment of a transfer fee of five and upon
the approval of the Board of Commissioners.)
§ 277-8. Application for taxicab driver's license; background check;
fee.
Every application for a taxicab driver's license shall be made to the Board
of Commissioners and shall set forth the full name and address of the
applicant, his or her age, whether or not he or she is a citizen of the United
States. Such applicant shall also furnish satisfactory evidence that he or
she has received a driver's license from the Motor Vehicle Department of
the State of New Jersey. No taxicab driver's license shall be issued to any
person who shall be under 19 years of age. Each applicant must supply
proof of a criminal history record background check. A license fee of $50
shall accompany each application for a taxicab driver's license.
§ 277-9. License card for taxicab driver; contents; display.
If the application for a taxicab driver's license shall be granted, there shall
be issued to the applicant a license card in evidence thereof, setting forth
§ 277-6 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 277-9
273:606
the number of the license, the name and address of the licensee and his or
her age. Said license card shall be signed by the Borough Clerk and shall at
all times be prominently displayed and adequately protected in the interior
of any taxicab operated by the licensee so that the fact thereof shall be at
all times in full view of and plainly legible to any passenger seated on the
rear seat of such taxicab.
§ 277-10. Oath or affirmation.
Every application for a taxicab license or a taxicab driver's license shall
be verified by the oath or affirmation of the applicant or applicants if an
individual or copartnership and, if a corporation, shall be verified by the
oath or affirmation of an officer thereof.
§ 277-11. Expiration of licenses; renewal; fees nonrefundable.
Every license issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter shall expire at
12:00 midnight on the 31st day of December of the year in which issued,
unless sooner surrendered, suspended or revoked; provided, however, that
if an application for a renewal shall have been filed on or before December
31, said taxicab may be operated and said driver may operate a taxicab,
pending the issuance of a new license or licenses, until the 15th day of
January next succeeding. No license fee payable under this chapter shall
be prorated nor shall any part thereof be refunded for any reason unless a
license shall be refused.
§ 277-12. Lettering specifications on vehicles.
Every taxicab so licensed shall have painted on both sides thereof the word
"Taxi" or "Cab" in letters at least three inches high or the name of the
operating owner containing the word "Taxi" or "Cab" or "Taxicab."
§ 277-13. Hours of operation to be contained on taxicab
application.
Every application for a taxicab license shall, in addition to all of the other
requirements contained in this chapter, contain a statement as to the hours
when said taxicab will be in operation for public use; and the failure of
any licensee to provide taxi service to the general public during the hours
named in the application shall be sufficient cause for revocation of any
license.
§ 277-14. Revocation or suspension of licenses.
The Board of Commissioners, after notice and hearing, may revoke or
suspend any license issued pursuant to this chapter if the licensee has been
once convicted of a crime in this or any other jurisdiction or has been
convicted of being a disorderly person or of a violation of Title 39, Motor
Vehicles and Traffic Regulation, of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey or
who or which violates any provision of this chapter or has any judgment
unsatisfied against him, her or it arising out of an automobile accident or
§ 277-9 TAXATION § 277-14
273:607
who or which has made false answers in his, her or its application for such
license or any renewal thereof or who or which has failed or fails to render
reasonably prompt, safe, proper and adequate taxicab service or who or
which has not complied fully with all the requirements of this chapter with
respect to such license. Any taxicab driver's license may be revoked or
suspended by the Board of Commissioners after notice and hearing if the
licensee has in any degree contributed to any injury to person or damage
to property arising out of the negligent operation of a motor vehicle or if
said taxicab driver shall have any infectious, communicable or contagious
disease. Any taxicab license may be revoked or suspended by the Board of
Commissioners after notice and hearing if the taxicab licensed is dangerous
to the safety or health of the occupants or others by reason of unsafe or
unsanitary conditions or if the insurance policy required by § 277-5 hereof
has once lapsed or if such insurance coverage is not maintained at all times
or if said licensed taxicab shall be used for any improper, immoral or illegal
business or purpose.
§ 277-15. Taxi stands.
§ 277-16. Child safety requirements. [Added 1-3-1995 by Ord. No.
1067124 ]
A. No person, partnership, association or corporation to whom a taxicab
license has been issued shall operate or maintain a taxi stand on any of
the public highways or elsewhere within the Borough of Collingswood
without express approval of the Board of Commissioners.
B. The granting of a taxicab license or licenses shall not be construed as
permission to operate and maintain a taxi stand or place of business
within the Borough of Collingswood unless request therefor was
contained or shall hereafter be contained in the application for any
taxicab license or licenses, and no such taxi stand or place of business
shall be maintained without specific authority first being given by the
Board of Commissioners.
A. Every person operating a taxicab who is transporting a child under the
age of five years on roadways, streets or highways of this borough shall
be responsible for the protection of the child by properly using a child
passenger restraint system that complies with federal vehicle safety
standards.
B. No driver shall operate a taxicab in which a child five years of age or
younger is a passenger unless:
(1) A child 18 months of age or younger is in a car seat, regardless of
whether such child is in the front or rear seat.
124. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former § 277-16,
Violations and penalties, as § 277-17.
§ 277-14 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 277-16
273:608
§ 277-17. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-15-1994 by Ord. No.
1058]
Except as may be provided by N.J.S.A. 48:16-12, any person violating any
of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished either
by imprisonment in the county jail for any term not exceeding 90 days, by a
fine not exceeding $1,000 or by a period of community service for not more
than 90 days, or any combination thereof, in the discretion of the court.
Chapter 281
TOBACCO SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Drugs and drug paraphernalia — See Ch. 149.
§ 281-1. Prohibition of tobacco sales to minors; prohibition of use
of tobacco by minors. [Amended 1-3-2000 by Ord. No. 1202;
3-6-2006 by Ord. No. 1397]
(2) A child over 18 months of age, but less than five years, is in a car
seat, if a front seat passenger, or is in a lap belt or lap belt and
shoulder harness, if a rear seat passenger.
A. It shall be unlawful to sell tobacco to a person under 19 years of age.
B. Sign requirements. A sign not less than six inches by eight inches shall
be posted in a conspicuous place near each cash register in all retail
establishments which sell tobacco products, containing the following
language:
SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF 19 IS PROHIBITED BY
LAW.
C. Legal proof of age must be shown. A person who sells or offers to sell a
tobacco product to a person under 19 years of age may be prosecuted in
accordance with state and local ordinances.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person under 19 years of age to smoke or
use a tobacco product in any public place or to possess in open view a
cigarette or tobacco product, an open cigarette pack, opened carton or
other opened container (as evidenced by a broken seal) holding a
tobacco product.
E. The Drug-Free School Zone Map,125 adopted by the Borough of
Collingswood, is hereby amended to include cigarette-free school zone,
whereby it shall be unlawful for anyone to sell, give or permit to be sold,
125. Editor's Note: See Ch. 149, Art. II, Drug-Free School Zones.
§ 277-16 TOBACCO SALES § 281-1
281:609
§ 281-2. Identification required. [Amended 3-6-2006 by Ord. No.
1397]
It shall be unlawful for a tobacco retailer to sell, or permit to be sold,
tobacco to any individual without requesting and examining identification
from the purchaser positively establishing the purchaser's age as 19 years
or greater, unless the seller has some other conclusive basis for determining
the buyer is over the age of 19 years.
§ 281-3. Prohibition of tobacco vending machines and self-service
tobacco displays.
§ 281-4. Removal of tobacco vending machines and self-service
tobacco displays.
All tobacco vending machines and self-service displays made unlawful by
the terms of this chapter shall be removed within 30 days from the effective
date of this chapter.
§ 281-5. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HEALTH DEPARTMENT — The Camden County Health Department, and
may be referred to herein in this chapter as the "Department."
HEALTH OFFICER — The Administrative Officer of the Camden County
Health Department.
or given, to a person under 19 years of age, tobacco in any form within
the areas on or within 1,000 feet of such school property.
F. It shall be also unlawful for a person under 19 years of age to smoke or
use a tobacco product, or possess in open view a cigarette or tobacco
product, an open cigarette pack, opened carton or other opened
container (as evidenced by a broken seal) holding a tobacco product in
and/or on school property, as referenced in the Cigarette-Free/Drug-
Free School Zone Map.
G. It shall be unlawful for a parent, legal guardian or other persons acting
in place of a parent or legal guardian or person, who is responsible for
the care and welfare of a person under the age of 19 years, to allow that
person to possess any cigarettes made of tobacco, or of any other
substances, which can be smoked, or any cigarette paper or tobacco in
any form, including but not limited to smokeless tobacco.
A. It shall be unlawful to offer for sale or to sell tobacco through a tobacco
vending machine in the Borough of Collingswood.
B. Self-service tobacco displays are prohibited in all retail establishments.
§ 281-1 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 281-5
281:610
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any member of the Borough of
Collingswood Police Department.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, cooperative, association,
corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee or any
other legal entity.
SELF-SERVICE DISPLAYS — Any racks, stands, or other display devices
from which a customer may take tobacco products directly with only
payment to be made to the tobacco retailer.
TOBACCO — Any product from the tobacco plant for the purpose of
smoking, chewing, inhaling and other personal use including cigars,
chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff and cigarettes in any form.
TOBACCO PRODUCT — Any product made from the tobacco plant or
containing tobacco leaf for the purpose of smoking, chewing, inhaling or
other personal use, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe
tobacco, chewing tobacco, snuff and dipping tobacco.[Added 1-3-2000 by
Ord. No. 1202]
TOBACCO RETAILER — Any person or entity that operates a store, stand,
booth, concession or place at which sales of tobacco are made to purchasers
for consumption or use; also, a person or entity that owns, operates or uses
a vending machine and/or a vending machine location.
VENDING MACHINE — Any automated, self-service device which, upon
insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment, dispenses
cigarette or other tobacco products.
§ 281-6. Enforcement; summons and complaint; obstruction of
enforcement officer.
A. Whenever the Health Officer or his/her designee or an enforcement
officer reasonably believes that there exists a violation of this chapter,
such officer or designee may issue a summons and complaint not later
than 60 days after discovery of the alleged violation. The complaint
shall be written and shall state with reasonable particularity the nature
of the violation, including reference to the article and section of this
chapter alleged to have been violated. The complaint shall be delivered
or sent by certified mail to the alleged violator.
B. The Health Officer, designee or law enforcement officer charged with
enforcement of this chapter, after giving proper identification, may
inspect any matter, thing, premises, place, person, record, vehicle,
incident or event as necessary.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to molest, willfully oppose, verbally
abuse or otherwise obstruct the Health Officer, designee or law
enforcement officer, who may request the assistance of the Borough of
Collingswood Police Department or other police agency or peace officer
when necessary to execute his or her official duty in a manner
prescribed by law.
§ 281-5 TOBACCO SALES § 281-6
281:611
§ 281-7. Severability; construction of provisions; repealer.
§ 281-8. Violations and penalties; suspension of license. [Amended
1-3-2000 by Ord. No. 1202; 3-6-2006 by Ord. No. 1397]
D. Citizens may bring complaints against violators of this chapter.
A. If any chapter, section, subsection or paragraph of this chapter is
declared to be unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative, in whole or in
part by a court of competent jurisdiction, such chapter, section,
subsection or paragraph shall, to the extent that it is not
unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative, remain in full force and effect,
and no such determination shall be deemed to invalidate the remaining
chapters, sections, subsections or paragraphs of this chapter.
B. This chapter shall be liberally construed for the health, safety, and
welfare of the people of the Borough of Collingswood.
C. All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
A. Unless otherwise provided by law, statute or ordinance, any person
violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, pay a penalty of not less than $100 nor more than $500 for each
offense. Complaint shall be made in the Municipal Court or before such
other judicial officer having authority under the laws of the State of
New Jersey.
B. Each sale of tobacco to a person under 19 years of age shall constitute a
separate violation. Each day that a tobacco vending machine or selfservice
tobacco display remains on any premises or tobacco is sold
without the required sign shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense.
C. The Camden County Health Department may suspend the retail food
establishment license of any person convicted of violation of this
chapter, for a period of not more than three days, pursuant to the
authority of the Health Department to license and regulate food
establishments, as provided by N.J.S.A. 26:3-31(c).
D. Unless otherwise provided by law, a person under 19 years of age
charged under § 281-1D and F, as a first offense with the use or
purchase of a tobacco product, shall be served with a written warning,
which shall inform the person of subsequent penalties. If that person is
a minor, a copy of said warning shall be sent to the minor's parents.
E. Repeat minor offenders, who are found guilty of violating this chapter,
shall, in addition to the penalties provided for in this Code, be subject to
a period of community service in accordance with the policies and
procedures of juvenile administration by the Camden County Juvenile
Court and the Borough of Collingswood Police Department.
§ 281-6 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 281-8
281:612
Chapter 282
TOWING AND STORAGE OF MOTOR VEHICLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 57. Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 285.
§ 282-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to set forth regulations governing operators
engaged in the business of removing and storing motor vehicles in the
Borough of Collingswood. The Borough has determined that such
regulations are in the best interest of the residents of the Borough of
Collingswood and comply with New Jersey statutes governing the removal
of unauthorized vehicles from public and private property, N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.49 through 40:48-2.55, and the New Jersey Local Public Contracts
Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
§ 282-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
ABANDONED — All meanings that are given to such term pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et seq.
MOTOR VEHICLE — All meanings that are given to such term pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 39:1-1, et seq.
OPERATOR — All towing and/or storage companies contracting or seeking
to contract with the Borough of Collingswood for the removal and/or
storage of motor vehicles in the Borough.
§ 282-3. Selection and contracting with operators.
The Borough shall select and contract with operator(s) to remove from
private or public property and to store motor vehicles which are disabled,
stolen, abandoned or involved in suspected criminal activity. The bid
process and contracts with the operators shall comply with one of the
methods set forth in this section.
F. The Municipal Police Department, or any citizen, may enforce this
chapter by filing a complaint in the Municipal Court, provided that no
citizen may file a complaint prior to 120 days after the date that this
chapter takes effect.
A. Contracts without public bidding. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:11-5(1)(u),
the Borough may contract for the removal and storage of motor vehicles
without the need for public bidding if such contracts include reasonable
§ 281-8 TOWING AND STORAGE OF MOTOR § 282-3
282:613
§ 282-4. Services to be provided by operator.
The Borough shall be authorized to engage the services of an operator to
perform the following services:
nonexclusionary and nondiscriminatory terms and conditions, including
the provision of such services on a rotating basis at the rates and
charges set forth in § 282-5.
B. Contracts as a result of public bidding. Pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:11-5(1)(u), all contracts for the removal and storage of motor
vehicles containing rates and terms other than those as provided in
Subsection A shall only be entered into by the Borough with the lowest
responsible bidder after the public bidding requirements contained in
the Local Public Contract Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1, et seq., have been
satisfied. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:11-15(22), a contract awarded
pursuant to this Subsection B shall be awarded for a term not exceeding
three years.
A. Removal.
(1) The operator shall be required to respond to Borough Police
Department calls to remove vehicles involved in accidents or
suspected criminal activity or which are disabled, reported stolen
or abandoned. Notification to the operator shall follow the
procedures set forth in Chapter 285, Vehicles, Abandoned, of the
Borough Code.
(2) The operator shall be available to receive calls from the Borough
Police Department seven days a week, 24 hours each day. The
operator shall have the appropriate vehicle on the scene anywhere
within the Borough limits within 20 minutes from time of
notification, under normal conditions, to remove disabled or
abandoned vehicles unless the Borough Police Department
determines it is not a threat to vehicle traffic or persons and may be
removed during regular business hours. In the case of an accident,
the operator must arrive at the scene within 20 minutes, under
normal conditions, after notification from the Borough Police
Department. Removal of the vehicle shall be performed under the
direct supervision of the Borough Police Department.
(3) In the event that the operator has been summoned by the Borough
for the purpose of towing a vehicle and the owner of the vehicle as
well as the owner's tower arrive at the scene prior to removal of the
vehicle by the operator, then, and in that event, the owner is
entitled to remove his or her vehicle.
(4) The owner of private property will be responsible for the removal of
any unattended or disabled vehicle from his or her property in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-5 and 36:4-56.6,
and may employ a towing contractor of his or her choice. However,
§ 282-3 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 282-4
282:614
the Borough Police Department reserves the right to impound a
motor vehicle and authorize towing pursuant to this chapter if any
such vehicle has been reported as stolen or having been used in
the commission of suspected criminal activity or otherwise must be
secured for investigative purposes.
B. Storage.
(1) Motor vehicles that are removed by order of the Borough Police
Department must be delivered to an area owned or leased by the
operator that complies with the specifications established by the
Borough.
(2) No removed vehicle may be parked upon a public street. All
removed vehicles must be stored by the operator within an
approved storage area.
(3) All vehicles, regardless of condition, must be stored in an area on
the operator's property that will allow for inspection and
subsequent removal.
(4) Except in the case of removing and storing an abandoned motor
vehicle pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:10A-1 and Chapter 285, Vehicles,
Abandoned, of the Borough Code, within 24 hours of receiving a
vehicle the operator shall notify, by letter, phone or in person, the
owner of the removed vehicle of the daily cost of storage as well as
the location of the vehicle and the removal procedures. If the
operator determines, after reasonable efforts that it is not able to
notify the vehicle owner, it shall immediately inform the Borough
Police Department of this fact and the basis for such determination.
(5) Vehicles that are designated as abandoned by the Borough Police
Department will be towed to a storage lot owned or leased by the
operator. However, the Borough shall retain the right to have
abandoned vehicles towed to Borough-owned property and pay the
operator the appropriate towing fee. Notification to the owner will
be provided by the Borough Police Department pursuant to N.J.S.A.
39:10A-1.
(6) The Borough shall not be responsible for any charges for any
vehicle stored under the provisions of this chapter.
C. Records and inspection.
(1) The operator shall maintain records of all vehicles towed, stored
and released by it pursuant to its contract with the Borough.
Records shall be maintained for no less than the twelve-month
period following the expiration of the contract with the Borough.
(2) The operator shall maintain a record provided by the Borough
Police Department of all property found anywhere in a towed
vehicle, including the trunk and glove compartment, if open or key
§ 282-4 TOWING AND STORAGE OF MOTOR § 282-4
282:615
available, and the operator shall be responsible to safeguard and
release the contents to the owner.
(3) The Chief of the Borough Police Department, or his designee, shall
be permitted access to any part of the storage area, including both
indoor and outdoor areas, at any time of the day or night for
inspection purposes.
(4) Authorized representatives of the Borough Police Department shall
have access to any of the records required to be maintained by the
operator.
(5) Vehicle owners shall have the right to remove their property from
the stored vehicle unless otherwise directed by the Borough Police
Department. The vehicle owner or his or her representative shall
have the right to take photos of a stored vehicle for insurance
purposes.
D. Release of impounded/towed motor vehicles.
(1) Vehicles must be available for release between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and 9:00 a.m. and
12:00 noon on Saturdays, except on legal holidays. The operator
shall provide the Borough Police Department with a list of the legal
holidays, on an annual basis, when vehicles will not be available for
release.
(2) The approved rates for services performed under the contract with
the Borough shall be posted in a conspicuous place, visible to the
public, at the operator's storage/garage area.
(3) The operator shall be required to prepare an invoice for charges
pertaining to each towed and/or stored vehicle to be presented to
the claimant of each vehicle. The invoice shall itemize all services
rendered.
(4) The Borough shall not be responsible for the payment of any
charges due and owing from a claimant of a vehicle, nor shall it be
responsible to assist the operator in collecting any such charges.
(5) The operator shall not release a vehicle pursuant to its contract
with the Borough until such time that a claimant provides a release
for the vehicle that he or she has obtained from the Borough Police
Department, a paid receipt by the Borough Clerk evidencing that
all amounts owed to the Borough connected with the removal,
towing and storage of such vehicle have been fully paid pursuant to
§ 285-7 of the Borough Code and proof of ownership of the vehicle.
E. Disposal of unclaimed vehicles.
(1) The operator shall notify the Borough Police Department of any
vehicles that remain unclaimed on its lot for at least 30 days.
§ 282-4 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 282-4
282:616
§ 282-5. Rates and terms of contracts.
§ 282-6. Minimum standards of operator performance.
The following minimum standards shall be required of all operators seeking
to contract with the Borough for towing and storage services:
(2) The Borough Police Department, with the assistance of the
operator, may secure any motor vehicle junk titles. A motor vehicle
not claimed by its owner will be disposed of in accordance with
New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission regulations or as otherwise
permitted pursuant to applicable New Jersey statutes.
(3) Abandoned vehicles may be disposed of as set forth in N.J. S.A.
39:10A-1, 39:10A-2 and 39:10A-3. No charges or liens shall accrue
against the Borough for the towing or storage of unclaimed or
abandoned vehicles. All funds collected from the sale of abandoned
vehicles will be first applied toward the towing and storage charges
for any such vehicle with the balance, if any, retained by the
Borough. In addition, the operator shall have the right to bid on
such vehicles at the time of public sale by the Borough.
(4) The Borough shall retain the right to sell any abandoned vehicle
towed to Borough-owned property and to retain any funds collected
from the sale of such vehicles.
A. Whether the contract for towing of motor vehicles and storage is
entered into by the Borough pursuant to § 282-3A or B, the operator
may not charge rates in excess of the usual, customary and reasonable
rates of operators for towing and storing motor vehicles pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.54.
B. The maximum rates which can be charged by operators shall comply
with any guidelines established by the New Jersey Division of Consumer
Affairs in the Department of Law and Public Safety. Unless the Borough
otherwise agrees, no amount for removal, storage or any other service
provided by the operator may be charged to the Borough. In the event
that the Borough agrees to pay the operator for storage of removed
motor vehicles, such expense for storage shall not exceed any limits
established by law, including the limits set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.50
or any successor statutes.
C. In no event shall any operator charge rates nor provide services in a
manner which discriminates against or excludes any person or group of
persons in violation of any applicable law. If any municipally owned
vehicles require towing, there shall be no charge to the Borough.
A. Equipment.
(1) The operator must maintain the following equipment:
(a) One heavy-duty wrecker, over ten-ton capacity.
§ 282-4 TOWING AND STORAGE OF MOTOR § 282-6
282:617
(b) One medium-duty wrecker, ten-ton capacity.
(c) One light-duty wrecker, four-ton capacity.
(d) One flatbed truck.
(2) Wreckers used by the operator must be of such construction to tow
any type of vehicle and to pass inspection of the Borough Police
Department.
(3) Each vehicle shall be equipped with a shovel, broom and any other
equipment necessary to clean up broken glass and any other debris
from the scene of an accident. It shall be the operator's
responsibility to clean up such debris if requested to do so by any
officer of the Borough Police Department at the scene of the
accident.
(4) Wreckers shall be maintained in good condition, comply with all
applicable provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et seq., available 24 hours a
day and identified on each side with the name and address of the
operator.
(5) At the time of submission of its bid, the operator shall submit to the
Borough satisfactory proof of ownership of the required number of
wreckers necessary to meet the Borough's requirements.
B. Land. The operator must provide proof to the Borough that it owns or
leases a storage area capable of storing a minimum of 25 vehicles. The
storage area must be in the Borough and no more than five miles from
the Collingswood Police Station for the convenience of owners of towed
vehicles and the Borough Police Department. If the operator is the
property owner of the storage area, it is to submit with its bid a certified
copy of the deed to the property. If the operator leases the storage area,
a copy of the lease, including a legal description of the property, shall be
submitted with the bid. The lease term must extend for a period no less
than six months beyond the proposed expiration date of the contract to
be entered with the Borough for the services to be provided. The
storage area must be enclosed with a fence of sturdy construction,
measure no less than six feet in height and be able to be secured when
unattended.
C. Alternative arrangements. A proposal for the services to be provided
under this chapter may be made jointly by separate companies, one in
the towing business which can meet all the requirements of this chapter
and the other owning or leasing property containing a storage facility
which meets all the requirements for storing towed vehicles. Any such
proposal must provide that the owner/operator of the storage facility
shall be responsible for receiving the required payment for towing and
storage. Proof of a written agreement or of an agreement which is
conditioned on the award of the contract by the Borough must be
submitted with any bid. The service, equipment and storage facility are
subject to periodic inspections and approval by the Borough.
§ 282-6 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 282-7
282:618
§ 282-7. Officer designated to enforce ordinance; complaint
procedures.
A designated representative of the Borough Police Department shall enforce
the requirements of this chapter as well as the terms and conditions of
any contract entered into by the Borough for the services to be provided
and to receive complaints from owners of motor vehicles that have been
towed and stored in the Borough without their consent. Pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.54, an individual who has had his or her motor vehicle towed and
stored in the Borough without his or her consent shall be entitled to contest
the removal, storage and/or rates charged. The complaining individual shall
submit his or her objection in writing to the designated representative of
the Borough Police Department within seven days of the contested action.
The written objection must detail the nature of the dispute, including the
time, place, date and rates charged, as well as any other information which
may aid in resolution. Within 14 days, the designated representative of the
Borough Police Department shall respond in writing to the complainant.
§ 282-8. Publication of rates and services.
The rates and charges in effect within the Borough, as established in
§ 282-5 of this chapter and the complaint procedures set forth in § 282-7 of
this chapter shall be posted during normal business hours in the office of
the Borough Clerk, the Borough Police Department and the offices of any
operators contracting with the Borough.
Chapter 283
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Shade tree advisory committee — See Ch. 72.
§ 283-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Tree Protection Ordinance."
§ 283-2. Purpose.
The intent and purpose of this chapter is to establish standards for the
Borough of Collingswood for the protection and preservation of certain
trees and shrubs, as defined herein growing in a natural state within areas
of borough curbstrips or borough easements.
§ 282-7 TOWING AND STORAGE OF MOTOR § 283-3
282:619
§ 283-3. Definitions.
The meaning of the words when used in this chapter shall be given their
common and ordinary meaning except when otherwise specified. The
following word is specifically defined for purposes of this chapter:
TREE — Any woody perennial plant having a diameter of 1 1/2 inches or
greater measured at a point four feet above the ground.
§ 283-4. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all trees, as defined in this chapter, growing upon
any borough curbstrip or borough easement.
§ 283-5. Trees on curbside, public property and in public parks.
[Amended 12-1-2008 by Ord. No. 1457]
§ 283-6. Concrete repairs when tree roots are involved.
See Appendix A, attached.126
§ 283-7. Utility trimming.
A. No person(s) is permitted to trim, top or remove any limbs, trunks,
branches or roots of any curbside tree, a tree located in a public park or
a tree located on public property.
B. No person(s) is permitted to nail, tack or staple any sign or notices into
any limbs, trunks, branches or roots of any curbside tree, a tree located
in a public park or a tree on public property.
A. Any person or persons, corporation or corporations and/or utility
companies must submit a written plan for any tree trimming prior to the
commencement of work to the office of the Superintendent of Public
Works or his designee for his approval. This plan must be submitted two
weeks prior to the work. Upon approval, the Superintendent of Public
Works shall be notified 24 hours in advance of the actual start of the
work. In emergency situations (i.e., windstorms, hurricanes, sewer
outages), this section shall be deemed inapplicable. However, if
possible, the Superintendent of Public Works shall be notified prior to
work. Violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be
punishable as provided for in § 283-9, Violations and penalties.
B. Each tree which is deemed to have been removed in violation of this
chapter, shall be considered a separate offense.
C. Nothing herein shall be deemed to limit the remedies available to the
Borough of Collingswood or other person seeking to compel
enforcement of this chapter.
126. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 283-3 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 283-8
282:620
§ 283-8. Planting of trees.
No tree should be planted in the curbstrip of the borough's easement
without prior approval from the Shade Tree Advisory Board.
§ 283-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s), corporations(s) and/or utility companies violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000,
imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed 90 days or a period of
community service for not more than 90 days, or any combination thereof,
at the discretion of the court.
Chapter 285
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Development regulations — See Ch. 141.
Littering and dumping — See Ch. 197.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 211.
Solid waste — See Ch. 261.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 265.
Vehicle sales lots — See Ch. 289.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 293.
§ 285-1. Parking or storage on public or private property. [Amended
11-3-2003 by Ord. No. 1326]
Except as may be provided in Ordinance No. 1325 (An Ordinance Governing
Motor Vehicle Towing and Storage Services),127 it shall be unlawful for any
person to park, store, leave or permit the parking, storing or leaving of any
licensed or unlicensed motor vehicle which is in a rusted, wrecked, junked
or partially dismantled or inoperative or abandoned condition, whether
attended or not, upon any public or private property within the Borough
of Collingswood, unless the same is enclosed within a building in which
Chapter 141, Development Regulations, permits the storage of motor
vehicles.
§ 285-2. Parking or storing inoperable vehicles on private property.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any motor
vehicle or parts of motor vehicles so in need of repair as to render the
same incapable of being readily operated under its own power on the land
of another without permission of the owner, possessor or occupant of such
land.
127. Editor's Note: See Ch. 282, Towing and Storage of Motor Vehicles.
§ 283-8 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 285-3
285:621
§ 285-3. Vehicles deemed nuisances; duty to remove.
Any motor vehicle parked, stored, left or permitted to be parked, stored or
left in violation of the provisions of § 285-1 hereof shall constitute rubbish
and unsightly debris and a nuisance detrimental to the health, safety and
welfare of the inhabitants of the Borough of Collingswood; and it shall be
the duty of the registered or other owner of such vehicle and it shall also be
the duty of the owner of the private property or of the lessee or other person
in possession of the private property upon which such vehicle is located
either to remove the same from the Borough of Collingswood or to have the
same housed in a building where it will not be visible from the street or
other private property.
§ 285-4. Notice to remove.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police of the Borough of Collingswood
to give written notice to the registered or other owner of any motor vehicle
which is in violation of this chapter or, in the alternative, to give such
notice to the owner or lessee of the private property upon which such
motor vehicle is situated to the effect that the parking, storing or leaving or
permitting of the parking, storing or leaving of such vehicle is in violation
of this chapter and also demanding that said vehicle be removed from the
Borough of Collingswood within 72 hours or that within 72 hours the same
be housed in a building where it will not be visible from the street or
adjoining private property. Said notice shall be given by personal service or
by registered or certified mail.
§ 285-5. Failure to comply with notice.
If notice is given as is provided in § 285-4 hereof and the person upon whom
said notice and demand is made shall fail to meet the requirements of said
notice, then said person shall be in violation of this chapter.
§ 285-6. Removal by police; notice of impoundment; costs; final
disposition of vehicle.
Notwithstanding the provisions of § 285-5 hereof and regardless of whether
or not the person or persons mentioned therein have been charged with
a violation of this chapter, the Chief of Police, after giving notice required
by § 285-4 hereof and if the requirements of such notice have not been
complied with upon the expiration of said seventy-two-hour period, may
cause the vehicle or vehicles to be removed to such suitable place for
storage as may be designated by the Chief of Police. Within 48 hours after
the removal and storage of such vehicle or vehicles, the Chief of Police shall
give notice in the manner prescribed in § 285-4 hereof to the registered
owner or other owner of such vehicle, if known, or also the owner, lessee
or person in possession of the land from which the vehicle was removed
and, by said notice, shall advise that the vehicle has been impounded and
stored for violation of this chapter. The notice shall include the location of
the place where the vehicle is stored, shall state the costs incurred by the
§ 285-3 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 285-6
285:622
borough for the removal or towing and the storage charges per day accrued
or accruing and shall advise that if such charges are not paid in full to the
Borough Clerk within a period of 10 days immediately following the giving
of such notice, said vehicle shall be deemed to have been abandoned and
thereafter will be discarded as junk or may, in the discretion of the Chief
of Police, be sold as an abandoned vehicle in accordance with the Revised
Statutes of the State of New Jersey.
§ 285-7. Release of impounded vehicles; payment of charges
required.
After any vehicle is impounded and stored as aforesaid, the same shall not
be released by the appointed keeper thereof until all charges connected
with the removal, towing and storage of such vehicle have been fully paid
as evidenced by the Borough Clerk's paid receipt.
§ 285-8. Vehicle repairs on streets.
It shall be unlawful to disassemble, construct, reconstruct, repair and/or
service motor vehicles of any kind in or upon any street, road, alley or other
public thoroughfare in the Borough of Collingswood, except for emergency
service; provided, however, that said emergency service shall not extend
over a period of two hours and that the same does not interfere with or
impede the flow of traffic.
§ 285-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-15-1994 by Ord. No.
1058]
Any person who shall be in violation of this chapter and be convicted thereof
shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000, imprisonment in the
county jail for a term not to exceed 90 days or a period of community service
for not more than 90 days, or any combination thereof.
Chapter 289
VEHICLE SALES LOTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Development regulations — See Ch. 141.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 193.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 285.
§ 289-1. License required.
From and after the passage of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any
person, firm or corporation to use any vacant lot, vacant property or any
portion of a lot outside of a building for the storage for sale of used or new
§ 285-6 VEHICLE SALES LOTS § 289-1
289:623
motor vehicles without first obtaining a license therefor from the Board of
Commissioners of the Borough of Collingswood as herein provided.
§ 289-2. Additional license required for additional lots.
Wherever two (2) or more motor vehicles are stored on any such vacant
lot or land for sale, whether adjacent to a duly established garage, service
station or any other motor vehicle business or not, the license, as herein
provided, shall be required; and a separate license shall be required for
each separate lot or parcel of ground upon which said business is
conducted; provided, however, that where several lots are contiguous to
each other and the business is conducted on all of said lots, only one (1)
license shall be necessary.
§ 289-3. Licenses nontransferable.
The license shall authorize the licensee to conduct the business on the lot
specified in the license and shall not be transferable to another plot or lot;
nor shall said license be assignable or transferable in any manner without
the consent of the Board of Commissioners.
§ 289-4. Application for license.
Every applicant for a license to engage in said business shall file with the
Borough Clerk a written application signed by the applicant or applicants,
which application shall state:
§ 289-5. Suspension or revocation of license; appeal.
Each application shall contain an agreement that the applicant accepts
the license to be granted upon the condition that it may be suspended or
revoked for cause at any time by the Board of Commissioners. The licensee
shall, upon notice of revocation, be entitled to a hearing before the Board
of Commissioners upon making application therefor within twenty-four (24)
hours after notice of revocation of said license.
A. The name and residence of the applicant and, if a firm or corporation,
the names and addresses of the officers and the registered agent or
partners.
B. The length of time that the applicant or applicants or, if the applicant is
a firm or corporation, the length of time that the manager or the person
in charge has been a resident of the borough, if such is the case; his or
their place of previous employment; and whether the applicant or
applicants have been convicted of crime and, if so, when, what offense
and in what court.
C. A detailed nature of the business to be conducted.
D. The place where the business is to be located and carried on.
§ 289-1 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 289-6
289:624
§ 289-6. Purchase from or sale to minors.
No licensee hereunder shall purchase from or sell to any person under the
age of twenty-one (21) years any motor vehicle without the written consent
of the parents or surviving parent or guardian of such minor.
§ 289-7. Storage or display on streets and sidewalks.
No motor vehicle shall be placed by the licensee on the sidewalk or any part
thereof, nor shall said licensee use the street or any part thereof for the
storage, display or sale of said motor vehicle.
§ 289-8. Inspection of premises.
All licensed premises shall be subject to inspection at all times by members
of the Police Department and other representatives of the borough.
§ 289-9. Vehicles without manufacturer's serial number.
§ 289-10. Conduct of another business on licensed premises.
If any other business than that herein especially licensed is to be conducted
on the premises and a license is required for said business by an ordinance
of the borough, a separate license must be secured therefor.
§ 289-11. Number of licensed premises restricted; promulgation of
rules and regulations.
The Board of Commissioners may restrict the number of such licensed
premises within the borough and may impose such reasonable regulations
and rules with regard to said business or businesses so to be conducted,
not contrary to law, as the Board of Commissioners may deem necessary
and proper for the good, government, order and protection of persons and
property and for the preservation of the public health, safety and welfare
of the municipality and its inhabitants and as may be necessary to carry
into effect the powers and duties conferred and imposed upon the borough
by law. These restrictions and regulations shall be made by resolution.
Rules, regulations and restrictions, as set forth in this section, may be
promulgated and adopted by the Board of Commissioners, from time to
A. No licensee or his agent shall knowingly buy, sell, receive, dispose of,
conceal or have in his possession any motor vehicle from which the
manufacturer's serial number or any other number or identification
mark has been removed, defaced, altered, covered or destroyed for the
purpose of concealing the identity of such vehicle.
B. The licensee and any person employed by him to whom is offered for
sale any motor vehicle, part or accessory from which has been removed,
defaced, covered, altered or destroyed the manufacturer's serial
number or any other identification shall immediately notify police
headquarters.
§ 289-6 VEHICLE SALES LOTS § 289-11
289:625
time, by resolution or resolutions setting forth in particular such rules,
regulations and restrictions.
§ 289-12. Annual license fee; expiration.
The annual license fee to be paid for said license shall be the sum of two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.), and all licenses hereunder shall terminate on
December 31 after the date of issuance. Said license fees shall be for the
purpose of regulating the business referred to herein.
§ 289-13. Exemption.
Dealers, however, defined in Section 39, Chapter 10 of the Revised Statutes
as agents, distributors or authorized dealers of the manufacturers of new
motor vehicles, who have an established place of business in the Borough
of Collingswood and who store, display and sell used motor vehicles in
connection with said establishment in open lots in said Borough of
Collingswood adjacent and contiguous to such duly established place of
business, shall not be required to be licensed hereunder.
§ 289-14. Consent of landowner.
If the applicant is not the owner of the site where the business is to be
conducted, the owner's consent to the conduct of said business shall be
endorsed on the application.
§ 289-15. License to be posted.
Each holder of a license herein authorized shall at all times keep the license
posted, while in force, in a conspicuous place on the premises described in
the application for such license.
§ 289-16. Compliance required.
The licensee, by accepting a license hereunder, agrees to comply with all
of the terms and conditions set forth in this chapter and all rules and
regulations promulgated by the Board of Commissioners.
§ 289-17. Violations and penalties.128
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall forfeit and pay a fine not to exceed the sum of one thousand
dollars ($1,000.), be imprisoned in the county jail for not more than ninety
(90) days or serve a period of community service for not more than ninety
(90) days, or any combination thereof, in the discretion of the court, and
each day that this chapter is violated shall constitute a separate offense.
128. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 289-11 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 289-18
289:626
§ 289-18. Effect on existing businesses.
Any person, firm or corporation now conducting the business herein
licensed shall have forty-five (45) days after the final passage hereof in
which to obtain the license herein required, and during said period this
chapter shall not become operative or effective as to persons now engaged
in said business in order that they may have ample opportunity to secure
the necessary license.
Chapter 293
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
§ 289-18 VEHICLE SALES LOTS § 289-18
289:627

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 293-1. Definitions.
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the New Jersey
Statutes Annotated shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases
used herein.
§ 293-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-3-2004 by Ord. No.
1332]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute or
otherwise authorized by this chapter, every person convicted of a violation
of a provision of this chapter or any supplement thereto shall be liable to a
penalty of not more than $50 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15
days, or both.
§ 293-1 VEHICLE SALES LOTS § 293-2
289:629

ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 293-3. Traffic control signals.129
§ 293-4. Speed limits.
§ 293-5. One-way streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule III (§ 293-52), attached
to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as one-way streets
in the direction indicated.
§ 293-6. U-turns.
No person shall make a U-turn on any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule IV (§ 293-53), attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 293-7. Prohibited turns at intersections.
No person shall make a turn of the kind designated (left, right, all) at any
of the locations described in Schedule V (§ 293-54), attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 293-8. Prohibited right turns on red signal.
No person shall make a right turn when facing a steady red signal (stop
indication) at any of the locations described in Schedule VI (§ 293-55),
attached to and made a part of this chapter.
A. Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersection
of those streets described in Schedule I (§ 293-50), attached to and
made a part of this chapter.
B. The traffic signal installation shall be in accordance with the provisions
of An Act Concerning Motor Vehicles and Traffic Regulations, Subtitle 1
of Title 39 of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated, and shall conform to
the design and shall be maintained in operation as authorized by the
Department of Transportation of the State of New Jersey.
A. The speed limit for both directions of traffic along the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule II (§ 293-51), attached to and made a part
of this chapter, is hereby established at the rate of speed indicated.
B. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits.
129. Editor's Note: See also Art. VIIA, Traffic Control Signal Monitoring System.
§ 293-3 VEHICLE SALES LOTS § 293-9
289:631
§ 293-9. Through streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VII (§ 293-56),
attached to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as
through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near right side of each
street intersecting the through street except where yield signs are provided
for in the designations.
§ 293-10. Stop intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule VIII (§ 293-57), attached to and
made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as stop intersections.
Stop signs shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 293-11. Yield intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule IX (§ 293-58), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as yield intersections. Yield
signs shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 293-12. Trucks over certain weights excluded.
Trucks in excess of the gross weights indicated are hereby excluded from
the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule X (§ 293-59), except for
the pickup and delivery of materials on such streets.
§ 293-13. No-passing zones.
No-passing zones are hereby established and shall be maintained along
those streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XI (§ 293-60),
attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 293-9 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 293-13
289:632
ARTICLE III
Parking, Standing and Stopping
§ 293-14. Regulations not exclusive.
The provisions of this article imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other and more restrictive
provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles as set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any other New Jersey statute or as
hereinafter provided.
§ 293-15. Parking prohibited at all times.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule XII (§ 293-61), attached to and made a part
of this chapter.
§ 293-16. No stopping or standing.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule XIII (§ 293-62), attached to and made a part
of this chapter.
§ 293-17. Parking prohibited certain hours.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule XIV
(§ 293-63) of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described in said Schedule XIV, attached to and made a part
of this chapter.
§ 293-18. No stopping or standing certain hours.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle during the times specified in
Schedule XV (§ 293-64) of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of
the streets or parts of streets described in said Schedule XV, attached to and
made a part of this chapter.
§ 293-19. Time limit parking.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown in
Schedule XVI (§ 293-65) at any time between the hours listed in said
Schedule XVI of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets
or parts of streets described in said Schedule XVI, attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 293-20. Parking on highways bordering school property.
Parking in the public highway bordering on any school property during the
hours when school is in session is hereby prohibited.
§ 293-14 VEHICLE SALES LOTS § 293-21
289:633
§ 293-21. Nighttime parking; insignia required.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
of any day upon any street or any part of any street except as set forth in
the following subsections:
A. Where the Chief of Police shall be satisfied that a resident making
application for the permission provided for in this and the following
subsection has no driveway, garage or other legal off-street parking
space on his premises and no publicly owned facility on which overnight
parking is permitted is located within one block of such resident's
premises, the Chief of Police shall issue to such resident an insignia
authorizing such resident to park a motor vehicle owned by him on the
public streets of the Borough where parking is not otherwise prohibited
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
B. Such insignia shall be displayed at all times upon the inside rear view
mirror of the motor vehicle being parked as permitted herein so that
the same shall be visible from outside such vehicle.
C. Number of permits. [Amended 4-4-2016 by Ord. No. 1593]
(1) Residences with no off-street parking shall be eligible for up to
three permits per household.
(2) Residences with a driveway that cannot fit more than two vehicles
are eligible for one permit per household.
(3) All vehicles must be registered to the Collingswood address for
proof of residency.
D. Permits will be valid for a period of one year and expire on December
31. [Added 5-1-2000 by Ord. No. 1217; amended 4-4-2016 by Ord.
No. 1593]
E. Where the Chief of Police shall be satisfied that certain special
circumstances exist upon review of an application being made by a
resident under this section for a temporary parking permit, the Chief of
Police shall issue to such applicant an insignia authorizing such
applicant to park a motor vehicle owned by the resident or a member of
the resident's household on the public streets of the Borough where
parking is not otherwise prohibited between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
6:00 a.m. [Added 5-1-2000 by Ord. No. 1217]
(1) The Chief of Police may consider various factors upon review of an
application made under this subsection, including, but not limited
to, the length of time requested for the temporary permit; the
purpose for which the temporary permit is requested and how the
purpose relates to the business of the Borough or its residents; the
number of outstanding parking permits at the time of the request
and the potential impact on residents of the surrounding area for
where the permit is requested; and the effect on the Borough and
§ 293-21 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 293-21
289:634
§ 293-22. Continuous parking prohibited.
No motor vehicle shall be permitted to be parked on any street for more
than 24 continuous hours.
§ 293-23. Summer parking in Roberts Park area.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time, from June 1 through September
15, on the streets described in Schedule XVII (§ 293-66), attached to and
make a part of this chapter, except as provided in § 293-21, Nighttime
parking; insignia required.
§ 293-24. Exceptions to parking restrictions for certain residents;
insignia required.
its ability to provide services. By way of illustration only and by
no means exhaustive, some examples of special circumstances
existing may include but are not limited to college students
returning home to the Borough during semester breaks and/or
holidays; long-term illness or care givers; and construction projects
requiring certain vehicles and equipment to be parked on a street.
F. All insignias issued under this section shall be color-coded to indicate
the period of validation. [Added 5-1-2000 by Ord. No. 1217]
A. Permit parking only streets. [Amended 6-3-1996 by Ord. No. 1102;
3-9-2012 by Ord. No. 1510; 6-1-2015 by Ord. No. 1571; 10-5-2015
by Ord. No. 1579; 4-4-2016 by Ord. No. 1593]
(1) Residences on the below streets may be eligible for up to two
permits per household.
(a) One permit per residence with under five vehicles.
(b) Two permits per residence with five or more vehicles.
Conard Avenue
Coolidge Avenue
Cooper Avenue
Curtis Avenue
Dill Avenue
Edison Avenue
Ogden Avenue
Wesley Avenue
Whitman Avenue
(2) Residences on the below streets may be eligible for up to three
permits per household.
§ 293-21 VEHICLE SALES LOTS § 293-24
289:635
(a) Two permits for residences with under five vehicles.
(b) Three permits for residences with five or more vehicles.
East Collings Avenue (Haddon Avenue to Maple Avenue)
Gorman Avenue
Lincoln Avenue (Haddon Avenue to 150 feet east of Maple
Avenue)
South Atlantic Avenue (Lakeview Drive to Dayton Avenue)
Spring Avenue
(3) Apartments. Tenants are eligible for only one permit per apartment
if three or more vehicles are registered to the apartment and they
can produce a current lease listing all of the occupants. [Amended
12-27-2018 by Ord. No. 1652]
(a) No permits will permitted for those living at the following:
1025 West Collings
Creswood
Heights of Collingswood
Marina Park
Pewter Village
White Have Condos
Woodlawn Terrace Condos
(b) Permits may be permitted for those living in the following:
30 Haddon
Bettlewood Avenue Apartments
Collingswood Arms
Madison Gardens
Maple Avenue between Washington Avenue and the driveway
of Washington Arms
Metropolitan Apartments
Pacific Avenue Apartments
Wayne Gardens
Wayne Terrace Apartments
Zane Avenue Apartments
B. Such insignia shall be displayed at all times upon the inside rear view
mirror of the motor vehicle being parked as permitted herein so that
the same shall be visible from outside such vehicle.
C. (Reserved)130
§ 293-24 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 293-24
289:636
§ 293-25. Loading zones.
The locations described in Schedule XVIII (§ 293-67), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as loading zones.
§ 293-26. Taxi stands.
The locations described in Schedule XIX (§ 293-68), attached to and made a
part of this chapter, are hereby designated as taxi stands.
§ 293-27. Bus stops.
The locations described in Schedule XX (§ 293-69), attached to and made a
part of this chapter, are hereby designated as bus stops.
§ 293-27.1. Fire lanes. [Added 10-1-2001 by Ord. No. 1269]
The locations described in Schedule XXIV (§ 293-71.2), attached to and
made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as fire lanes, upon which
no person shall stop or stand a vehicle. Said fire lanes shall be marked by
painting yellow the curbs abutting each fire lane and erecting "Fire Lane"
signs.
D. Use of the overnight parking call-in procedure is restricted and
prohibited in the above area without the permission of the Chief of
Police. [Added 6-3-1996 by Ord. No. 1102]
130. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, regarding the issuance of more than one insignia,
was repealed 4-4-2016 by Ord. No. 1593.
§ 293-24 VEHICLE SALES LOTS § 293-27.1
289:637

ARTICLE IV
Emergency No Parking
§ 293-28. Designation of snow emergency no-parking areas.
§ 293-29. Posting of signs.
§ 293-30. Removal of vehicles.
Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this article shall
be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of
traffic, and any peace officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle.
The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal and storage which
may result from such removal before regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ 293-31. Effectiveness of article.
The effectiveness of this article is contingent upon signs being erected as
required by law.
A. Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers
the street or highway, no vehicle shall be parked on either side of any of
the streets or parts thereof described in Schedule XXI (§ 293-70),
attached to and made a part of this chapter.
B. The above parking prohibitions shall remain in effect after the snow has
ceased until the streets have been plowed sufficiently and to the extent
that parking will not interfere with the normal flow of traffic.
A. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
streets or parts of streets where temporary emergency no-parking signs
are displayed. The Chief of Police, or in his absence the ranking police
officer, is authorized to declare an emergency and to direct the posting
of said emergency no-parking signs when weather conditions,
accidents, fires or public celebrations dictate or require the avoidance
of hazards or other conditions which interfere with the free flow of
traffic.
B. Notification that the emergency no-parking signs are being or will be
posted shall be given to the operator or owner of any vehicle which has
been parked prior to the posting of the signs.
§ 293-28 VEHICLE SALES LOTS § 293-31
289:639

ARTICLE V
Metered Parking
§ 293-32. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, which are not defined in Subtitle 1 of
Title 39 of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated, shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this section for purposes of this article:
PARKING METER — Any mechanical device or meter not inconsistent with
this article placed or erected for the regulation of parking by authority of
this article. Each parking meter installed shall indicate by proper legend the
legal parking time established by the Chief of Police and, when operated,
shall at all times indicate the balance of legal parking time and, at the
expiration of such period, shall indicate illegal or overtime parking.
PARKING METER SPACE — Any space within a parking meter zone, which
is adjacent to a parking meter and which is duly designated for the parking
of a single vehicle by lines painted or otherwise durably marked on the curb
or on the surface of the street or lot adjacent to or adjoining the parking
meters.
PARKING METER ZONE — Any restricted on-street parking area or offstreet
parking lot upon which parking meters are installed and in operation.
§ 293-33. Designation of parking spaces.
The Chief of Police is hereby directed and authorized to provide for the
marking off of individual parking spaces in the parking meter zones
designated and described in Schedule XXII (§ 293-71), said parking spaces
to be designated by lines painted or marked on the curbing or surface of the
street or lot. At each space so marked off, it shall be unlawful to park any
vehicle in such a way that said vehicle shall not be entirely within the limits
of the space so designated.
§ 293-34. Installation of parking meters.
In said parking meter zones, the Chief of Police shall cause parking meters
to be installed upon the curb, sidewalk or area immediately adjacent to
the parking spaces provided in § 293-33 of this article. No parking meters
shall be installed in areas where parking is prohibited pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-138. The Chief of Police shall be responsible for
the regulation, control, operation, maintenance and use of such parking
meters. Each device shall be so set as to display a signal showing legal
parking upon the deposit of the appropriate coin, lawful money of the
United States of America, for the period of time prescribed in § 293-35.
Each device shall be so arranged that upon the expiration of the lawful time
limit, it will indicate by a proper, visible signal that the lawful parking period
has expired, and in such case the right of such vehicle to occupy such space
shall cease, and the operator, owner, possessor or manager thereof shall be
subject to the penalties hereinafter provided.
§ 293-32 VEHICLE SALES LOTS § 293-35
289:641
§ 293-35. Operation of parking meters.
Except in a period of emergency determined by an officer of the Fire or
Police Department, or in compliance with the directions of a police officer
or traffic control sign or signal, when any vehicle shall be parked in any
parking space alongside or next to which a parking meter is located, the
operator of such vehicle shall, upon entering the said parking meter space,
immediately deposit or cause to be deposited in said meter such proper
coin of the United States of America as is required for such parking meter
and as is designated by proper directions on the meter, and when required
by the directions on the meter, the operator of such vehicle, after the
deposit of the proper coin, shall also set in operation the timing mechanism
on such meter in accordance with directions properly appearing thereon,
and failure to deposit such proper coin and to set the timing mechanism
in operation when so required shall constitute a violation of this article.
Upon the deposit of such coin (and the setting of the timing mechanism in
operation when so required), the parking space may be lawfully occupied
by such vehicle during the period of time which has been prescribed for
the part of the street in which said parking space is located, provided that
any person placing a vehicle in a parking meter space adjacent to a meter
which indicates that unused time has been left in the meter by the previous
occupant of the space shall not be required to deposit a coin so long as his
occupancy of said space does not exceed the indicated unused parking time.
If said vehicle shall remain parked in any such parking space beyond the
parking time limit set for such parking space and if the meter shall indicate
such illegal parking, then and in that event such vehicle shall be considered
as parking overtime and beyond the period of legal parking time, and such
parking shall be deemed a violation of this article.
§ 293-36. Manner of parking.
When a parking meter space is parallel with the adjacent curb or sidewalk,
no person shall park or permit the parking of any vehicle in such parking
space in any other position than with the foremost part of such vehicle
nearest to the parking meter; when a parking meter space is diagonal to
the curb or sidewalk, no person shall park or permit the parking of any
vehicle in such parking space in any other position than with the foremost
part of such vehicle nearest to the parking meter; when a parking meter
shall have been installed at the head of and immediately adjacent to any
parking space on a municipal off-street parking lot, no person shall park or
permit the parking of any vehicle in such parking space in any other position
than with the foremost part of such vehicle nearest to the parking meter;
provided, however, that in municipal off-street parking lots, signs shall be
erected indicating that "head-on" parking only is permitted. In any event, a
vehicle shall be parked within the lines marked on the pavement measuring
such parking space.
§ 293-35 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 293-37
289:642
§ 293-37. Violations.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this article for any
person to:
§ 293-38. Reports of violations; citations.
A. Cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of or
operated by such person to be parked overtime or beyond the period of
legal parking time established for any parking meter zone as herein
described, or to deposit in any parking meter any coin for the purpose
of parking beyond the maximum legal parking time for the particular
parking meter zone.
B. Permit any vehicle to remain or be placed in any parking space adjacent
to any parking meter while said meter is displaying a signal indicating
that the vehicle occupying such parking space has already been parked
beyond the period prescribed for such parking space.
C. Park any vehicle across any line or marking of a parking meter space or
in such position that the vehicle shall not be entirely within the area
designated by such lines or markings.
D. Deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair
the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the provisions of
this article.
E. Deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slug, device
or metal substance or other substitute for lawful coins.
F. Park or permit the parking of any vehicle in any parking meter space
where the meter does not register lawful parking.
A. It shall be the duty of the police officers, acting in accordance with
instructions issued by the Chief of Police, to report:
(1) The number of each parking meter which indicates that the vehicle
occupying the parking space adjacent to such parking meter is or
has been parked in violation of any of the provisions of this article.
(2) The state license number of such vehicle.
(3) That such vehicle is parked in violation of any of the provisions of
this article.
(4) Any other facts, a knowledge of which is necessary to a thorough
understanding of the circumstances attending such violation.
B. Each such police officer shall also attach to such vehicle a notice to the
owner thereof that such vehicle has been parked in violation of a
provision of this article, and instructing such owner to report to the
Municipal Court with regard to such violation.
§ 293-37 VEHICLE SALES LOTS § 293-39
289:643
§ 293-39. Impounding of vehicles. [Amended 6-8-2012 by Ord. No.
1515]
Any vehicle left parked for a period exceeding three days (72 hours)
succeeding expiration of the maximum parking time indicated during the
hours of operation specified in the space in which the vehicle is parked shall
be towed, under the direction of the Police Department, to the designated
garage or any other place designated by the Chief of Police for
impoundment, subject to redemption by the owner upon payment of the
reasonable cost of towing and a storage charge for each day or portion
thereof during which it remains in said garage or other place, said charges
to be regulated by state guidelines. A lot removal fee of $35 shall be paid to
the Borough of Collingswood prior to the release of any vehicle towed and/
or stored.
§ 293-40. Purpose of meter deposits.
The coins required to be deposited in parking meters as provided herein are
hereby levied and assessed as fees to provide for the proper regulation and
control of traffic upon the public streets and also the cost of supervising
and regulating the parking of vehicles in the parking meter zones created
thereby, and to cover the cost of the purchase, supervision, protection,
inspection, installation, operation, maintenance, control and use of the
parking meters described herein.
§ 293-41. Collection of coins from meters; disposition thereof.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to designate some proper person or
persons to make regular collections of the moneys deposited in said meters,
and it shall be the duty of such person or persons so designated to remove
from the parking meters the locked containers therein containing the coins
so deposited in said meters and to deliver such locked containers to the
Treasurer, who shall unlock them and count the funds contained in such
containers and deposit such funds in the usual manner provided by law.
§ 293-39 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 293-41
289:644
ARTICLE VI
Additional Parking Regulations
§ 293-42. Parking regulations for Heights of Collingswood.
[Amended 12-29-2009 by Ord. No. 1474]
A. The request of the Board of Directors of the corporation owning the
land and buildings known as the "Heights of Collingswood" that the
provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated
be made applicable to the semipublic or private roads, streets,
driveways, trails, terraces, bridle paths, parkways, parking areas or
other roadways open to or used by the public, tenants or employees of
the various buildings and lands thereof is hereby approved.
B. It shall be unlawful for the owners or drivers of automobiles or other
vehicles to park their said automobiles or other vehicles in any of the
following designated sections or the drives, streets or roads of the
above-defined Heights of Collingswood:
(1) The circle drives in front of Towers A, B, C and D.
(2) On either side of the roadway from Collings Avenue to the north
entrance of Heights of Collingswood garage, from the garage
entrance to the distance of 55 feet northerly thereof.
(3) Within the three-thousand-square-foot area at the end of the
roadway at the rear of Tower A, adjacent to the loading platform.
(4) Within the three-thousand-square-foot area at the end of the
roadway at the rear of Tower B, adjacent to the loading platform.
(5) Within the three-thousand-square-foot area at the end of the
roadway at the rear of Tower C, adjacent to the loading platform.
(6) Within the three-thousand-square-foot area at the end of the
roadway at the rear of Tower D, adjacent to the loading platform.
(7) On either side of the roadway from Newton Lake Drive to the south
entrance of Heights of Collingswood garage.
(8) Along the southerly curbline of the Heights of Collingswood
roadway, which runs parallel to Newton Lake Drive from Browning
Road to White Horse Pike, from Browning Road for a distance of 50
feet westerly thereof.
(9) Within the driveway which connects the roadway running parallel
to Collings Avenue with the parking lot which runs parallel to White
Horse Pike.
(10)Within the driveway which connects the roadway running parallel
to Newton Lake Drive with the parking area which runs parallel to
White Horse Pike.
§ 293-42 VEHICLE SALES LOTS § 293-42
289:645
§ 293-42.1. Parking regulations for Scottish Rite Theatre and
Ballroom. [Added 12-29-2009 by Ord. No. 1474]
§ 293-42.2. Parking regulation for Collingswood Arms. [Added
11-4-2013 by Ord. No. 1540]
(11)Within the designated handicapped parking slots unless displaying
handicapped registration plates or stickers.
(12)On either side of the roadway from Browning Road to the service
entrance of Tower D.
C. A loading and unloading zone for a distance of 30 feet to the east of the
loading platform between Tower B and Tower D is hereby established
and shall be restricted to vehicles loading and unloading from said
platform for a period not to exceed 30 minutes.
D. All restricted parking zones and all crosswalks mentioned herein shall
be clearly marked in the manner provided by law.
E. The following roadways are hereby designated as through streets in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, and all roadways intersecting with
said through streets shall be yield intersections. All intersecting
roadways with said designated through streets shall have yield-right-ofway
signs erected and maintained on the rear right side of the same. All
drivers of automobiles or other vehicles approaching said yield
intersections shall yield to those persons on the through street, in the
manner set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-144 and 39:4-145. Designated through
streets are:
(1) The roadway from Collings Avenue to the north entrance of Heights
of Collingswood garage.
(2) The roadway from Browning Road to the loading platform between
Tower B and Tower D.
(3) The roadway from Newton Lake Drive to the south entrance of
Heights of Collingswood garage.
A. The provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the New Jersey Statutes
Annotated shall apply to the land and buildings known as the "Scottish
Rite Theatre and Ballroom," including all surrounding areas, roadways,
including semipublic and private roads, driveways, parkways, parking
areas and any open space intended for use by members of the public,
tenants, invitees, licensees, agents, representatives or employees.
B. It shall be unlawful for the owners or operators of any automobile or
other motor vehicle subject to the provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of
the New Jersey Statutes Annotated to park any automobile or other
motor vehicle in any area of the Scottish Rite Theatre and Ballroom
which has been designated as a no-parking area.
§ 293-42 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 293-42.2
289:646
§ 293-42.3. Parking regulation for Zane School. [Added 11-3-2014
by Ord. No. 1558]
§ 293-43. Parking restriction for vehicles used to transport
flammable or combustible liquids.
A. The provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the New Jersey Statutes
Annotated131 and all parking ordinances of the Borough of Collingswood
shall apply to the land and buildings of the apartment building located
at 30 Washington Avenue and known as "Collingswood Arms," including
all surrounding areas, roadways, including semipublic and private
roads, driveways, parkways, parking areas and any open space
intended for use by members of the public, tenants, invitees, licensees,
agents, representatives or employees.
B. It shall be unlawful for the owners or operators of any automobile or
other motor vehicle subject to the provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of
the New Jersey Statutes Annotated and all parking ordinances of the
Borough of Collingswood to park any automobile or other motor vehicle
in any area of Collingswood Arms which has been designated as a noparking
area.
A. The provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the New Jersey Statutes
Annotated and all parking ordinances of the Borough of Collingswood
shall apply to the land and buildings located at 756 Haddon Avenue and
known as "Zane School," including all surrounding areas, roadways,
including semipublic and private roads, driveways, parkways, parking
areas and any open space intended for use by members of the public,
tenants, invitees, licensees, agents, representatives or employees.
B. It shall be unlawful for the owners or operators of any automobile or
other motor vehicle subject to the provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of
the New Jersey Statutes Annotated and all parking ordinances of the
Borough of Collingswood to park any automobile or other motor vehicle
in any area of Zane School which has been designated as a no-parking
area.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
FLAMMABLE OR COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS — Gasoline, kerosene,
benzine, naphtha and fuel oil.
PARK — To leave any truck, trailer or semitrailer unattended either on
public or private property, whether within or without any garage, shed
or other structure.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any
truck, trailer or semitrailer designed or constructed and used for the
purpose of transporting flammable or combustible liquids, whether or
131. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et seq.
§ 293-42.2 VEHICLE SALES LOTS § 293-43
289:647
§ 293-44. Commercial vehicles in residential, Professional Office
and Central Business District zones. [Amended 7-11-2011 by Ord.
No. 1500]
§ 293-44.1. Parking on unimproved property. [Added 4-5-1999 by
Ord. No. 1182]
No person shall park a vehicle on unimproved property in the Borough.
not the same shall be loaded, for a period in excess of one hour, within
100 feet of any dwelling in the Borough of Collingswood.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle used for commercial
purposes, in interstate commerce, for the transportation of persons
for hire, compensation or profit. The display of commercial, omnibus
or constructor registration plates on any motor vehicle shall, for the
purposes of this section, be prima facie evidence that the vehicle is a
"commercial vehicle."
GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT — The combined weight of the vehicle and
the rated pay load. For the purposes of this section, the gross weight
as stated on the vehicle's registration certificate shall be prima facie
evidence of the vehicle's "gross vehicle weight."
RESIDENTIAL, PROFESSIONAL OFFICE AND CENTRAL BUSINESS
DISTRICT ZONES — All areas of the Borough of Collingswood
designated on the Zoning Map of the Borough of Collingswood as
residential, professional office and business districts.
B. The parking, storing or garaging of any commercial vehicle with a gross
vehicle weight of 10,000 pounds or more is prohibited within the
residential, Professional Office and Commercial Business District zones
of the Borough.
C. The parking, storing or garaging of any commercial-type equipment,
including but not limited to trailers, chippers, mixers, backhoes and
bulldozers, is prohibited within the residential, Professional Office and
Commercial Business District zones of the Borough.
D. Recreation vehicles and equipment, including but not limited to boats,
trailers and campers, may be parked, stored or garaged within the
residential, Professional Office and Commercial Business District zones
as long as they are parked, stored or garaged to the rear of the front
building line of a dwelling, or are not visible from the street.
E. Nothing herein, however, shall prohibit the temporary parking of a
commercial vehicle for the purpose of performing services or making
pickups or deliveries in the regular course of business.
§ 293-43 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 293-44.1
289:648
ARTICLE VII
Handicapped Parking
[Added 10-7-1996 by Ord. No. 1106]
§ 293-45. Parking spaces reserved for handicapped persons.
[Amended 5-3-2004 by Ord. No. 1332]
§ 293-46. through § 293-49. (Reserved)
A. No person who has not been issued a special vehicle identification card
by the New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles or who is not otherwise
permitted to park in parking spaces established for use by handicapped
persons pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-204 through 39:4-206 shall be
permitted to park in such spaces. This provision shall apply to all
parking spaces located in the Borough of Collingswood which have
been established for use by handicapped persons, including all such
parking spaces properly established by the Borough by ordinance,
resolution or regulation pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.5 and/or
39:4-197.6 and all such parking spaces established by any entity
pursuant to and in compliance with federal, state and/or local law.
B. Proper signs providing notices of the penalties set forth in Subsection C
of this § 293-45 shall be erected at said parking spaces as necessary.
C. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-197(3)c, any person convicted of a violation of
this § 293-45 shall be liable to a penalty of $250 for the first offense and
at least $250 and up to 90 days' community service for all subsequent
offenses.
§ 293-45 VEHICLE SALES LOTS § 293-46
289:649

ARTICLE VIIA
Traffic Control Signal Monitoring System
[Added 12-7-2009 by Ord. No. 1473]
§ 293-49.1. Installation.
§ 293-49.2. Issuance of summons.
The Police Department of the Borough of Collingswood shall review the
recorded images produced by the system to determine whether sufficient
evidence exists demonstrating that a traffic control signal violation has
occurred and shall issue a summons when appropriate, in accordance with
the rules of the Court.
§ 293-49.3. Use of recorded images.
A. The Borough of Collingswood hereby determines to install and utilize a
traffic control signal monitoring system (system) at various
intersections within the Borough of Collingswood as approved by the
Commissioner of Transportation pursuant to the Act.132
B. The system to be installed shall be approved by the governing body.
C. The Borough of Collingswood shall have the authority to enter into a
contract, following a lawful procurement process, for the installation of
the system. Any contract that shall contain provisions contrary to the
Act shall not be deemed invalid but rather reformed to conform to the
Act.
D. The signs notifying drivers that a system is being utilized shall be
approved by the Municipal Engineer and shall be placed on each street
converging into the affected intersection as required by the Act.
E. The Municipal Engineer shall inspect and certify the system at least
once every six months from the date of its installation.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the recorded images
produced by the System shall be available for the exclusive use of the
Police Department for the purpose of discharging his or her duties
under P.L. 2007, c. 348.133
B. Any recorded image or information produced in connection with the
system shall not be deemed a public record under N.J.S.A 47:1A-1 et
seq., or in common law. The recorded images shall not be:
(1) Discoverable as a public record by any person, entity or
governmental agency, except upon a subpoena issued by a grand
jury or a court order in a criminal matter; or
132. Editor's Note: See also § 293-3, Traffic control signals.
133. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 39:4-8.12 et seq.
§ 293-49.1 VEHICLE SALES LOTS § 293-49.3
289:651
§ 293-49.4. Locations. [Added 1-10-2011 by Ord. No. 1489134]
Traffic control signal monitoring systems shall be installed and operated at
the following locations:
§ 293-49.5. Liability of motor vehicle owner and operator.
The liability of the owner and operator of a motor vehicle for a traffic control
signal violation summons pursuant to the system shall be joint, subject to
provisions of the Act.
(2) Offered as evidence in any civil or administrative proceeding not
directly related to a traffic control signal violation.
C. Any recorded image or information collected in connection with a traffic
control signal violation shall not be retained after 60 business days
following the collection of any fine or penalty.
D. If a summons is not issued within 40 business days following the traffic
control signal violation, all recorded images and any information
collected with respect to the traffic control signal violation shall be
removed by the Police Department within two business days.
E. The Borough of Collingswood shall certify compliance with this section
by filing a report to with the Commissioner of Transportation in
accordance with the Act.
A. White Horse Pike and Collings Avenue.
B. Cuthbert Boulevard and Haddon Avenue.
C. Old White Horse Pike and Ferry Avenue.
134. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former § 293-49.4 as
§ 293-49.5.
§ 293-49.3 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 293-49.5
289:652
ARTICLE VIII
Schedules
§ 293-50. Schedule I: Traffic Control Signals.
In accordance with the provisions of § 293-3, traffic control signals shall be
installed at the following described intersections:
Intersection
(Reserved)
§ 293-51. Schedule II: Speed Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § 293-4, speed limits are hereby
established upon the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street
Speed limit
(mph) Location
White Horse Pike [Added
7-6-1998 by Ord. No. 1156]
30 From Collingswood
Circle to Oaklyn
Borough boundary
§ 293-52. Schedule III: One-Way Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 293-5, the following described streets
or parts of streets are hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction
indicated:
Name of
Street
Direction of
Travel Hours/Days Location
Atlantic Avenue South All/All From Franklin Avenue to
Browning
Collings Avenue West All/All From Maple Avenue to
Haddon Avenue
Dayton Avenue West 7:00 a.m. to
2:00
p.m./Sundays
From South Atlantic
Avenue to Park Avenue
Dill Avenue West 7:00 a.m. to
2:00
p.m./Sundays
From Park Avenue to
Stokes Avenue
Dwight Avenue East All/All From Richey Avenue to
Crescent Boulevard (U.S.
Route 130)
East Coulter
Avenue
West All/All From Maple Avenue to
Haddon Avenue
Eldridge Avenue West All/All From Colford Avenue to
Everett Avenue
§ 293-50 VEHICLE SALES LOTS § 293-52
289:653
Name of
Street
Direction of
Travel Hours/Days Location
Fern Avenue East All/All From Haddon Avenue to
Maple Avenue
Frazer Avenue West All/All From Maple Avenue to
Haddon Avenue
Hillcrest Avenue East All/All From Highland Avenue to
Garfield
Homestead
Avenue
West All/All From Haddon Avenue to
North Atlantic Avenue
Lees Lane East All/All From Merrick Avenue to
Stokes Avenue
Lincoln Avenue East All/All From Haddon Avenue to
Maple Avenue
Narberth
Terrace
West All/All From Haddon Avenue to
Atlantic Avenue
North Atlantic
Avenue
South All/All From West Homestead
Avenue to Cuthbert Road
North Atlantic
Avenue [Added
7-11-2011 by
Ord. No. 1500;
repealed
11-5-2012 by
Ord. No. 1526]
North Vineyard
Boulevard
West All/All From Garfield Avenue to
Highland Avenue
Sloan Avenue North All/All From Magill Avenue to
Route 130
Washington
Avenue
East All/All From Haddon Avenue to
Maple Avenue
West Stiles
Avenue
West All/All Entire length
Woodlawn
Avenue
East All/All From Autumn Avenue to
Princeton Avenue
§ 293-53. Schedule IV: U-Turn Prohibitions.
In accordance with the provisions of § 293-6, no person shall make a U-turn
at any of the following locations:
Name of Street Location
(Reserved)
§ 293-52 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 293-54
289:654
§ 293-54. Schedule V: Prohibited Turns at Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 293-7, no person shall make a turn of
the kind designated below at any of the following locations:
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel
Prohibited
Turn Hours
At Intersection
of
Browning Road North Left All North Atlantic
Avenue
Collings Avenue
(commercial
vehicles only)
[Added
6-5-2017 by
Ord. No. 1618]
East and
West
Right All Comly Avenue
Comly Avenue
(commercial
vehicles only)
[Added
6-5-2017 by
Ord. No. 1618]
North and
South
Right All Collings Avenue
Haddon Avenue
[Added11-7-2005
by Ord. No.
1385]
South Left When
children
are
present
during
school
hours
Garfield Avenue
Haddon Avenue
[Added
11-7-2005 by
Ord. No. 1385]
South Left All Narberth Terrace
Wawa Driveway
[Amended
11-7-2005 by
Ord. No. 1385]
West Left All Cuthbert
Boulevard
§ 293-55. Schedule VI: Prohibited Right Turns on Red Signal.
In accordance with the provisions of § 293-8, no person shall make a right
turn when facing a steady red signal (stop indication) at any of the following
locations:
§ 293-54 VEHICLE SALES LOTS § 293-55
289:655
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Hours/Days
Prohibited Right
Turn on Red Signal
Onto
Browning Road Both 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m./
Monday
through Friday
Haddon Avenue
Collings Avenue East All/All Haddon Avenue
Cuthbert Road East All/All Haddon Avenue
Haddon Avenue Both 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m./
Monday
through Friday
Browning Road
Lees Avenue Both 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m./
Monday
through Friday
Park Avenue
Park Avenue Both 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m./
Monday
through Friday
Lees Avenue
§ 293-56. Schedule VII: Through Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 293-9, the following described streets
or parts of streets are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall
be installed on the near right side of each street intersecting the through
street, except where yield signs are provided for in the designations.
Name of Street Limits
Bettlewood Avenue From the Collingswood-Oaklyn Borough line
Eldridge Avenue Between Richey Avenue and Champion Avenue
Harrison Avenue Between Crescent Boulevard (U.S. Highway
130) and Browning Road
Highland Avenue Between Summerfield Avenue and Browning
Road
Highland Avenue Between Woodlawn Terrace and Summerfield
Avenue
Lees Avenue From and including Merrick Avenue to but not
including Park Avenue
Lees Avenue From, but not including, Park Avenue to, but
not including, Haddon Avenue
Magill Avenue Between Browning Road and Route 30
Magill Avenue Between Richey Avenue and Champion Avenue
§ 293-55 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 293-56
289:656
Name of Street Limits
Maple Avenue Between Browning Road and Woodlawn
Avenue
Maple Avenue Between Pacific Avenue and Browning Road
Maple Avenue Between Woodlawn Avenue and Penn Avenue
Stokes Avenue Between Cuthbert Road and Dayton Avenue
§ 293-57. Schedule VIII: Stop Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 293-10, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections, and stop signs
shall be installed as follows:
Stop Sign on At Intersection of
Bettlewood Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord.
No. 1385] Collings Avenue
Bettlewood Avenue [Added 3-5-2001 by Ord.
No. 1249; amended 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Merrick Avenue
Bettlewood Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord.
No. 1385]
Newton Lake Drive
Browning Road (w) [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord.
No. 1385]
Collings Avenue
Browning Road (w) [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord.
No. 1385]
Harrison Avenue
Browning Road (e) [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord.
No. 1385]
Highland Avenue
Browning Road (w) [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord.
No. 1385]
Newton Lake Drive
Browning Road (w) [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord.
No. 1385]
Park Avenue
Browning Road (e) [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord.
No. 1385]
South Park Drive
Cattell Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Eldridge Avenue
Cattell Avenue [Amended 11-7-2005 by Ord.
No. 1385]
Harrison Avenue
Cedar Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Lincoln Avenue
Cedar Avenue [Amended 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Tatem Avenue
Cedar Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Woodlawn Avenue
§ 293-56 VEHICLE SALES LOTS § 293-57
289:657
Stop Sign on At Intersection of
Center Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Lincoln Avenue
Center Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
New Jersey Avenue
Center Avenue [Added 9-15-1997 by Ord. No.
1134; amended 3-5-2001 by Ord. No. 1249;
11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 1385]
Tatem Avenue
Center Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Woodlawn Avenue
Champion Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord.
No. 1385]
Grant Avenue
Champion Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord.
No. 1385]
Magill Avenue
Colford Avenue [Added 3-5-2001 by Ord. No.
1249]
Newton Avenue
Comly Avenue Eldridge Avenue
Comly Avenue Grant Avenue
Comly Avenue [Amended 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Harrison Avenue
Comly Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Magill Avenue
Conard Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
North Atlantic Avenue
Conard Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Park Avenue
Conard Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
South Atlantic Avenue
Dayton Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Linwood Avenue
Dayton Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Park Avenue
Dayton Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
South Atlantic Avenue
Dayton Avenue [Amended 11-7-2005 by Ord.
No. 1385]
Stokes Avenue
Dill Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Park Avenue
Dill Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Stokes Avenue
Dwight Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Franklin Avenue (w)
§ 293-57 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 293-57
289:658
Stop Sign on At Intersection of
Dwight Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Richey Avenue
East Browning Road [Added 3-5-2001 by Ord.
No. 1249]
Highland Avenue
East Collings Avenue [Amended 11-7-2005 by
Ord. No. 1385]
Maple Avenue
Eldridge Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Champion Avenue
Eldridge Avenue [Amended 11-7-2005 by Ord.
No. 1385]
Colford Avenue
Eldridge Avenue [Amended 11-7-2005 by Ord.
No. 1385]
Comly Avenue
Eldridge Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Everett Avenue
Fern Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Maple Avenue
Fern Avenue [Added 3-5-2001 by Ord. No.
1249; amended 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 1385]
Oriental Avenue
Franklin Avenue (w) [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord.
No. 1385]
Dwight Avenue
Franklin Avenue (w) [Amended 11-7-2005 by
Ord. No. 1385]
Grant Avenue
Franklin Avenue (w) [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord.
No. 1385]
Harrison Avenue
Franklin Avenue (w) [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord.
No. 1385]
Park Avenue
Frazer Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Lincoln Avenue
Frazer Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Maple Avenue
Garfield Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Highland Avenue
Garfield Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Maple Avenue
Garfield Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
North Vineyard
Boulevard
Grant Avenue [Amended 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Cattell Avenue
Grant Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Champion Avenue
§ 293-57 VEHICLE SALES LOTS § 293-57
289:659
Stop Sign on At Intersection of
Grant Avenue [Amended 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Comly Avenue
Grant Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Franklin Avenue (w)
Grant Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Richey Avenue
Grant Avenue Taylor Avenue
Harrison Avenue [Amended 11-7-2005 by Ord.
No. 1385]
Cattell Avenue
Harrison Avenue [Amended 11-7-2005 by Ord.
No. 1385]
Comly Avenue
Harrison Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Franklin Avenue (w)
Harrison Avenue [Added 7-3-2017 by Ord. No.
1620]
Richey Avenue
Harrison Avenue [Amended 11-7-2005 by Ord.
No. 1385]
Sloan Avenue
Harrison Avenue [Added 9-15-1997 by Ord. No.
1134; amended 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 1385]
Virginia Avenue
Highland Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Browning Road (e)
Highland Avenue [Added 9-15-1997 by Ord. No.
1134]
East Palmer Avenue
Highland Avenue [Added 3-5-2001 by Ord. No.
1249; amended 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 1385]
Garfield Avenue
Highland Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Hillcrest Avenue
Highland Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Palmer Avenue
Highland Avenue [Added 12-6-2004 by Ord. No.
1356]
South Vineyard
Boulevard
Harrison Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Summerfield Avenue
Highland Avenue [Amended 11-7-2005 by Ord.
No. 1385]
Woodlawn Avenue
Hillcrest Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Garfield Avenue
Hillcrest Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Highland Avenue
Hillcrest Avenue [Added 12-6-2004 by Ord. No.
1356]
South Vineyard
Boulevard
§ 293-57 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 293-57
289:660
Stop Sign on At Intersection of
Irvin Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
South Atlantic Avenue
Lakeview Drive [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Bettlewood Avenue
Lakeview Drive [Amended 11-7-2005 by Ord.
No. 1385]
Linwood Avenue
Lakeview Drive [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Park Avenue
Lawnside Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Maple Avenue
Lawnside Avenue [Added 3-5-2001 by Ord. No.
1249; amended 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 1385]
Oriental Avenue
Lees Avenue [Added 9-15-1997 by Ord. No.
1134]
Linwood Avenue
Lees Avenue [Added 9-15-1997 by Ord. No.
1134; amended 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 1385]
Merrick Avenue
Lees Avenue [Added 9-15-1997 by Ord. No.
1134; amended 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 1385]
South Atlantic Avenue
Lees Avenue [Added 3-5-2001 by Ord. No.
1249; amended 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 1385]
Stokes Avenue
Lees Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Ventnor Avenue
Lees Lane Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 1385] Belmont Avenue
Lees Lane Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 1385] Linwood Avenue
Lees Lane Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 1385] Stokes Avenue
Lincoln Avenue Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Cedar Avenue
Lincoln Avenue [Added 3-5-2001 by Ord. No.
1249; 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 1385]
Center Avenue
Lincoln Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Maple Avenue
Lincoln Avenue [Added 3-5-2001 by Ord. No.
1249; amended 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 1385]
Washington Avenue
Linwood Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Bettlewood Avenue
Linwood Avenue [Added 3-5-2001 by Ord. No.
1249; amended 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 1385]
Dayton Avenue
Linwood Avenue [Amended 11-7-2005 by Ord.
No. 1385]
Lees Avenue
§ 293-57 VEHICLE SALES LOTS § 293-57
289:661
Stop Sign on At Intersection of
Madison Avenue (e) [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord.
No. 1385]
Maple Avenue
Magill Avenue [Added 3-5-2001 by Ord. No.
1249; amended 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 1385]
Comly Avenue
Magill Avenue [Added 12-27-2019 by Ord. No.
1677]
Franklin Avenue
Magill Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Richey Avenue
Magill Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Taylor Avenue
Maple Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Browning Road (e)
Maple Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Fern Avenue
Maple Avenue [Added 9-15-1997 by Ord. No.
1134; amended 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 1385]
Frazer Avenue
Maple Avenue [Added 9-15-1997 by Ord. No.
1134; amended 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 1385]
Garfield Avenue
Maple Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Lincoln Avenue
Maple Avenue [Added 3-5-2001 by Ord. No.
1249; amended 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 1385]
Madison Avenue (e)
Maple Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Pacific Avenue
Maple Avenue [Added 9-15-1997 by Ord. No.
1134; amended 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 1385]
Palmer Avenue
Maple Avenue [Amended 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Penn Avenue
Maple Avenue [Added 9-15-1997 by Ord. No.
1134; amended 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 1385]
Stiles Avenue (e)
Maple Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Washington Avenue
Maple Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Woodlawn Avenue
Merion Terrace Atlantic Avenue
Merrick Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Bettlewood Avenue
Merrick Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Lees Avenue
New Jersey Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord.
No. 1385]
Center Avenue
§ 293-57 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 293-57
289:662
Stop Sign on At Intersection of
New Jersey Avenue [Added 9-15-1997 by Ord.
No. 1134; amended 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Frazer Avenue
North Atlantic Avenue [Added 7-11-2011 by Ord.
No. 1500]
Collings Avenue
North Atlantic Avenue [Added 3-5-2001 by Ord.
No. 1249; amended 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Conard Avenue
North Atlantic Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord.
No. 1385]
Cuthbert Boulevard
North Atlantic Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord.
No. 1385]
Irvin Avenue
North Atlantic Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord.
No. 1385]
Ogden Avenue
North Vineyard Boulevard [Added 12-6-2004 by
Ord. No. 1356; amended 11-7-2005 by Ord.
No. 1385]
Highland Avenue
Oriental Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Fern Avenue
Oriental Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Lawnside Avenue
Oriental Avenue [Amended 11-7-2005 by Ord.
No. 1385]
Linden Avenue
Oriental Avenue [Added 3-5-2001 by Ord. No.
1249; amended 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 1385]
Stiles Avenue (e)
Pacific Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Maple Avenue
Palmer Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Highland Avenue
Palmer Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Maple Avenue
Park Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Browning Road (w)
Park Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Collings Avenue
Park Avenue (both directions) [Added 5-1-2000
by Ord. No. 1211; amended 11-7-2005 by Ord.
No. 1385]
Conard Avenue
Park Avenue [Added 7-3-2017 by Ord. No.
1620]
Dayton Avenue
§ 293-57 VEHICLE SALES LOTS § 293-57
289:663
Stop Sign on At Intersection of
Park Avenue [Added 3-5-2001 by Ord. No.
1249; amended 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 1385]
Lakeview Drive
Park Avenue [Added 3-5-2001 by Ord. No.
1249; amended 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 1385]
West Wayne Terrace
Park Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Zane Avenue (w)
Parkway [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 1385] Collings Avenue
Parkway [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 1385] Park Avenue
Penn Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Maple Avenue
Powell Lane [Added 7-11-2011 by Ord. No.
1500]
Haddon Avenue
Powell Lane [Added 7-11-2011 by Ord. No.
1500]
North Atlantic Avenue
Princeton Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Woodlawn Avenue
Princeton Avenue [Amended 11-7-2005 by Ord.
No. 1385]
Woodlawn Terrace
Richey Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Collings Avenue
Richey Avenue [Added 3-5-2001 by Ord. No.
1249; amended 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 1385]]
Dwight Avenue
Richey Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Eldridge Avenue
Richey Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Grant Avenue
Richey Avenue [Added 7-3-2017 by Ord. No.
1620]
Harrison Avenue
Richey Avenue [Added 9-15-1997 by Ord. No.
1134; amended 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 1385]
Magill Avenue
Sloan Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Grant Avenue
Sloan Avenue Amended 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Harrison Avenue
Sloan Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Magill Avenue
South Atlantic Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord.
No. 1385]
Collings Avenue
South Atlantic Avenue [Added 9-15-1997 by Ord.
No. 1134; amended 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Conard Avenue
§ 293-57 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 293-57
289:664
Stop Sign on At Intersection of
South Atlantic Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord.
No. 1385]
Dayton Avenue
South Atlantic Avenue [Added 3-5-2001 by Ord.
No. 1249; amended 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Lees Avenue
Stiles Avenue (e) [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Maple Avenue
Stokes Avenue [Amended 11-7-2005 by Ord.
No. 1385]
Cuthbert Road
Stokes Avenue Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Dayton Avenue
Stokes Avenue [Added 3-5-2001 by Ord. No.
1249; amended 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 1385]
Dill Avenue
Stokes Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1385]
Lakeview Drive
Stokes Avenue [Amended 11-7-2005 by Ord.
No. 1385]
Lees Avenue
Summerfield Avenue (e) [Added 11-7-2005 by
Ord. No. 1385]
Highland Avenue
South Vineyard Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by
Ord. No. 1385]
Garfield Avenue
South Vineyard Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by
Ord. No. 1385]
Highland Avenue
Taylor Avenue Grant Avenue
Washington Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord.
No. 1385]
Lincoln Avenue
Washington Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord.
No. 1385]
Maple Avenue
West Browning Road [Added 3-5-2001 by Ord.
No. 1249]
Harrison Avenue
West Browning Road [Added 3-5-2001 by Ord.
No. 1249]
Park Avenue
West Franklin Avenue [Added 3-5-2001 by Ord.
No. 1249]
Dwight Avenue
West Franklin Avenue Grant Avenue
Woodlawn Avenue [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord.
No. 1385]
Center Avenue
Woodlawn Avenue [Added 3-5-2001 by Ord. No.
1249]
Highland Avenue
Woodlawn Avenue [Added 3-5-2001 by Ord. No.
1249; amended 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 1385]
Maple Avenue
§ 293-57 VEHICLE SALES LOTS § 293-57
289:665
Stop Sign on At Intersection of
Woodlawn Terrace [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord.
No. 1385]
Highland Avenue
Woodlawn Terrace [Added 12-27-2019 by Ord.
No. 1677]
Princeton Avenue
§ 293-58. Schedule IX: Yield Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 293-11, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as yield intersections, and yield signs
shall be installed as follows:
Yield Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Highland Avenue East Summerfield Avenue Frazer
Avenue
New Jersey Avenue Southwest Frazer Avenue
North Vineyard
Boulevard
South At intersection of Garfield
Avenue and Hillcrest Avenue
Parkway North Park Avenue
Summerfield Avenue North Highland Avenue
§ 293-59. Schedule X: Commercial Trucks Excluded. [Amended
11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 1385]
In accordance with the provisions of § 293-12, commercial trucks are
hereby excluded from the following streets or parts of streets, except for
the pickup and delivery of materials on such streets:
Name of Street Location
Arlington Avenue From Park Avenue to Dwight Avenue
Browning Road Entire length
Dwight Avenue From White Horse Pike to Franklin Avenue
Franklin Avenue From Collings Avenue to Park Avenue
Grant Avenue From White Horse Pike to Browning Road
Harrison Avenue From White Horse Pike to Browning Road
Magill Avenue From White Horse Pike to Browning Road
Park Avenue From Collings Avenue to West Narberth
Terrace
Virginia Avenue Entire length
Woodlynne Avenue Entire length
§ 293-57 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 293-60
289:666
§ 293-60. Schedule XI: No-Passing Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 293-13, no-passing zones are hereby
established and shall be maintained upon the following described streets or
parts thereof:
Name of Street Location
Magill Avenue Between Champion Avenue and Browning
Road
§ 293-61. Schedule XII: Parking Prohibited at All Times.
In accordance with the provisions of § 293-15, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts of street:
Name of Street Side Location
Atlantic Avenue
[Added 6-1-2015
by Ord. No. 1571;
amended
10-5-2015 by
Ord. No. 1579]
From Lakeview Drive to Dayton Avenue
Bellevue Terrace West Entire length
Bettlewood Avenue West From Collings Avenue to Merrick Avenue
Bilson Avenue South From Haddon Avenue to South Atlantic
Avenue
Browning Road North From North Atlantic Avenue to Park
Avenue
Browning Road South From Collings Avenue to Park Avenue
Browning Road South From Park Avenue to North Atlantic
Avenue
Bryant Avenue South From Haddon Avenue to North Atlantic
Avenue
Cambridge Avenue East From Collings Avenue to Eldridge
Avenue
Colford Avenue East From Collings Avenue to Newton Lake
Drive
Collings Avenue North From Browning Road to Franklin Avenue
Collings Avenue North From Franklin Avenue to White Horse
Pike
Collings Avenue North From the easterly curbline of Haddon
Avenue to a point 80 feet easterly thereof
Collings Avenue North From Haddon Avenue to Browning Road
§ 293-60 VEHICLE SALES LOTS § 293-61
289:667
Name of Street Side Location
Collings Avenue
[Added 6-5-2017
by Ord. No. 1618]
North and
South
Between the crosswalk and the "No
Parking" sign
Collings Avenue South From Browning Road to White Horse
Pike
Collings Avenue South From the westerly curbline of Haddon
Avenue to a point 178 feet west thereof
Collings Avenue South From the northerly curbline of Lakeview
Drive to Park Avenue
Collings Avenue South From Maple Avenue to Haddon Avenue
Collings Avenue South From Maple Avenue to a point 70 feet
east of the easterly curbline of Maple
Avenue
Conard Avenue North From South Atlantic Avenue to Park
Avenue
Conard Avenue South From Haddon Avenue to North Atlantic
Avenue
Conard Avenue South From South Atlantic Avenue to Park
Avenue
Coolidge Avenue Both From South Atlantic Avenue to terminus
Cooper Avenue Both From South Atlantic Avenue to terminus
Curtis Avenue Both From South Atlantic Avenue to terminus
Cuthbert Road North From the easterly curbline of Haddon
Avenue to a point 225 feet easterly
thereof
Cuthbert Road North From Haddon Avenue to Stokes Avenue
Cuthbert Road South From the easterly curbline of Haddon
Avenue to a point 152 feet easterly
thereof
Dill Avenue Both From South Atlantic Avenue to Park
Avenue
Dwight Avenue North From Richey Avenue to U.S. Route 130
Edison Avenue Both From South Atlantic Avenue to terminus
Eldridge Avenue North From Bettlewood Avenue to Everett
Avenue
Eldridge Avenue South From Colford Avenue to Everett Avenue
Everett Avenue East From Collings Avenue to Eldridge
Avenue
Everett Avenue East From Eldridge Avenue to Newton Lake
Drive
§ 293-61 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 293-61
289:668
Name of Street Side Location
Fern Avenue North From a point 240 feet east of the easterly
curbline of Maple Avenue and extending
180 feet easterly thereof
Fern Avenue South From Haddon Avenue to a point 144 feet
west of the westerly curbline of
Burrwood Avenue
Ferry Avenue South From White Horse Pike to Haddon
Avenue
Franklin Avenue West From the southerly curbline of Magill
Avenue to a point 270 feet south thereof
Frazer Avenue North From Maple Avenue to Haddon Avenue
Frazer Avenue North From Maple Avenue to a point 256 feet
east of the easterly curbline of Haddon
Avenue
Garfield Avenue North From the easterly curbline of Haddon
Avenue to a point 100 feet easterly
thereof
Garfield Avenue South From Highland Avenue to North
Vineyard Boulevard
Haddon Avenue East From the southerly curbline of Cuthbert
Road to a point 180 feet southerly
thereof
Haddon Avenue
[Added
12-28-2017 by
Ord. No. 1633]
East First spot on Haddon Avenue near
Collings Avenue marked "Zip Car"
Haddon Avenue
[Added 4-4-2016
by Ord. No. 1593]
South From Ferry Avenue to Bellevue Terrace
Haddon Avenue West From Bryant Avenue to Cuthbert Road
Harrison Avenue North From White Horse Pike (U.S. Route 30)
to Richey Avenue
Harrison Avenue South From U.S. Route 30 to West Franklin
Avenue
Harvard Avenue North From Haddon Avenue to Maple Avenue
Highland Avenue
[Added 8-6-2018
by Ord. No. 1643]
Both From Summerfield to Hillcrest Avenue
Hillcrest Avenue North From Highland Avenue to Maple Avenue
Homestead Avenue South From Haddon Avenue to South Atlantic
Avenue
§ 293-61 VEHICLE SALES LOTS § 293-61
289:669
Name of Street Side Location
Irvin Avenue Both From Haddon Avenue to South Atlantic
Avenue
Knight Avenue North From Haddon Avenue to Maple Avenue
Lake Shore Drive Both Newton Avenue to Newton Avenue
Lees Avenue North From Haddon Avenue to Atlantic Avenue
Lees Avenue South From Atlantic Avenue to Park Avenue
Lees Avenue South From the westerly curbline of Haddon
Avenue to a point 112 feet westerly
thereof
Lincoln Avenue North From Haddon Avenue to Maple Avenue
Lincoln Avenue North From Maple Avenue to a point 586 feet
east of the easterly curbline of Autumn
Avenue
Lumberyard
parking garage
[Added
12-28-2017 by
Ord. No. 1633]
Spot marked "Zip Car"
Magill Avenue Both From the westerly curbline of U.S. Route
30 to a point 125 feet west thereof
Magill Avenue North From the easterly curbline of U.S. Route
30 to a point 125 feet east thereof
Magill Avenue South From White Horse Pike to Franklin
Avenue
Maple Avenue Both From Pacific Avenue to Browning Road
Maple Avenue East From Pacific Avenue to Penn Avenue
Maple Avenue West From the southerly curbline of Fern
Avenue to a point 100 feet southerly
thereof
Maple Avenue West From Woodlawn Avenue to Fern Avenue
Maple Avenue
[Added
12-27-2018 by
Ord. No. 1652]
Between Washington Avenue and the
driveway of Washington Arms
Narberth Terrace South From Haddon Avenue to Atlantic Avenue
New Jersey Avenue South From Frazer Avenue to a point 140 feet
west of the westerly curbline of
Burrwood Avenue
§ 293-61 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 293-61
289:670
Name of Street Side Location
North Atlantic
Avenue [Added
7-11-2011 by
Ord. No. 1500]
Both West Knight Avenue to Collings Avenue
North Atlantic
Avenue
East From Collings Avenue to Irvin Avenue
North Atlantic
Avenue
West From Collings Avenue to Irvin Avenue
North Atlantic
Avenue
West From Homestead Avenue to Cuthbert
Road
North Atlantic
Avenue
West From Merion Terrace to Browning Road
North Atlantic
Avenue
West From West Homestead Avenue to
Cuthbert Road
North Vineyard
Boulevard
South From Garfield Avenue to Highland
Avenue
Ogden Avenue Both From South Atlantic Avenue to Park
Avenue
Ogden Avenue South From Haddon Avenue to North Atlantic
Avenue
Old White Horse
Pike
East From Route 130 to Ferry Avenue
Oxford Avenue Both From Eldridge Avenue to terminus
Park Avenue East From the northerly curbline of Collings
Avenue to a point 116 feet northerly
thereof
Park Avenue West From Browning Road to Cuthbert Road
Penn Avenue North From Haddon Avenue to Maple Avenue
Richey Avenue North From the easterly curbline of Crescent
Boulevard (U.S. Route 130) to a point
120 feet east thereof
South Atlantic
Avenue
East From Collings Avenue to Cuthbert Road
South Atlantic
Avenue
West From Cuthbert Road to Conard Avenue
South Atlantic
Avenue
West From the southerly curbline of Lees
Avenue to 232 feet south thereof
South Atlantic
Avenue
West From Lees Avenue to Cooper Avenue
Spring Avenue East From Woodlawn Avenue to Lincoln
Avenue
§ 293-61 VEHICLE SALES LOTS § 293-61
289:671
Name of Street Side Location
Washington
Avenue
South From Haddon Avenue to Maple Avenue
Wesley Avenue Both From South Atlantic Avenue to its
terminus
West Homestead South From Haddon Avenue to South Atlantic
Avenue
West Knight
Avenue
Both From Haddon Avenue to terminus
West Knight
Avenue
North From Haddon Avenue to P.A.T.C.O.
West Linden
Avenue
Both From Haddon Avenue to terminus
West Stiles Avenue Both From Haddon Avenue to South Atlantic
Avenue
Whitman Avenue Both From South Atlantic Avenue to its
terminus
Woodlawn Avenue North From Haddon Avenue to Maple Avenue
Woodlawn Avenue North From Autumn Avenue to Princeton
Avenue
Zane Avenue South From Haddon Avenue to Park Avenue
§ 293-62. Schedule XIII: No Stopping or Standing.
In accordance with the provisions of § 293-16, no person shall stop or stand
a vehicle upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
All municipal and county
roads
Both No stopping or standing of 10-ton
vehicles on all municipal and
county roads
§ 293-63. Schedule XIV: Parking Prohibited Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 293-17, no person shall park a vehicle
between the hours listed upon any of the following described streets or
parts of streets:
§ 293-61 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 293-63
289:672
Name of
Street Side Hours Location
All streets Both 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m., except as set
forth in §§ 293-21
and 293-24
Borough of Collingswood
Coolidge
Avenue
North 7:00 a.m. to 11:30
a.m.
From South Atlantic
Avenue to terminus
Coolidge
Avenue
South 11:30 a.m. to 4:00
p.m.
From South Atlantic
Avenue to terminus
Cooper
Avenue
North 7:00 a.m. to 11:30
a.m.
From South Atlantic
Avenue to terminus
Cooper
Avenue
South 11:30 a.m. to 4:00
p.m.
From South Atlantic
Avenue to terminus
Curtis
Avenue
North 7:00 a.m. to 11:30
a.m.
From South Atlantic
Avenue to terminus
Curtis
Avenue
South 11:30 a.m. to 4:00
p.m.
From South Atlantic
Avenue to terminus
Dill Avenue North 4:00 p.m. to 11:30
a.m.
From South Atlantic
Avenue to Park Avenue
Dill Avenue South 11:30 a.m. to 4:00
p.m.
From Park Avenue to South
Atlantic Avenue
Edison
Avenue
North 7:00 a.m. to 11:30
a.m.
From South Atlantic
Avenue to terminus
Edison
Avenue
South 11:30 a.m. to 4:00
p.m.
From South Atlantic
Avenue to terminus
§ 293-64. Schedule XV: No Stopping or Standing Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 293-18, no person shall stop or stand
a vehicle between the times specified upon any of the following described
streets or parts of streets:
Name of
Street Side Hours/Days Location
Cambridge
Avenue
West 7:00 a.m. to
4:00
p.m./School
days
From Collings Avenue to
Eldridge Avenue
Collings
Avenue
North 7:00 a.m. to
4:00
p.m./School
days
From Colford Avenue to
Everett Avenue
Collings
Avenue
North 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m./All
From White Horse Pike to
Cattell Avenue
§ 293-63 VEHICLE SALES LOTS § 293-64
289:673
Name of
Street Side Hours/Days Location
Collings
Avenue
South 4:00 p.m. to
6:00 p.m./All
From Cattell Avenue to
White Horse Pike
Collings
Avenue
South 7:00 a.m. to
4:00
p.m./School
days
From Everett Avenue to
Colford Avenue
§ 293-65. Schedule XVI: Time Limit Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 293-19, no person shall park a vehicle
for longer than the time limit shown upon any of the following described
streets or parts of streets:
Name of
Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Collings
Avenue
South 15 mins.; 9:00
a.m. to 6:00
p.m./All
From a point 25 feet from
the easterly curbline of
North Atlantic Avenue to a
point 49 feet easterly
thereof
East Stiles
Avenue
Both 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m.
to 5:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Haddon Avenue to
Oriental Avenue
Fern Avenue North 4 hrs.; 7:00 a.m.
to 5:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Haddon Avenue to
Maple Avenue
Haddon
Avenue
East 2 hrs.; 8:00 a.m.
to 5:00 p.m./All
From a point 35 feet from
the northerly curbline of
East Linden Avenue to a
point 270 feet north of the
northerly curbline of East
Stiles Avenue
Haddon
Avenue
South 2 hrs.; 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m./All
From Gorman Avenue to
West Zane Avenue
Haddon
Avenue
West 2 hrs.; 8:00 a.m.
to 5:00 p.m./All
From West Linden Avenue
to West Stiles Avenue
Richey Avenue Both 2 hrs.; 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m./All
From Eldridge Avenue to
Grant Avenue
§ 293-66. Schedule XVII: Summer Parking in Roberts Park Area.
In accordance with the provisions of § 293-23, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time from June 1 through September 15 upon any of the following
§ 293-64 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 293-66
289:674
described streets or parts of streets, except as provided in § 293-21,
Nighttime parking; insignia required:
Name of Street Side Location
Garfield Avenue North From Maple Avenue to Highland Avenue
Highland Avenue West From Hillcrest Avenue to Garfield
Avenue
Hillcrest Avenue North From Maple Avenue to Highland Avenue
South Vineyard
Boulevard
West From Garfield Avenue to Hillcrest
Avenue
§ 293-67. Schedule XVIII: Loading Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 293-25, the following described
locations are hereby designated as loading zones:
Name of Street Side Location
Haddon Avenue West Beginning at a point 352 feet from the
northerly curbline of Irvin Avenue and
extending to a point 60 feet northerly
thereof
Richey Avenue West Beginning at a point 98 feet from the
southerly curbline of Collings Avenue and
extending 50 feet southerly thereof
§ 293-68. Schedule XIX: Taxi Stands.
In accordance with the provisions of § 293-26, the following described
locations are hereby designated as taxi stands:
Name of Street Side Location
Haddon Avenue West Beginning at a point 408 feet from the
northerly curbline of Collings Avenue and
extending to a point 40 feet northerly
thereof
§ 293-69. Schedule XX: Bus Stops.
In accordance with the provisions of § 293-27, the following described
locations are hereby designated as bus stops:
A. Haddon Avenue, northbound, on the easterly side thereof at:
(1) Penn Avenue (near side): beginning at the southerly curbline of
Penn Avenue and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(2) Homestead Avenue (near side): beginning at the southerly curbline
of Homestead Avenue and extending 115 feet south therefrom.
§ 293-66 VEHICLE SALES LOTS § 293-69
289:675
(3) Stiles Avenue (near side): beginning at the southerly curbline of
Stiles Avenue and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(4) Fern Avenue (near side): beginning at the southerly curbline of
Fern Avenue and extending 110 feet southerly therefrom.
(5) Frazer Avenue (near side): beginning at the southerly curbline of
Frazer Avenue and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(6) East Collings Avenue (near side): beginning at the southerly
curbline of East Collings Avenue and extending 105 feet southerly
therefrom.
(7) Woodlawn Avenue (near side): beginning at the southerly curbline
of Woodlawn Avenue and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(8) Harvard Avenue (near side): beginning at the southerly curbline of
Harvard Avenue and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(9) Knight Avenue (near side): beginning at the southerly curbline of
Knight Avenue and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(10) East Madison (near side): beginning at the southerly curbline of
East Madison and extending 108 feet southerly therefrom.
(11) Garfield Avenue (near side): beginning at the southerly curbline of
Garfield Avenue and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(12) Hillcrest Avenue (near side): beginning at the southerly curbline of
Hillcrest Avenue and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(13) Palmer Avenue (near side): beginning at the southerly curbline of
Palmer Avenue and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(14) Browning Road (near side): beginning at the northerly curbline of
Browning Road and extending 118 feet northerly therefrom.
(15) Ardmore Terrace (near side): beginning at the southerly curbline of
Ardmore Terrace and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(16) Narberth Terrace (near side): beginning at the southerly curbline
of Narberth Terrace and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
B. Haddon Avenue, southbound, on the westerly side thereof at:
(1) Bellevue Terrace (near side): beginning at the northerly curbline of
Bellevue Terrace and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(2) Narberth Terrace (near side): beginning at the northerly curbline of
Narberth Terrace and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(3) Franklin Avenue (near side): beginning at the northerly curbline of
Franklin Avenue and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
§ 293-69 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 293-69
289:676
§ 293-70. Schedule XXI: Snow Emergency No-Parking Areas.
In accordance with the provisions of § 293-28, no person shall park a vehicle
upon either side of any of the streets or parts of streets thereof listed below,
whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers the
street or highway:
Name of Street Location
(Reserved)
§ 293-71. Schedule XXII: Parking Meter Zones. [Amended 3-7-2011
by Ord. No. 1490]
(4) Browning Road (near side): beginning at the northerly curbline of
Browning Road and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(5) Palmer Avenue (near side): beginning at the northerly curbline of
Palmer Avenue and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(6) Hillcrest Avenue (near side): beginning at the northerly curbline of
Hillcrest Avenue and extending 205 feet northerly therefrom.
(7) West Zane Avenue (near side): beginning at the northerly curbline
of West Zane Avenue and extending 125 feet northerly therefrom.
(8) West Madison Avenue (near side): beginning at the northerly
curbline of West Madison Avenue and extending 105 feet northerly
therefrom.
(9) Woodlawn Avenue (near side): beginning at the northerly curbline
of Woodlawn Avenue and extending 137 feet northerly therefrom.
(10) Collings Avenue (near side): beginning at the northerly curbline of
Collings Avenue and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(11) Irwin Avenue (near side): beginning at the northerly curbline of
Irwin Avenue and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(12) Lees Avenue (near side): beginning at the northerly curbline of
Lees Avenue and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(13) Stiles Avenue (near side): beginning at the northerly curbline of
Stiles Avenue and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(14) Conard Avenue (near side): beginning at the northerly curbline of
Conard Avenue and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(15) Ogden Avenue (near side): beginning at the northerly curbline of
Ogden Avenue and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
A. On-street parking meter zones. Parking or standing a vehicle in a
parking meter space in the on-street parking meter zones described
§ 293-69 VEHICLE SALES LOTS § 293-71
289:677
below shall be lawful during the hours specified only upon the deposit
of such amount as is indicated for each specified period of time.
Name of
Street Side Hours
Time Limit/
Rate Location
Fern Avenue Northwest 9:00 a.m. to
9:00 p.m.
3 hrs./$0.50
per hour
From the
northeasterly
side of Haddon
Avenue to a
point 175 feet
northeasterly
therefrom
Frazer
Avenue
Both 9:00 a.m. to
9:00 p.m.
3 hrs./$0.50
per hour
From the
northeasterly
side of Haddon
Avenue to a
point 175 feet
northeasterly
therefrom
Haddon
Avenue
Both 9:00 a.m. to
9:00 p.m.
3 hrs./$0.50
per hour
From the
northwesterly
line of East
Stiles Avenue,
northwesterly
to the
southeasterly
line of West
Madison
Avenue
Haddon
Avenue
[Added
3-9-2012 by
Ord. No.
1508]
North — — For a distance
of 116 feet in a
northerly
direction from
the northeast
corner of East
Coulter Avenue;
3 metered
spaces and 1
15-minute
space
§ 293-71 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 293-71
289:678
Name of
Street Side Hours
Time Limit/
Rate Location
Haddon
Avenue
[Added
3-9-2012 by
Ord. No.
1508]
South — — From a distance
of 95.6 feet in a
southerly
direction from
the southeast
corner of West
Coulter Avenue;
1 metered
space and 1
15-minute
space
Harvard
Avenue
Southeast 9:00 a.m. to
9:00 p.m.
3 hrs./$0.50
per hour
From the
northeasterly
side of Haddon
Avenue to a
point 175 feet
northeasterly
therefrom
Knight
Avenue
Southeast 9:00 a.m. to
9:00 p.m.
3 hrs./$0.50
per hour
From the
northeasterly
side of Haddon
Avenue to a
point 175 feet
northeasterly
therefrom
Lincoln
Avenue
Both 9:00 a.m. to
9:00 p.m.
3 hrs./$0.50
per hour
From the
northeast line
of Haddon
Avenue,
northeasterly to
the
southwesterly
line of Spring
Avenue
extended
North
Atlantic
Avenue
Northeast 9:00 a.m. to
9:00 p.m.
3 hrs./$0.50
per hour
Powell Lane to
West Collings
Avenue
Powell Lane Both 9:00 a.m. to
9:00 p.m.
3 hrs./$0.50
per hour
Length of street
§ 293-71 VEHICLE SALES LOTS § 293-71
289:679
Name of
Street Side Hours
Time Limit/
Rate Location
Washington
Avenue
Southeast 9:00 a.m. to
9:00 p.m.
3 hrs./$0.50
per hour
From the
northeasterly
side of Haddon
Avenue to a
point 175 feet
northeasterly
therefrom
B. Off-street parking meter zones. Parking or standing a vehicle in a
parking meter space in the off-street parking meter zones described
below shall be lawful only when not in excess of the maximum parking
time indicated during the hours of operation specified, on all days
except Sundays and holidays, and only upon the deposit of such amount
as is indicated for each specified period of time.
Name of Lot
(Location) Hours
Time Limit/
Rate
Borough Parking Lot No. 3,
located on Atlantic Avenue near
the P.A.T.C.O. lines; 113 meters
nearest P.A.T.C.O. [NOTE:
Stickers may be purchased
permitting parking for businesses
only in this lot for 12 hours at an
annual cost of $145. Rules shall
be promulgated by the
Administrator in order to carry
out the intent of this off-street
parking meter zone, which is to
provide parking for businesses in
the Borough of Collingswood.]
[Amended 11-3-2014 by Ord.
No. 1558]
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m.
3 hrs./$0.50 per
hour
The parking lot on Collings
Avenue near the P.A.T.C.O. lines,
known as Block 96, Lots 19 and
20:
16 meters nearest Haddon
Avenue
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m.
3 hrs./$0.50 per
hour
21 meters nearest Collings
Avenue
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m.
3 hrs./$0.50 per
hour
§ 293-71 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 293-71
289:680
§ 293-71.1. Schedule XXIII: Alternate Side Parking. [Added
9-15-1997 by Ord. No. 1134]
Parking shall be prohibited as follows:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Location Hours/Days
Haddon Avenue Northbound 500-900 Tuesday/ 12:00 a.m.
to 7:00 a.m.
Haddon Avenue Southbound 500-900 Friday/ 12:00 a.m. to
7:00 a.m.
§ 293-71.2. Schedule XXIV: Fire Lanes. [Added 10-1-2001 by Ord.
No. 1269]
In accordance with the provisions of § 293-27.1, the following described
locations are hereby designated as fire lanes, upon which no person shall
stop or stand a vehicle:
Name of Lot
(Location) Hours
Time Limit/
Rate
Lumberyard Parking Garage 9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m.
3 hrs./$0.50 per
hour; 5
additional
hours/$0.30 per
hour
The parking lot at the rear of the
Municipal Building, located at
678 Haddon Avenue
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m.
3 hrs./$0.50 per
hour
The parking lot located along
North Atlantic Avenue between
Collings Avenue and Irvin Avenue
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m.
3 hrs./$0.50 per
hour
The parking lot at the P.A.T.C.O.
overhead rails located on Atlantic
Avenue between Collings Avenue
and Irvin Avenue
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m.
3 hrs./$0.50 per
hour
Zone School Parking Lot [Added
11-3-2014 by Ord. No. 1558]
5:00 p.m. to
9:00 p.m.
3 hrs./$0.50 per
hour
NOTE: Annual stickers may be purchased permitting parking for
businesses and their employees in the parking garage at designated
spots. Rules and rates shall be promulgated by the Borough
Administrator and/or Police Chief for the purpose of providing offstreet
parking for Collingswood business owners and their employees.
§ 293-71 VEHICLE SALES LOTS § 293-71.2
289:681
Name of Street Side Location
Browning Road West From Haddon Avenue to 100 feet past the
school entrance door (Mark Newbie School)
Cambridge
Avenue
East From Eldridge Avenue to Collings Avenue
(high school)
Cedar Avenue West From Lincoln Avenue to the school driveway
(Tatem School)
Comly Avenue West From Magill Avenue to 100 feet past the
school entrance door (Sharp School)
Eldridge Avenue North and
South
From Colford Avenue to Oxford Avenue
(middle school)
Eldridge Avenue North From Oxford Avenue to Cambridge Avenue
(high school)
Haddon Avenue West From the school driveway to the driveway
for 460 Haddon Avenue (Garfield School)
Lees Avenue East From Stokes Avenue to 50 feet past the
school entrance (Zane North School)
Lincoln Avenue North From Cedar Avenue to the end of school
property (Tatem School)
Magill Avenue South From Comly Avenue to Taylor Avenue
(Sharp School)
Parkview
Apartment
Complex [Added
1-8-2007 by
Ord. No. 1420]
The circle drives in front of Towers A, B, C
and D
Parkview
Apartment
Complex [Added
1-8-2007 by
Ord. No. 1420]
Within the three-thousand-square-foot area
at the end of the roadway at the rear of
Tower A, adjacent to the loading platform
Parkview
Apartment
Complex [Added
1-8-2007 by
Ord. No. 1420]
Within the three-thousand-square-foot area
at the end of the roadway at the rear of
Tower B, adjacent to the loading platform
Parkview
Apartment
Complex [Added
1-8-2007 by
Ord. No. 1420]
Within the three-thousand-square-foot area
at the end of the roadway at the rear of
Tower C, adjacent to the loading platform
§ 293-71.2 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 293-71.2
289:682
Name of Street Side Location
Parkview
Apartment
Complex [Added
1-8-2007 by
Ord. No. 1420]
Within the three-thousand-square-foot area
at the end of the roadway at the rear of
Tower D, adjacent to the loading platform
Parkview
Apartment
Complex [Added
1-8-2007 by
Ord. No. 1420]
On either side of the roadway from Newton
Lake Drive to the south entrance of
Parkview Apartments garage
Scottish Rite
Theatre and
Ballroom [Added
12-29-2009 by
Ord. No. 1474]
The southwest curbline parallel to the
Scottish Rite Theatre and Ballroom, all
areas immediately adjacent to the loading
dock and the rear entrance of the building
closest to Magill Avenue
Stokes Avenue North From Lees Avenue to the end of the school
playground (Zane North School)
§ 293-72. Entrances and exits.135 [Added 1-6-1997 by Ord. No. 1113]
A. Traffic entering and exiting the WAWA parking lot, located at Block 96,
Lots 14A, 15, 19 and 20. Traffic shall enter said parking lot only from
Haddon Avenue. Traffic exiting said parking lot shall exit only onto
Collings Avenue. It shall be a violation of this section for any motor
vehicle to enter said parking lot from Collings Avenue. It shall be a
violation of this section to exit said parking lot onto Haddon Avenue.
B. Traffic exiting the South Jersey Savings and Loan Association parking
lot, located at Block 22, Lot 13, 627 Haddon Avenue, shall exit said
parking lot only onto Haddon Avenue from Drive-Thru and MAC lanes.
It shall be a violation of this section for any motor vehicle to enter said
parking lot from Haddon Avenue for the use of the Drive-Thru and MAC
lanes. [Added 3-3-1997 by Ord. No. 1118]
C. Traffic entering the PNC Bank parking lot, located at Block 67, Lot 5,
852 Haddon Avenue, shall enter said parking lot only from Haddon
Avenue into the parking lot and Drive-Thru lanes. It shall be a violation
of this section for any motor vehicle to exit said parking lot onto Haddon
Avenue. [Added 3-3-1997 by Ord. No. 1118]
135. Editor's Note: The language for former § 293-72, Schedule XXIII: Handicapped Parking,
can now be found in § 293-45.
§ 293-71.2 VEHICLE SALES LOTS § 293-72
289:683
Chapter 301
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Waterworks — See Ch. 77.
Development regulations — See Ch. 141.
Sewers — See Ch. 247.
§ 293-72 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 293-72
289:684
ARTICLE I
Tampering; Connections
[Adopted 8-16-1971 by Ord. No. 662 as Ch. 98 of the 1971 Code]
§ 301-1. Tampering with water supply system. [Amended 3-5-2007
by Ord. No. 1424]
It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, corporations or other business
entity to damage, tamper with, or destroy any part or parts of the water
supply system located within the boundaries of the Borough of
Collingswood, the Township of Haddon or the Borough of Woodlynne owned
and/or serviced by the Borough of Collingswood Water Department.
§ 301-2. Connection prohibited. [Amended 3-5-2007 by Ord. No.
1424]
It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, corporations or other business
entity to tap into or connect with any part or parts of the water supply
system, including fire hydrants, lying within the boundaries of the Borough
of Collingswood within the Township of Haddon or the Borough of
Woodlynne owned and/or serviced by the Borough of Collingswood Water
Department.
§ 301-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-15-1994 by Ord. No.
1058; 3-5-2007 by Ord. No. 1424]
Any person, persons, corporations or other business entity being found
guilty of violating any of the provisions of this article shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $2,000, imprisonment for not more than 90 days or a
period of community service for not more than 90 days, or any combination
thereof.
§ 301-1 VEHICLE SALES LOTS § 301-3
289:685

ARTICLE II
Water Rents
[Adopted 11-19-1973 by Ord. No. 681 (Ch. 97 of the 1971 Code)]
§ 301-4. Connection permit required.
From and after the passage of this Article, no person, persons, firm,
corporation, association or organization shall make any connection with the
water system of the Borough of Collingswood until he or it shall first obtain
a permit therefor from the Borough Clerk.
§ 301-5. Compliance required.
Any such person connecting with or heretofore connected to the water
system shall pay the charges and rentals herein provided for and shall
comply with and be subject to all of the terms and conditions of this Article.
§ 301-6. Charges for installation of connection and street opening
permits; size of service line restricted. [Amended 8-15-1994 by Ord.
No. 1058; 3-5-2007 by Ord. No. 1424]
A. Where no connection from the water main to the curb currently exists,
an initial connection fee of $2,000 shall be charged.
B. Installation charges.
(1) The following charges shall apply to the installation of a water
connection by the Borough. This shall include the corporation stop,
service pipe to the curb, curb stop, curb box, meter and labor.
Size of Service Line
(inches) Charge
3/4 $900
1 $1,200
(2) An additional charge of $500 shall apply if a pit meter is required.
C. The following charges shall apply for street opening permits:
(1) State highway: $800.
(2) County highway: $400.
(3) Municipal highway: $250.
D. No service line which exceeds one inch in diameter may be installed
without the review and approval of all plans and specifications of the
proposed installation location of the service line by the Borough’s
Superintendent of the Water Department. No installation may begin
until the owner of the property has received written authorization from
the Superintendent of the Water Department. Upon such written
§ 301-4 VEHICLE SALES LOTS § 301-6
289:687
§ 301-7. Quantities for minimum charges.
A minimum charge shall be made for water service through each
connection. Such minimum charge shall be made for water use per
connection in the following quantities or less:
§ 301-8. Service charges per connection. [Amended 1-7-1974 by
Ord. No. 684; 2-20-1979 by Ord. No. 753; 10-4-1982 by Ord. No.
798; 3-3-1986 by Ord. No. 863; 5-19-1986 by Ord. No. 869; 9-4-1990
by Ord. No. 980; 10-1-1990 by Ord. No. 982; 1-24-1994 by Ord. No.
1042; 2-5-1996 by Ord. No. 1089; 2-1-1999 by Ord. No. 1176;
3-6-2000 by Ord. No. 1209; 5-5-2003 by Ord. No. 1314; 6-5-2006 by
Ord. No. 1400; 6-1-2009 by Ord. No. 1461; 6-6-2011 by Ord. No.
1496; 12-2-2013 by Ord. No. 1542; 12-7-2015 by Ord. No. 1583;
12-4-2017 by Ord. No. 1629; 12-3-2018 by Ord. No. 1651; 12-2-2019
by Ord. No. 1673]
The service charge per connection, both inside and outside the Borough of
Collingswood, shall be as follows:
Size of Meter
(inches) Monthly Charge Quarterly Charge
5/8 X 3/4 $10.75 $32.25
3/4 $16 $48
1 $27 $81
1 1/4 $38 $114
1 1/2 $53.75 $161.25
2 $86 $258
3 $172 $516
4 $259 $777
6 $540 $1,620
authorization and payment of all connection fees to the Borough, the
property owner may install the service line at his or her expense.
E. No person, persons, corporation or other business entity shall make any
connection to any fire hydrant of the water system located within the
boundaries of the Borough of Collingswood, the Township of Haddon or
the Borough of Woodlynne and owned and/or serviced by the Borough
of Collingswood Water Department without first obtaining a permit.
A. Per month, 330 cubic feet (2,490 gallons).
B. Per quarter of one year, 1,000 cubic feet (7,480 gallons).
C. Per half of one year, 2,000 cubic feet (14,960 gallons).
§ 301-6 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 301-9
289:688
§ 301-9. Charge for water consumption. [Amended 2-20-1979 by
Ord. No. 753; 10-4-1982 by Ord. No. 798; 3-3-1986 by Ord. No. 863;
9-4-1990 by Ord. No. 980; 1-24-1994 by Ord. No. 1042; 2-5-1996 by
Ord. No. 1089; 2-1-1999 by Ord. No. 1176; 3-6-2000 by Ord. No.
1209; 5-5-2003 by Ord. No. 1314; 6-5-2006 by Ord. No. 1400;
6-1-2009 by Ord. No. 1461; 6-6-2011 by Ord. No. 1496; 12-2-2013 by
Ord. No. 1542; 12-7-2015 by Ord. No. 1583; 12-4-2017 by Ord. No.
1629; 12-3-2018 by Ord. No. 1651; 12-2-2019 by Ord. No. 1673]
The water charge for all water used from connections, both in the Borough
of Collingswood and from connections outside the Borough of Collingswood,
shall be $3.65 per 100 cubic feet.
§ 301-10. Fire protection service charge. [Added 9-4-1990 by Ord.
No. 980; amended 1-24-1994 by Ord. No. 1042; 2-5-1996 by Ord. No.
1089; 2-1-1999 by Ord. No. 1176; 3-6-2000 by Ord. No. 1209;
12-29-2009 by Ord. No. 1472]
A public fire protection charge of $250 per hydrant is hereby established.
§ 301-11. Payment of charges; penalty for late payment.
The water charges established and fixed herein shall be payable
semiannually on such dates as the Director of Revenue and Finance may
direct, except that said Director of Revenue and Finance may direct that
any water charges be payable monthly or quarter-annually on such dates
as he shall direct. Where water charges are payable semiannually, the
semiannual charge provided for in § 301-8 shall be paid for the semiannual
quantity provided for in § 301-7. Where water charges are payable monthly,
the monthly charge provided for in § 301-8 shall be paid for the monthly
quantity provided in § 301-7. Charges for excess water consumption shall
be payable at the same times as minimum charges are payable. If any such
charge shall not be paid within 30 days after the same shall be due, a
penalty shall be added thereon at the rate of 8% from the due date to the
date of payment.
§ 301-12. Lien; collection of charges, costs and penalties.
All water charges established herein shall be payable to the Collector of
Taxes of the Borough of Collingswood or such other person as may be
designated by the Board of Commissioners and, where the premises served
are within the Borough of Collingswood, shall be and remain a lien upon the
same as all other taxes and municipal charges upon real estate under the
laws of the State of New Jersey. The Borough of Collingswood shall have the
same remedy for the collection of water charges, with interest, costs and
penalties as fixed by the Board of Commissioners, as said borough now has
or may hereafter have under the laws of the State of New Jersey for the
collection of taxes and other municipal liens upon real estate, together with
any other remedies as may be provided by law.
§ 301-9 VEHICLE SALES LOTS § 301-13
289:689
§ 301-13. Basis of water charges for new connections.
Where any structure or improvement is completed and water service is
available, water charges shall be based on the proportion which the water
charge bears to the balance of the billing period during which the water
service is furnished.
§ 301-14. Imposition and collection of additional taxes. [Added
11-19-1984 by Ord. No. 827]
The borough shall impose and collect such taxes as are required by P.L.
1983, c. 443.136
§ 301-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-15-1994 by Ord. No.
1058]
Any person violating § 301-4 of this Article shall, upon conviction thereof,
be subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000, imprisonment in the county jail
not exceeding 90 days or a period of community service for not more than
90 days, or any combination thereof, in the discretion of the court.
136. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 58:12A-1 et seq.
§ 301-13 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § 301-15
289:690
Appendix
Chapter A312
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
§ A312-1. Purpose.
The Borough hereby grants to Comcast Cablevision of Garden State, L.P.,
its nonexclusive municipal consent to place in, upon, across, above, over
and under highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, easements, public ways and
public places in the Borough poles, wires, cables, underground conduits,
manholes and other television conductors, fixtures, apparatus and
equipment as may be necessary for the construction, operation and
maintenance in the Borough of a cable television and communications
system.
§ A312-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Such meaning
or definition of terms is supplemental to those definitions of the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) rules and regulations, 47 C.F.R.
Subsection 76.1 et seq., and the Cable Communications Policy Act, 47 U.S.C.
Section 521 et seq., as amended, and the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A.
48:5A-1 et seq., and shall in no way be construed to broaden, alter or
conflict with the federal and state definitions:
ACT or CABLE TELEVISION ACT — Chapter 186 of the General Laws of
New Jersey, and subsequent amendments thereto, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq.
BASIC CABLE SERVICE — Any service tier, which includes the
retransmission of local television broadcast signals as defined by the FCC.
BOARD or BPU — The Board of Public Utilities, State of New Jersey.
COMPANY — The grantee of rights under this ordinance and is known as
"Comcast Cablevision of Garden State, L.P."
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
MUNICIPALITY or BOROUGH — The Borough of Collingswood, County of
Camden, State of New Jersey.
OFFICE or OCTV — The Office of Cable Television of the Board.
§ A312-3. Statement of findings.
Public hearings conducted by the Borough concerning the renewal of
municipal consent herein granted to the company were held after proper
public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act and the
regulations of the Board adopted pursuant thereto. Said hearings, having
been fully open to the public, and the Borough, having received at said
§ 301-15 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A312-3
A312:691
public hearings all comments regarding the qualifications of the company
to receive this renewal of municipal consent, the Borough hereby finds that
the company possesses the necessary legal, technical, character, financial
and other qualifications and that the company's operating and construction
arrangements are adequate and feasible.
§ A312-4. Duration of franchise.
§ A312-5. Franchise fee.
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act, the company shall, during
each year of operation under the consent granted herein, pay to the
Borough 2% of the gross revenues from all recurring charges in the nature
of subscription fees paid by subscribers for cable television reception
service in the Borough or any higher amount permitted by the Act or
otherwise allowable by law, whichever is greater.
§ A312-6. Franchise territory.
The consent granted under this ordinance to the renewal of the franchise
shall apply to the entirety of the Borough and any property subsequently
annexed hereto.
§ A312-7. Extension of service.
A. The nonexclusive municipal consent granted herein shall expire 15
years from the date of expiration of the previous certificate of approval
issued by the Board with an automatic renewal of 10 years as provided
by N.J.S.A. 48:5A-19 and 48:5A-25, and N.J.A.C. 14:18-13.6.
B. The municipality may review the company's compliance under this
ordinance. Said reviews shall commence on the 10th anniversary of the
granting of the renewal certificate of approval and shall be completed
no later than six months from commencement. The municipality shall
notify the company and the OCTV of the commencement of said review
in writing and shall also notify the company and OCTV in writing within
30 days after completion of said review. Said notification shall present
the municipality's complete findings in this matter. The company shall
have the right to fully participate and present evidence in these
proceedings.
C. In the event that the municipality shall find that the company has not
substantially complied with the material terms and conditions of this
ordinance, the municipality shall have the right to petition the OCTV for
appropriate action, including modification and/or termination of the
certificate of approval; provided however, that the municipality shall
first have given the company written notice of all alleged instances of
noncompliance and an opportunity to cure same within 90 days of that
notification.
§ A312-3 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § A312-7
A312:692
§ A312-8. System upgrade.
§ A312-9. Construction requirements.
A. The company shall be required to proffer service along any public rightof-
way to any person's residence or business located in the franchise
territory and designated primary service area (PSA) at the tariffed rates
for standard and nonstandard installations.
B. The company shall utilize the Office of Cable Television's line extension
policy (LEP) for extensions of service below a minimum homes per mile
figure (HPM) of 35.
A. The company has completed an upgrade of the cable television
distribution system serving the Borough. The upgraded system is a
hybrid fiber optic/coaxial cable system following a fiber to the node
architecture. The upgraded system provides improved picture quality,
enhanced signal reliability and increased channel capacity.
B. The upgrade has been completed following the company's engineering
guidelines for hybrid fiber/coaxial (HFC) plant design which meets or
exceeds all applicable state and federal regulations as well as voluntary
cable television industry standards and follows commonly accepted
industry practices.
A. Restoration. In the event that the company or its agents shall disturb
any pavement, street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways or other surface in
the natural topography, the company shall, at its sole expense, restore
and replace such places or things so disturbed in as good a condition as
existed prior to the commencement of said work.
B. Relocation. If at any time during the period of this consent the
municipality shall alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other
way or place, the company, upon reasonable notice by the municipality,
shall remove, relay or relocate its equipment at the expense of the
company.
C. Temporary removal of cables. The company shall, upon request of the
municipality, at the company's expense, temporarily raise, lower or
remove its lines in order to facilitate the moving of buildings or
machinery or in other like circumstances. Whenever the request is
made by, for or on behalf of private parties, the cost will be borne by
those same parties.
D. Removal or trimming of trees. During the exercise of its rights and
privileges under this franchise, the company shall have the authority to
trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks or other
public places of the municipality so as to prevent the branches of such
trees from coming in contact with the wires and cable of the company.
Such trimming shall be only to the extent necessary to maintain proper
§ A312-7 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A312-9
A312:693
§ A312-10. Customer service.
In providing services to its customers, the company shall comply with
N.J.A.C. 14:18-1 et seq. and all applicable state and federal statutes and
regulations. The company shall strive to meet or exceed all voluntary
company and industry standards in the delivery of customer service and
shall be prepared to report on it to the community upon written request of
the Borough Administrator or Clerk.
§ A312-11. Municipal complaint officer.
The Office of Cable Television is hereby designed as the complaint officer
for the municipality pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26b. All complaints shall
be received and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.5. The
municipality shall have the right to request copies of records and reports
pertaining to complaints by Borough customers from the OCTV.
§ A312-12. Local office.
clearance of the company's wire and cables. The company shall notify
the Borough prior to any tree work.
A. The company shall continue to comply fully with all applicable state and
federal statues and regulations regarding credits for outages, the
reporting of it to regulatory agencies and notification of it to customers.
B. The company shall continue to fully comply with all applicable state and
federal statutes and regulations regarding the availability of devices for
the hearing impaired and the notification of it to customers.
C. The company shall use every effort to meet or exceed voluntary
standards for telephone accessibility developed by the National Cable
Television Association (NCTA). Those standards shall include, but not
be limited to, the goal of answering 90% of incoming telephone calls
within 30 seconds.
D. Nothing herein shall impair the right of any subscriber or the
municipality to express any comment with respect to telephone
accessibility to the complaint officer or impair the right of the complaint
officer to take any action that is appropriate under law.
E. The company is permitted, but is not required, to charge a late fee
consistent with applicable state and federal statutes and regulations.
A. During the term of this franchise, and any renewal thereof, the
company shall maintain a local business office or agent for the purpose
of receiving, investigating and resolving all complaints regarding the
quality of service, equipment malfunctions and similar matters. Such
local business office shall be open during normal business hours and in
no event less than 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. The
company's employees, representatives or agents will provide telephone
response for such purposes as mentioned herein 24 hours per day.
§ A312-9 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § A312-12
A312:694
§ A312-13. Performance bonds.
During the life of the franchise, the company shall give to the municipality
a bond in the amount of $25,000. Such bond shall be to insure the faithful
performance of all undertakings of the company as represented in its
application for municipal consent incorporated herein.
§ A312-14. Subscriber rates.
The rates of the company shall be subject to regulation as permitted by
federal and state law.
§ A312-15. Public, educational and governmental access.
§ A312-16. Commitments by company.
B. The telephone number and address of the local office shall be listed in
applicable telephone directories and in correspondence from the
company to the customer. The telephone number for the local office
shall utilize an exchange that is a non-toll call for Borough residents.
C. Additionally, the company shall make reasonable efforts to provide
additional payment options to Borough customers that are economically
practicable and technically feasible, including, but not limited to, online
bill payment, electronic fund transfers (EFT's), automatic credit
card debiting, third-party payment locations and/or establishment of
drop box locations for the purpose of added customer convenience.
A. The company shall continue to provide system-wide leased or
commercial access channel opportunities on a channel maintained by
the company for the purpose of cablecasting commercial access
programming in conformance with the company's guideline and
applicable state and federal statutes and regulations.
B. The company shall take appropriate steps to ensure that the signals
originated on the access channels are carried without material
degradation and with a signal whose quality is equal to that of the other
channels that the company transmits.
A. Within 18 months of receipt of a renewal certificate of approval (COA)
by the OCTV, the company shall provide a dedicated educationgovernment
access (EG) channel to be viewed by residents of the
Borough. Qualified individuals and organizations may utilize the access
channel for the purpose of cablecasting noncommercial access
programming in conformance with the Borough's published access
rules.
B. Within 18 months of receipt of a renewal certificate of approval (COA)
by the OCTV, the company shall construct a dedicated fiber optic return
line to a location designated by the Borough for the purpose of
cablecasting live and/or recorded programming on the education-
§ A312-12 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A312-16
A312:695
government access channel. Upon reasonable written request, the
Borough shall notify the company regarding the location for the
dedicated fiber return line.
C. The company will provide and maintain the cable, modulators and
equipment necessary for the Borough education-government access
channel to send a signal to the company and to receive the return feed
of signal. The company will not be responsible for the maintenance of
any studio equipment used for the access channel, including but not
limited to cameras, editing decks, monitors and character generators,
etc.
D. Within 18 months of receipt of a renewal certificate of approval, the
company shall provide the Borough with a one-time technology grant in
the amount of $5,000 for purchase of video production equipment in
association with the education-government access channel.
E. The company shall provide preferred cable television service on one
outlet to each qualified existing and future municipal building,
including police, fire, first aid, emergency management, public library
and community centers in the Borough at no cost or charge, provided
the facility is located within 200 feet of active cable distribution plant.
Installation of additional outlets shall be paid for on a materials plus
labor basis by the municipality. Monthly service charges shall be waived
on all additional outlets.
F. The company shall continue to provide preferred cable television
service on one outlet at no cost to each qualified existing and future
public and private elementary, intermediate and secondary school in
the Borough, provided the school is within 200 feet of active cable
distribution plant. The school may distribute the signal to all classrooms
within the school on the school's internal network as long as that
network meets or exceeds FCC standards for cumulative leakage index
(CLI). Should the schools request additional outlets to be installed, such
installation shall be paid for on a materials plus labor basis by the
school requesting service. Monthly service charges shall be waived on
all additional outlets.
G. The company shall provide free basic Internet service, via high-speed
cable modem, to one nonnetworked personal computer in each
qualified existing and future school in the Borough, public and private,
elementary, intermediate and secondary, at no charge, provided the
facility is located within 200 feet of active cable distribution plant. The
Internet service shall be installed on a personal computer that is
accessible to the students and not for administrative use only.
H. The company shall provide free basic Internet access via high-speed
cable modem on one nonnetworked personal computer in each qualified
existing and future public library at no charge, provided the facility is
located within 200 feet of active cable distribution plant. The Internet
§ A312-16 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § A312-16
A312:696
§ A312-17. Two-way services and interconnection.
In the event that the Borough determines that it is necessary and feasible
for it to contract with the company for the purpose of providing two-way
or interconnection services, the company shall be required to apply to the
BPU for approval to enter into and establish the terms and conditions of
such contract. All costs for such application to the BPU shall be borne by
the Borough.
§ A312-18. Emergency uses.
§ A312-19. Liability insurance.
The company shall at all times maintain a comprehensive general liability
insurance policy with a single limit amount of $1,000,000 covering liability
for any death, personal injury, property damages or other liability arising
out of its construction and operation of the cable television system and an
excess liability (or umbrella) policy in the amount of $3,000,000.
§ A312-20. Incorporation of application.
All of the commitments and statements contained in the application and
any amendment thereto submitted in writing to the municipality by the
company, except as modified herein, are binding upon the company as terms
and conditions of this municipal consent. The application and any other
relevant writings submitted by the company shall be considered a part of
this ordinance and made a part hereof by reference as long as it does not
conflict with state or federal law. All ordinances or parts of ordinances
or other agreements between the Borough and the company that are in
conflict with the provisions of this agreement are hereby declared invalid
and superseded.
§ A312-21. Competitive equity.
Should the Borough grant a franchise to construct, operate and maintain a
cable television system to any other person, corporation or entity on terms
materially less burdensome or more favorable than the terms contained
herein, the company may substitute such language that is more favorable or
service shall be installed on a personal computer that is accessible to
library patrons and not for administrative use only.
A. The company shall be required to fully comply with all applicable
federal and state statutes and regulations, rules and regulations
governing the implementation, operation and testing of the Emergency
Alert System (EAS).
B. The company shall in no way be held liable for any injury suffered by the
municipality or any other person during an emergency if, for any
reason, the municipality is unable to make full use of the cable
television system as contemplated herein.
§ A312-16 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A312-21
A312:697
less burdensome for the comparable provision of this ordinance, subject to
the provisions of N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7.
§ A312-22. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court
or federal or state agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and its validity or
unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of
the ordinance.
§ A312-23. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon issuance of a renewal
certificate of approval from the BPU.
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
1038 9-20-1993 Parking in Knight Park
amendment
Ch. 217, Art. II
1039 10-4-1993 Conveyance of property NCM
1040 12-20-1993 Salaries See Ch. 69
1041 1-3-1994 Interlocal services
agreement
NCM
1042 1-24-1994 Water rents amendment Ch. 301, Art. II
1043 2-7-1994 Hazardous substances Ch. 177, Art. I
1044 2-7-1994 Street name change NCM
1045 2-7-1994 Tax abatement for home
improvements
amendment
Ch. 273. Art. II
1046 2-22-1994 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 227
1047 3-7-1994 Public Defender Ch. 15, Art. II
1048 3-7-1994 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Repealed by
Ord. No. 1058
1049 3-7-1994 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Repealed by
Ord. No. 1058
§ A312-21 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § DL-1
A312:698
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
1050 3-21-1994 Exceeding index rate NCM
1051 3-21-1994 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 227
1052 4-4-1994 Parking in Knight Park
amendment
Ch. 217, Art. II
1053 4-18-1994 Conveyance of property NCM
1054 4-18-1994 Appropriation NCM
1055 6-20-1994 Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 29
1056 6-20-1994 Salaries See Ch. 69
1057 6-20-1994 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Repealed by
Ord. No. 1058
1058 8-15- 1994 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
1059 8-15-1994 Development regulations
amendment
Ch. 141
1060 9-6- 1994 Salaries See Ch. 69
1061 10-3-1994 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 227
1062 11-7-1994 Salaries See Ch. 69
1063 11-21-1994 Grant agreement NCM
1064 11-21-1994 Lease agreement NCM
1065 12-5-1994 Conveyance of property NCM
1066 1-3-1995 Salaries See Ch. 69
1067 1-3-1995 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 277
1068 1-17-1995 Appropriation NCM
1069 1-17-1995 Appropriation NCM
1070 1-17-1995 Bond NCM
1071 2-6-1995 Development regulations
amendment
Ch. 141
1072 2-21-1995 Exceeding index vote NCM
1073 2-21-1995 Salaries See Ch. 69
1074 3-6-1995 Emergency Medical
Services Division
Ch. 29, Art. II
1075 3-20- 1995 Salaries See Ch. 69
1076 4-3-1995 Vehicles and traffic Ch. 293
1077 4-17-1995 Vehicles and traffic Ch. 293
1078 7-17-1995 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 227
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A312:699
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
1079 8-21-1995 Crosswalk on county road NCM
1080 8-21-1995 Development regulations
amendment
Ch. 141
1081 8-21-1995 Redevelopment plan NCM
1082 9-5-1995 Salaries See Ch. 69
1083 9-18-1995 Interlocal services
agreement
NCM
1084 10-2-1995 Street name change
amendment
NCM
1085 10-2-1995 Acquisition of property NCM
1086 11-6-1995 Appropriation NCM
1087 11-6-1995 Appropriation NCM
1088 12-4-1995 Community development
grant agreement
NCM
1089 2-5-1996 Water rents amendment Ch. 301, Art. II
1090 2-20-1996 Salaries See Ch. 69
1091 2-20-1996 Bond NCM
1092 3-18-1996 Acquisition of Sutton
Towers
NCM
1093 3-18-1996 Redevelopment plan
amendment
NCM
1094 3-18-1996 Salaries See Ch. 69
1095 3-18-1996 Conveyance of real
property
NCM
1096 4-1-1996 Lease agreement NCM
1097 4-1-1996 Salaries See Ch. 69
1098 4-15-1996 Uniform construction
codes
Ch. 130
1099 5-6-1996 Salaries See Ch. 69
1100 5-20-1996 Salaries See Ch. 69
1101 6-3-1996 Redevelopment plan
amendment
NCM
1102 6-3-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 293
1103 7-15-1996 Sale of property NCM
1104 9-3-1996 Sale of tobacco Ch. 281
1105 9-3-1996 Police Department Rules
and Regulations
Ch. 57, Art. IV
(reference only)
§ DL-1 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § DL-1
A312:700
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
1106 10-7-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 293
1107 10-7-1996 Salaries See Ch. 69
1108 12-2-1996 Street obstructions Ch. 265, Art. IX
1109 12-20-1996 Agreement NCM
1110 12-16-1996 Salaries See Ch. 69
1111 1-6-1997 Bond ordinance NCM
1112 1-6-1997 Appropriation NCM
1113 1-6-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 293
1114 1-21-1997 Bond ordinance NCM
1115 1-21-1997 Bond ordinance NCM
1116 1-21-1997 Bond ordinance NCM
1117 2-3-1997 Uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 135
1118 3-3-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 293
1119 4-7-1997 Shade Tree Advisory
Committee
Repealed by
Ord. No. 1142
1120 5-5-1997 Salaries See Ch. 69
1121 Withdrawn
1122 7-21-1997 Tax sale certificates Ch. 241, Art. III
1123 7-21-1997 Emergency appropriation NCM
1124 7-21-1997 Salaries See Ch. 69
1125 7-21-1997 Salaries See Ch. 69
1126 8-18-1997 Development regulations
amendment
Ch. 141
1127 8-18-1997 Registration and licensing
of rental property
Repealed by
Ord. No. 1581
1128 8-18-1997 Rooming and boarding
houses
Ch. 244
1129 8-18-1997 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 227
1130 9-2-1997 Emergency appropriation NCM
1131 9-2-1997 Redevelopment plan NCM
1132 9-2-1997 Registration and licensing
of rental property
amendment
Repealed by
Ord. No. 1581
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A312:701
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
1133 9-15-1997 Redevelopment plan NCM
1134 9-15-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 293
1135 10-6-1997 Key boxes Ch. 186
1136 10-6-1997 Fire damaged buildings Ch. 115
1137 10-6-1997 Vacant rental units Repealed by
Ord. No. 1581
1138 10-6-1997 Tax sales Repealed by
Ord. No. 1581
1139 12-1-1997 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 163
1140 1-5-1998 Salaries See Ch. 69
1141 1-5-1998 Licensing and control of
dogs amendment
Ch. 105, Art. I
1142 1-5-1998 Shade Tree Advisory
Board
Ch. 72
1143 1-5-1998 Trees Ch. 283
1144 2-2-1998 Development regulations
amendment
Ch. 141
1145 3-2-1998 Tattooing and body
piercing
Ch. 271
1146 3-2-1998 Development regulations
amendment
Ch. 141
1147 4-6-1998 Public Defender
amendment
Ch. 15, Art. II
1148 4-6-1998 Redevelopment plan NCM
1149 5-4-1998 Salaries See Ch. 69
1150 5-4-1998 Appropriation
cancellation
NCM
1151 5-4-1998 Appropriation amendment NCM
1152 5-4-1998 Bond ordinance NCM
1153 6-1-1998 Precious metals and gems Ch. 225
1154 6-1-1998 Vehicles on sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 265, Art. III
1155 Withdrawn
1156 7-6-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 293
1157 9-10-1998 Redevelopment plan NCM
1158 8-3-1998 Redevelopment plan NCM
§ DL-1 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § DL-1
A312:702
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
1159 8-3-1998 Registration and licensing
of rental property
amendment
Repealed by
Ord. No. 1581
1160 8-3-1998 Bond NCM
1161 8-3-1998 Bond NCM
1162 8-3-1998 Bond NCM
1163 8-3-1998 Bond NCM
1164 9-8-1998 Sidewalk and curb
construction and repairs
Ch. 265, Art. VIII
1165 9-8-1998 Vacant rental units
amendment
Repealed by
Ord. No. 1581
1166 10-5-1998 Lease agreement NCM
1167 10-5-1998 Zoning Map amendment NCM
1168 10-5-1998 Development regulations
amendment
Ch. 141
1169 11-2-1998 Development regulations
amendment
Ch. 141
1170 11-2-1998 Tax abatement for home
improvements
amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. 1173
1171 12-7-1998 Salaries See Ch. 69
1172 1-4-1999 Trees Ch. 283
1173 1-4-1999 Tax exemption for
improvements
Repealed by
Ord. No. 1581
1174 1-4-1999 Appropriation NCM
1175 1-4-1999 Sidewalk and curb
construction and repairs
amendment
Ch. 165, Art. VIII
1176 2-1-1999 Water rents amendment Ch. 301, Art. II
1177 2-1-1999 Bond amendment NCM
1178 2-1-1999 Tax exemption for
improvements
amendment
Repealed by
Ord. No. 1581
1179 4-5-1999 Salaries See Ch. 69
1180 4-5-1999 Development regulations
amendment
Ch. 141
1181 4-5-1999 Sewers amendment Ch. 247
1182 4-5-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 293
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A312:703
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
1183 Not adopted
1184 Bond NCM
1185 6-7-1999 Salaries See Ch. 69
1186 6-7-1999 Adoption of duty manual
and rules and regulations
for the Police Department
NCM
1187 6-7-1999 Unnecessary and unusual
noises; parades
amendment
Ch. 207, Art. II
1188 7-6-1999 Development regulations
amendment
Ch. 141
1189 Not adopted
1190 7-6-1999 Guaranty NCM
1191 7-6-1999 Authorization of execution
of a lease purchase
agreement
NCM
1192 7-6-1999 Bond NCM
1193 8-25-1999 Conveyance of property NCM
1194 8-25-1999 Sale of property NCM
1195 9-7-1999 Bond NCM
1196 10-4-1999 Special improvement
districts
NCM
1197 10-4-1999 Salaries See Ch. 69
1198 11-1-1999 Rental property: vacant
rental units amendment
Repealed by
Ord. No. 1581
1199 11-1-1999 Redevelopment plan NCM
1200 1-3-2000 Special improvement
districts amendment
NCM
1201 1-3-2000 Development regulations
amendment
Ch. 141
1202 1-3-2000 Tobacco sales amendment Ch. 281
1203 1-3-2000 Loitering and curfew Ch. 201
1204 1-3-2000 Development regulations
amendment
Ch. 141
1205 Pending Salaries See Ch. 69
1206 1-3-2000 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 163
§ DL-1 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § DL-1
A312:704
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
1207 2-7-2000 Tax exemption for
improvements
amendment
Repealed by
Ord. No. 1581
1208 3-6-2000 Salaries See Ch. 69
1209 3-6-2000 Water rents amendment Ch. 301, Art. II
1210 5-1-2000 Salaries See Ch. 69
1211 5-1-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 293
1212 5-1-2000 Sewers amendment Ch. 247
1213 5-1-2000 Redevelopment plan
amendment
NCM
1214 5-1-2000 Bond NCM
1215 5-1-2000 Bond NCM
1216 5-1-2000 Bond NCM
1217 5-1-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 293
1218 Tabled
1219 6-5-2000 Political fund-raising:
solicitation or acceptance
of contributions in
government buildings
Ch. 221, Art. I
1220 6-5-2000 Salaries See Ch. 69
1221 8-7-2000 Salaries See Ch. 69
1222 8-7-2000 Bond NCM
1223 8-7-2000 Rental property
amendment
Repealed by
Ord. No. 1581
1224 8-11-2000 Bond amendment NCM
1225 9-5-2000 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 227
1226 9-5-2000 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 227
1227 9-5-2000 Registration and licensing
of rental property
amendment
Repealed by
Ord. No. 1581
1228 9-5-2000 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 227
1229 9-5-2000 Bond amendment NCM
1230 10-2-2000 Drunk driving free school
zones
Ch. 149, Art. III
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A312:705
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
1231 10-2-2000 Bond amendment NCM
1232 10-2-2000 Street name assigned NCM
1233 10-2-2000 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 163
1234 12-4-2000 Redevelopment plan NCM
1235 12-4-2000 Redevelopment plan NCM
1236 12-4-2000 Redevelopment plan NCM
1237 12-4-2000 Redevelopment plan NCM
1238 12-4-2000 Redevelopment plan NCM
1239 3-5-2001 Development regulations
amendment
Ch. 141
1240 1-2-2001 Salaries See Ch. 69
1241 Bond Tabled
1242 1-2-2001 Redevelopment plan NCM
1243 1-2-2001 Redevelopment plan NCM
1244 2-5-2001 Business improvement
zone
NCM
1245 2-5-2001 Redevelopment plan NCM
1246 2-5-2001 Redevelopment plan NCM
1247 3-5-2001 Development regulations
amendment
Ch. 141
1248 3-5-2001 Uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 135
1248 3-5-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 293
1250 3-5-2001 Sewer use Ch. 247, Art. II
1251 4-2-2001 Tax exemption for
improvements
amendment
Repealed by
Ord. No. 1581
1252 5-7-2001 Salaries See Ch. 69
1253 5-7-2001 Redevelopment plan NCM
1254 6-4-2001 Bond NCM
1255 Not adopted
1256 7-2-2001 Redevelopment plan NCM
1257 Not adopted
1258 7-2-2001 Bond NCM
1259 7-2-2001 Bond NCM
1260 8-6-2001 Redevelopment plan NCM
§ DL-1 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § DL-1
A312:706
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
1261 8-6-2001 Redevelopment plan NCM
1262 9-4-2001 Redevelopment plan NCM
1263 9-4-2001 Redevelopment plan NCM
1264 9-4-2001 Salaries See Ch. 69
1265 9-4-2001 Redevelopment plan NCM
1266 9-4-2001 Bond NCM
1267 9-4-2001 Redevelopment plan NCM
1268 9-4-2001 Rental property: heating
and cooling facilities
Repealed by
Ord. No. 1581
1269 10-1-2001 Fire prevention
amendment; vehicles and
traffic amendment
Chs. 163 and
293
1270 11-5-2001 Capital improvement NCM
1271 11-5-2001 Salaries See Ch. 69
1272 1-7-2002 Salaries See Ch. 69
1273 1-7-2002 Redevelopment plan NCM
1274 1-7-2002 Redevelopment plan NCM
1275 1-7-2002 Redevelopment plan NCM
1276 1-7-2002 Bond NCM
1277 2-4-2002 Redevelopment plan NCM
1278 2-4-2002 Redevelopment plan NCM
1279 2-4-2002 Redevelopment plan NCM
1280 2-4-2002 Redevelopment plan NCM
1281 2-4-2002 Redevelopment plan NCM
1282 2-4-2002 Redevelopment plan NCM
1283 2-4-2002 Water bond NCM
1284 2-4-2002 Sewer bond NCM
1285 2-4-2002 Redevelopment bonds NCM
1286 3-4-2002 Development regulations
amendment
Ch. 141
1287 6-3-2002 Exceed index rate NCM
1288 6-3-2002 Sewer rents amendment Ch. 247
1289 6-3-2002 Cable television franchise
renewal
Ch. A312
1290 Void
1291 7-1-2002 Bond NCM
1292 7-1-2002 Redevelopment plan NCM
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A312:707
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
1293 7-1-2002 Redevelopment plan NCM
1294 8-5-2002 Salaries See Ch. 69
1295 8-5-2002 Redevelopment plan NCM
1296 8-5-2002 Redevelopment plan NCM
1297 9-6-2002 Appropriation NCM
1298 9-3-2002 Bond NCM
1299 2-3-2003 Subdivision of property
for redevelopment plan
NCM
1300 10-7-2002 Development regulations
amendment
Ch. 141
1301 11-4-2002 Redevelopment plan NCM
1302 11-4-2002 Redevelopment plan NCM
1303 11-4-2002 Redevelopment plan NCM
1304 1-6-2003 Salaries See Ch. 69
1305 3-3-2003 Bond NCM
1306 3-3-2003 Development regulations
amendment
Ch. 141
1307 3-3-2003 Redevelopment plan NCM
1308 Void
1309 Void
1310 4-7-2003 Salaries See Ch. 69
1311 4-7-2003 Exceed index rate NCM
1312 5-5-2003 Redevelopment plan NCM
1313 5-5-2003 Redevelopment plan NCM
1314 5-5-2003 Water rents amendment Ch. 301, Art. II
1315 5-5-2003 Sewer rents amendment Ch. 247, Art. I
1316 5-5-2003 Bond amendment NCM
1317 8-4-2003 Redevelopment plan NCM
1318 8-4-2003 Redevelopment plan NCM
1319 8-4-2003 Redevelopment plan NCM
1320 Bond Void
1321 Transit village Void
1322 8-4-2003 Bond NCM
1323 9-2-2003 Animals amendment Ch. 105, Art. II
1324 10-6-2003 Redevelopment plan NCM
1325 10-6-2003 Towing and storage of
motor vehicles
Ch. 282
§ DL-1 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § DL-1
A312:708
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
1326 11-3-2003 Abandoned vehicles
amendment
Ch. 285
1327 12-1-2003 Salaries See Ch. 69
1328 4-5-2004 Reports, documents and
photographs amendment
Ch. 241
1329 4-5-2004 Development regulations
amendment
Ch. 141
1330 4-5-2004 Development regulations
amendment
Ch. 141
1331 4-5-2004 Rental property
amendment
Repealed by
Ord. No. 1581
1332 5-3-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 293
1333 5-3-2004 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 163
1334 5-3-2004 Development regulations
amendment
Ch. 141
1335 5-3-2004 Appropriation NCM
1336 5-3-2004 Bond NCM
1337 6-7-2004 Transfer of property NCM
1338 6-7-2004 Bond NCM
1339 7-6-2004 Civilian Agent Ch. 57, Art. V
1340 7-6-2004 Redevelopment Plan
amendment
NCM
1341 8-2-2004 Salaries See Ch. 69
1342 8-2-2004 License and permit fees
amendment
Ch. 241, Art. IV
1343 9-7-2004 Redevelopment plan NCM
1344 9-7-2004 Illegal storm sewer
connections
Ch. 263, Art. I
1345 9-7-2004 Disposal of pet wastes Ch. 105, Art. IV
1346 9-7-2004 Prohibited discharges to
storm sewers
Ch. 263, Art. II
1347 9-7-2004 Disposal of yard waste
amendment
Ch. 233
1348 9-7-2004 Feeding of wildlife Ch. 105, Art. V
1349 9-7-2004 Littering amendment Ch. 197, Art. II
1350 Yard waste collection and
disposal
Rescinded
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A312:709
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
1351 10-4-2004 Uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 135
1352 10-4-2004 Redevelopment plan NCM
1353 11-1-2004 Salaries See Ch. 69
1354 11-1-2004 Transfer of property NCM
1355 12-6-2004 Installation of vehicle
channelization
NCM
1356 12-6-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 293
1357 12-6-2004 Redevelopment plan NCM
1358 12-6-2004 Redevelopment Utility Repealed by
Ord. No. 1402
1359 12-6-2004 Parking Utility Ch. 53
1360 1-3-2005 Salaries See Ch. 69
1361 1-3-2005 Redevelopment plan NCM
1362 1-3-2006 Redevelopment plan NCM
1363 1-3-2005 Redevelopment plan NCM
1364 1-3-2005 Redevelopment plan NCM
1365 1-3-2005 Redevelopment plan NCM
1366 1-3-2005 Redevelopment plan NCM
1367 1-3-2005 Redevelopment plan NCM
1368 1-3-2005 Redevelopment plan NCM
1369 1-3-2005 Redevelopment plan NCM
1370 3-7-2005 Fees for copies
amendment
Ch. 241, Art. I
1371 3-7-2005 Redevelopment plan NCM
1372 3-7-2005 Redevelopment plan NCM
1373 3-7-2005 Development regulations
amendment
Ch. 141
1374 3-7-2005 Bond NCM
1375 4-4-2005 Rental property
amendment
Repealed by
Ord. No. 1581
1376 4-4-2005 Redevelopment Utility
amendment
Repealed by
Ord. No. 1402
1377 5-2-2005 Redevelopment plan NCM
1378 5-2-2005 Redevelopment plan NCM
1379 5-2-2005 Exceed budget cap NCM
§ DL-1 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § DL-1
A312:710
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
1380 7-5-2005 Development regulations
amendment
Ch. 141
1381 8-1-2005 Bond NCM
1382 8-1-2005 Bond NCM
1383 8-1-2005 Bond NCM
1384 10-3-2005 Redevelopment plan NCM
1385 11-7-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 293
1386 11-7-2005 Transfer of property NCM
1387 3-6-2006 Development regulations
amendment
Ch. 141
1388 12-5-2005 Redevelopment plan NCM
1389 11-21-2005 Financial agreement NCM
1390 12-5-2005 Financial agreement NCM
1391 1-9-2006 Salaries See Ch. 69
1392 1-9-2006 Tax agreement NCM
1393 2-6-2006 Stormwater
control requirements
(summary of ordinance on
file)
Ch. 263, Art. III
1394 3-6-2006 Redevelopment plan NCM
1395 3-6-2006 Fees for copies
amendment
Ch. 241, Art. I
1396 3-6-2006 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 227
1397 3-6-2006 Tobacco sales amendment Ch. 281
1398 6-5-2006 Salaries See Ch. 69
1399 6-5-2006 Municipal stormwater
management plan
adopted
Ch. 263, Art. III
1400 6-5-2006 Water rents amendment Ch. 301, Art. II
1401 6-5-2006 Sewer rates amendment Ch. 247, Art. I
1402 6-5-2006 Redevelopment Utility
dissolved
Ch. 61, Editor's
Note only
1403 7-3-2006 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 227
1404 7-3-2006 Sidewalks and curbs
amendment
Ch. 265, Art. VIII
1405 7-3-2006 Garage sales amendment Ch. 173
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A312:711
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
1406 7-3-2006 Development regulations
amendment
Ch. 141
1407 7-3-2006 Housing Liaison Repealed by
Ord. No. 1598
1408 7-3-2006 Development regulations
amendment
Ch. 141
1409 7-18-2006 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
1410 8-7-2006 Development regulations
amendment
Ch. 141
1411 8-7-2006 Redevelopment plan NCM
1412 8-7-2006 Redevelopment plan NCM
1413 8-7-2006 Cancellation of certain
appropriations;
reappropriation of funds
NCM
1414 10-2-2006 Redevelopment plan
amendment
NCM
1415 9-5-2006 Political fund-raising:
political contribution
limits for professional
contracts
Ch. 221, Art. II
(footnote only)
1416 10-2-2006 Political fund-raising:
County contributions and
expenditures
Ch. 221, Art. III
1417 11-6-2006 Borough rehabilitation
plan
NCM
1418 12-4-2006 Appropriation NCM
1419 12-4-2006 Appropriation NCM
1420 1-8-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 293
1421 1-8-2007 Joint Municipal Court Ch. 15, Art. III
1422 1-8-2007 Tax abatement financial
agreement
NCM
1423 1-8-2007 Tax abatement financial
agreement
NCM
1424 3-5-2007 Water: tampering;
connections amendment;
water rents amendment
Ch. 301, Arts. I
and II
1425 11-7-2006 Political fund-raising:
political contribution
limits for professional
contracts
Ch. 221, Art. II
§ DL-1 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § DL-1
A312:712
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
1426 4-2-2007 Street naming and
extension
NCM
1427 4-2-2007 Redevelopment plan
amendment
NCM
1428 4-2-2007 Animals: licensing and
control of dogs
amendment
Ch. 105, Art. I
1429 5-7-2007 Appropriation NCM
1430 5-7-2007 Emergency appropriation NCM
1431 5-7-2007 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
1432 6-4-2007 Salaries See Ch. 69
1433 7-2-2007 Bond amendment NCM
1434 7-2-2007 Salaries See Ch. 69
1435 7-2-2007 Parks and recreation:
Department of Recreation
Ch. 217, Art. IV
1436 8-14-2007 Flood damage prevention Superseded by
Ord. No. 1602
1437 9-4-2007 Development regulations
amendment
Ch. 141
1438 9-4-2007 Bond NCM
1439 9-4-2007 Bond NCM
1440 12-3-2007 Development regulations
amendment
Ch. 141
1441 12-28-2007 Games of chance: raffle
licensing
Ch. 171, Art. I
1442 1-7-2008 Salaries See Ch. 69
1443 3-3-2008 Acquisition of easement NCM
1444 4-7-2008 Raffle licensing
amendment
Ch. 171, Art. I
1445 5-5-2008 Development regulations
amendment
Ch. 141
1446 7-7-2008 Development regulations
amendment; dumpsters,
roll-off containers and
pods
Ch.141; Ch. 265,
Art. X
1447 6-2-2008 Solicitation of
contributions in roadways
Ch. 123, Art. II
1448 7-7-2008 Exceed municipal budget;
establish cap bank
NCM
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A312:713
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
1449 7-7-2008 Registration and
inspection fees
amendment
Chs. 163, 227,
237 (Repealed
by Ord. No.
1581), 241
1450 8-4-2008 Salaries See Ch. 69
1451 8-4-2008 Bond NCM
1452 9-2-2008 Retirement: Defined
Contribution Retirement
Program
Ch. 65, Art. I
1453 8-4-2008 Appropriation NCM
1454 11-3-2008 Livestock and fowl;
development regulations
amendment; littering and
dumping regulations
amendment
Ch. 105, Art. VI;
Ch. 141, Ch.
197, II
1455 12-1-2008 Salaries See Ch. 69
1456 5-4-2009 Affordable housing:
development fees
Repealed by
Ord. No. 1598
1457 12-1-2008 Graffiti; trees amendment Ch. 227, Art. II;
Ch. 283
1458 12-1-2008 Bond amendment NCM
1459 3-2-2009 Littering and dumping
regulations amendment
Ch. 197, Art. II
1460 5-4-2009 Bond NCM
1461 6-1-2009 Water rents amendment Ch. 301, Art. II
1462 6-1-2009 Sewers: rates and
charges amendment
Ch. 247, Art. I
1463 6-1-2009 Fire prevention
amendment; parks and
recreation: Department of
Recreation amendment;
streets and sidewalks:
excavations and
obstructions in streets
amendment
Chs. 163; 217,
Art. IV; 265, Art.
I
1464 6-1-2009 Exceed municipal budget;
establish cap bank
NCM
1465 6-1-2009 Bond NCM
1466 8-10-2009 Subdivision plan approval NCM
1467 7-7-2009 Development regulations
amendment
Ch. 141
§ DL-1 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § DL-1
A312:714
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
1468 8-10-2009 Development regulations
amendment; parks and
recreation: Department of
Recreation amendment
Chs. 141; 217,
Art. IV
1469 11-10-2009 Registration and licensing
of rental property
amendment
Repealed by
Ord. No. 1581
1470 10-5-2009 Affordable housing: fair
share plan
Repealed by
Ord. No. 1598
1471 11-10-2009 Tax abatement financial
agreement
NCM
1472 12-29-2009 Water rents amendment Ch. 301, Art. II
1473 12-7-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 293
1474 12-29-2009 Fire prevention
amendment; parks and
recreation: Department of
Recreation amendment;
vehicles and traffic
amendment
Chs. 163; 217,
Art. IV; 293
1475 3-1-2010 Fire Department Rules
and Regulations and
Standard Operating
Procedures amendment
NCM
1476 5-3-2010 Redevelopment plan NCM
1477 5-3-2010 Utility easement NCM
1478 Tabled
1479 5-3-2010 Salaries See Ch. 69
1480 5-3-2010 Bond NCM
1481 6-14-2010 Fire Department: general
provisions amendment;
parks and recreation:
Department of Recreation
amendment; registration
and licensing of rental
property amendment
Chs. 29, Art. I;
217, Art. IV; 237,
Art. II (Repealed
by Ord. No.
1581)
1482 6-14-2010 Exceed municipal budget;
establish cap bank
NCM
1483 10-4-2010 Fees for copies
amendment
Ch. 241, Art. I
1484 8-3-2010 Dumpsters and refuse
containers
Ch. 263, Art. IV
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A312:715
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
1485 8-3-2010 Private storm drain
retrofitting
Ch. 263, Art. V
1486 8-3-2010 Bond NCM
1487 8-3-2010 Financial agreement
amendment
NCM
1488 12-6-2010 Development regulations
amendment; littering and
dumping: regulations
amendment
Ch. 141, Ch.
197, Art. II
1489 1-10-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 293
1490 3-7-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 293
1491 5-9-2011 Sewer use amendment Ch. 247, Art. II
1492 Not adopted
1493 6-6-2011 Department of Recreation
amendment
Ch. 217, Art. IV
1494 5-9-2011 Fire Department standard
operating procedures
amendment
NCM
1495 5-9-2011 Exceed municipal budget;
establish cap bank
NCM
1496 6-6-2011 Water rents amendment Ch. 301, Art. II
1497 6-6-2011 Sewers: rates and
charges amendment
Ch. 247, Art. I
1498 Not adopted
1499 6-6-2011 Bond NCM
1500 7-11-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 293
1501 7-11-2011 Development regulations
amendment
Ch. 141
1502 9-6-2011 Personnel policy
amendment
NCM
1503 10-3-2011 Bond NCM
1504 12-27-2011 Licensing and control of
dogs amendment
Ch. 105, Art. I
1505 3-9-2012 Appropriation NCM
1506 3-9-2012 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 277
1507 4-6-2012 Development regulations
amendment
Ch. 141
§ DL-1 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § DL-1
A312:716
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
1508 3-9-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 293
1509 5-11-2012 Unnecessary and unusual
noises; parades
amendment
Ch. 207, Art. II
1510 3-9-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 293
1511 4-6-2012 Development regulations
amendment
Ch. 141
1512 3-9-2012 Stormwater management:
dumpsters and refuse
containers amendment
Ch. 263, Art. IV
1513 4-6-2012 Appropriation NCM
1514 5-11-2012 Exceed municipal budget;
establish cap bank
NCM
1515 6-8-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 293
1516 6-8-2012 Appropriation NCM
1517 6-8-2012 Appropriation NCM
1518 6-8-2012 Appropriation NCM
1519 8-10-2012 Fire prevention: outdoor
and open burning
Ch. 163, Art. II
1520 7-25-2012 Redevelopment plan NCM
1521 7-25-2012 Financial agreement NCM
1522 8-6-2012 Dumpsters, roll-off
containers and pods
amendment
Ch. 265, Art. X
1523 8-6-2012 Financial agreement NCM
1524 8-6-2012 Chaining or tethering of
animals amendment
Ch. 105, Art. III
1525 11-5-2012 Salaries NCM
1526 11-5-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 293
1527 12-3-2012 Salaries NCM
1528 12-3-2012 Bond NCM
1529 12-3-2012 Acquisition of property NCM
1530 2-5-2013 Fees for police outside
employment
Ch. 57, Art. VI
1531 2-5-2013 Salaries NCM
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A312:717
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
1532 3-4-2013 Exceed municipal budget;
establish cap bank
NCM
1533 3-4-2013 Financial agreement NCM
1534 5-6-2013 Fire prevention
amendment; Property
Maintenance Code
amendment
Chs. 163;. 227,
Art. I
1535 4-1-2013 Salaries NCM
1536 6-3-2013 Appropriation NCM
1537 6-3-2013 Energy and natural gas
aggregation program
NCM
1538 7-1-2013 Salaries NCM
1539 7-1-2013 Uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 135
1540 11-4-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 293
1541 12-2-2013 Sewers: rates and
charges amendment
Ch. 247, Art. I
1542 12-2-2013 Water rents amendment Ch. 301, Art. II
1543 12-2-2013 Salaries NCM
1544 3-3-2014 Exceed municipal budget;
establish cap bank
NCM
1545 3-3-2014 Bond NCM
1546 5-5-2014 Appropriation NCM
1547 5-5-2014 Chaplain Ch. 45, Art. IV
1548 5-5-2014 Sewer use amendment Ch. 247, Art. II
1549 7-7-2014 Fire damaged buildings:
securing of buildings and
structures amendment
Ch. 115, Art. I
1550 7-7-2014 Payment of salaries:
direct deposit
Ch. 69, Art. II
1551 8-4-2014 Police Department:
organization; regulation;
operation amendment;
Civilian Agent
amendment
Ch. 57, Arts. I
and V
1552 9-2-2014 Appropriation NCM
1553 9-2-2014 Authorization of financial
agreement
NCM
1554 10-6-2014 Salaries NCM
§ DL-1 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § DL-1
A312:718
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
1555 10-6-2014 Appropriation NCM
1556 10-6-2014 Property maintenance:
upkeep of vacant and
abandoned residential
properties
Ch. 227, Art. III
1557 11-3-2014 Development regulations
amendment
Ch. 141
1558 11-3-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 293
1559 11-3-2014 Salaries NCM
1560 12-1-2014 Appropriation NCM
1561 12-1-2014 Animals: chaining or
tethering of animals
amendment
Ch. 105, Art. III
1562 2-2-2015 Appropriation NCM
1563 3-2-2015 Exceed municipal budget;
establish cap bank
NCM
1564 3-2-2015 Bond NCM
1565 4-6-2015 Development regulations
amendment
Ch. 141
1566 4-6-2015 Abandoned property Ch. 228
1567 4-6-2015 Appropriation NCM
1568 4-6-2015 Parks and recreation:
Department of Recreation
amendment
Ch. 217, Art. IV
1569 4-6-2015 Redevelopment plan
amendment
NCM
1570 5-4-2015 Recycling; solid waste Ch. 233; Ch. 261
1571 6-1-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 293
1572 7-6-2015 Police Department:
organization; regulation;
operation amendment
Ch. 57, Art. I
1573 8-3-2015 Public Works Department Ch. 61
1574 8-3-2015 Salaries NCM
1575 8-3-2015 Development regulations
amendment
Ch. 141
1576 8-3-2015 Development regulations
amendment
Ch. 141
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A312:719
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
1577 8-3-2015 Development regulations
amendment
Ch. 141
1578 9-8-2015 Health Ch. 33
1579 10-5-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 293
1580 11-2-2015 Salaries NCM
1581 11-2-2015 Rental property Ch. 237
1582 12-7-2015 Appropriation NCM
1583 12-7-2015 Water rents amendment Ch. 301, Art. II
1584 12-7-2015 Sewers: rates and
charges amendment
Ch. 247, Art. I
1585 12-28-2015 Animals: feeding of
wildlife amendment
Ch. 105, Art. V
1586 12-28-2015 Redevelopment plan
amendment
NCM
1587 3-7-2016 Bond NCM
1588 4-4-2016 Exceed municipal budget;
establish cap bank
NCM
1589 3-24-2016 Bond NCM
1590 3-24-2016 Bond NCM
1591 3-24-2016 Bond NCM
1592 4-4-2016 Sewer use amendment Ch. 247, Art. II
1593 4-4-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 293
1594 4-4-2016 Animals: pet shop sales Ch. 105, Art. VII
1595 5-2-2016 Appropriation NCM
1596 6-6-2016 Salaries NCM
1597 7-5-2016 Salaries NCM
1598 8-1-2016 Affordable housing Ch. 85
1599 8-1-2016 Development regulations
amendment
Ch. 141
1600 Unnecessary and unusual
noises; parades
amendment
Ch. 207, Art. II
1601 8-1-2016 Development regulations
amendment
Ch. 141
1602 8-12-2016 Flood damage prevention Ch. 167
1603 9-6-2016 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § DL-1
A312:720
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
1604 9-6-2016 Development regulations
amendment
Ch. 141
1605 9-6-2016 Bond NCM
1606 9-6-2016 Animals: cats amendment Ch. 105, Art. II
1607 10-3-2016 Bond NCM
1608 10-3-2016 Bond NCM
1609 10-3-2016 Salaries NCM
1610 Not adopted
1611 Not adopted
1612 2-6-2017 Salaries NCM
1613 4-11-2017 Appropriation NCM
1614 5-1-2017 Appropriation NCM
1615 5-1-2017 Development regulations
amendment
Ch. 141
1616 5-1-2017 State of emergency
amendment
Ch. 155
1617 5-1-2017 State of emergency
amendment
Ch. 155
1618 6-5-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 293
1619 7-3-2017 Salaries NCM
1620 7-3-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 293
1621 8-7-2017 Bond NCM
1622 9-6-2017 Salaries NCM
1623 9-6-2017 Appropriation NCM
1624 Not adopted
1625 11-6-2017 Appropriation NCM
1626 9-20-2017 Financial agreement
amendment
NCM
1627 10-2-2017 Appropriation NCM
1628 11-7-2017 Bond NCM
1629 12-4-2017 Water rents amendment Ch. 301, Art. II
1630 12-4-2017 Sewers: rates and
charges amendment
Ch. 247, Art. I
1631 12-4-2017 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 163
1632 12-28-2017 Salaries NCM
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A312:721
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
1633 12-28-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 293
1634 3-3-2018 Development Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 141
1635 3-5-2018 Fire Prevention
Amendment
Ch. 163
1636 4-3-2018 Exceed Budget; Cap Bank NCM
1637 5-31-2018 Salary NCM
1638 5-31-2018 Public Works Department
Amendment
Ch. 61
1639 5-31-2018 Salary NCM
1640 6-4-2018 Parks and Recreation:
Department of Recreation
Amendment
Ch. 217, Art. IV
1641 6-4-2018 Appropriation NCM
1642 8-6-2018 Parks and Recreation:
Permits for Activities in
Knight Park
Ch. 217, Art. IV
1643 8-6-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 293
1644 9-10-2018 Development Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 141
1645 10-1-2018 Bond Amendment NCM
1646 10-1-2018 Bond Amendment NCM
1647 10-1-2018 Salaries NCM
1648 10-1-2018 Development Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 141
1649 12-3-2018 Salaries NCM
1650 12-3-2018 Salaries NCM
1651 12-3-2018 Water: Water Rents
Amendment
Ch. 301, Art. II
1652 12-27-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 293
1653 12-27-2018 Development Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 141
1654 12-27-2018 Salaries NCM
1655 2-4-2019 Bond NCM
1656 2-4-2019 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 COLLINGSWOOD CODE § DL-1
A312:722
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
1657 4-1-2019 Tax Abatement NCM 46
1658 4-1-2019 Agreement NCM 46
1659 4-1-2019 Agreement NCM 46
1660 4-1-2019 Agreement NCM 46
1661 5-6-2019 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM 46
1662 5-6-2019 Salaries NCM 46
1663 6-3-2019 Appropriation NCM 46
1664 6-3-2019 Rehabilitation Plan NCM 46
1665 7-1-2019 Salaries NCM 46
1666 8-5-2019 Salaries NCM 46
1667 10-7-2019 Smoking Ch. 258 46
1668 10-7-2019 Outdoor Lighting Ch. 195 46
1669 10-7-2019 Environmental
Hazards: Single-Use
Plastic Bags
Ch. 157, Art. I 46
1670 12-2-2019 Rental Property
Amendment
Ch. 237 46
1671 Withdrawn 46
1672 10-7-2019 Green Development:
Major Development
Checklist
Ch. 175, Art. I 46
1673 12-2-2019 Water Amendment Ch. 301 46
1674 12-2-2019 Fire Department
Amendment
Ch. 29 46
1675 12-2-2019 State of Emergency
Amendment
Ch. 155 46
1676 Not adopted 46
1677 12-27-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 293 46
1678 12-27-2019 Rental Property
Amendment
Ch. 237 46
1679 12-27-2019 Fire Prevention
Amendment
Ch. 163 46
1680 12-27-2019 Salaries NCM 46
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A312:723

DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
141 Attachment 1
Borough of Collingswood
SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS
[Amended 3-3-2002 by Ord. No. 1306; 12-3-2007 by Ord. No. 1440]
District 
Minimum
 Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
 Lot Width
(feet)
Minimum Principal
Yard Dimensions
(feet) Maximum Requirements
Front
Yard
Side
Yard
Each
Side
Yard
Both
Rear
Yard
Building
Coverage
(percent)
Impervious
Coverage
(percent)
Building
Height
(feet) F.A.R.
SF-D1. Single Family,
Detached Residential District 
8,500 70 30 8 20 20 25% 35% 35 N/A
SF-D2. Single Family,
Detached Residential District 
6,000 60 25 7.5 16 20 30% 40% 35 N/A
SF-D3. Single Family,
Detached Residential District T
6,000 60 25 7.5 16 20 30% 40% 35 N/A
SF-A. Single Family,
Attached Residential District
2,000 20 20 10 N/A 20 50% 60% 35 N/A
MF. Multi-Family Residential District
80,000 200 25 25 N/A 25 20% 60% 35
garden;
70 midrise;
100
high-rise
1.5
mid/
highrise
only

SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS

District
Minimum
 Lot Area
(square feet)
Minimum
 Lot Width
(feet)
Minimum Principal
Yard Dimensions
(feet) Maximum Requirements
Front
Yard
Side
Yard
Each
Side
Yard
Both
Rear
Yard
Building
Coverage
(percent)
Impervious
Coverage
(percent)
Building
Height
(feet) F.A.R.
SF Semidetached Dwellings
3,750 35 25 10 N/A 20 30% 40% 35 N/A
CBD. Central Business District
2,000 20 0 0 0 10 80% 100% 35 1.5
POD. Professional Office District
12,500 75 25 20 40 20 30% 50% 35 0.4
HBD. Highway Business District
15,000 150 45 20 40 20 25% 70% 35 0.4

SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS
District
Minimum
 Lot Area
(square feet)
Minimum
 Lot Width
(feet)
Minimum Principal
Yard Dimensions
(feet) Maximum Requirements
Front
Yard
Side
Yard
Each
Side
Yard
Both
Rear
Yard
Building
Coverage
(percent)
Impervious
Coverage
(percent)
Building
Height
(feet) F.A.R.
HID. Highway Industrial District
15,000 100 25 20 40 20 25% 60% 35 0.5
NOTES:
This schedule is intended to be a summary of permitted, accessory, and conditional uses. Please refer to Article VI of this chapter for a complete listing of uses.
In Zoning Districts SF-D1 through SF-D3 and POD, the front yard minimums shall be increased to the average setback within 200 feet, along the same street, not to exceed 45 feet.
All single-family, detached units permitted within the SF-A, MF, and POD Districts shall comply with the requirements outlined in the SF-D3 Zone. For mid- and high-rise
apartments, all setbacks shall be equal to ½ the building height but not less than 25 feet. SF-A minimum side yard requirement of 10 feet shall apply to end units only.
141 Attachment 1:3 04 - 15 - 2008