Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 1-1. SHORT TITLE. [New]
This book shall be known and may be cited as "The Revised General
Ordinances of the Township of Deptford, 2001", and is herein referred to as
the "Revision" or "Code."
§ 1-2. DEFINITIONS. [New]
For the purpose of this Revision, and in the interpretation and application of
all other ordinances heretofore or hereafter adopted, except as the context
may otherwise require:
CLERK OR TOWNSHIP CLERK — The municipal Clerk duly appointed
pursuant to law.
COUNTY — The County of Gloucester.
DAYS — The calendar days.
DEPARTMENT — An organizational unit of the government established
or designated by ordinance or this Revision as a department, together
with any agency or instrumentality of the government assigned to such
organizational unit by the Township Council.
GOVERNING BODY — The Council created and constituted pursuant to the
Charter.
LICENSED — Licensed in accordance with the appropriate section or
Chapter of this Revision.
MANAGER — The Township Manager or a designated Acting Manager
appointed and serving pursuant to the Charter or Code.
MONTH — A calendar month unless otherwise specifically provided.
OATH — Shall be construed to include an affirmation where an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath. In such cases the words swear and sworn
shall be construed to be equivalent to the words affirm and affirmed.
OCCUPANT — See tenant.
OFFICER OR OFFICIAL — And the title of an officer or official shall be
construed as if the words of the Township of Deptford followed it.
ORDINANCE — Any act of local legislation heretofore or hereafter adopted,
and including this Revision, so long as it is adopted by the procedure
required for the adoption of an ordinance and so long as it remains in force
and effect pursuant to law.
OWNER — When applied to a building or land shall include any part owner,
any corporation, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint
1:1
tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or part of such building or
land.
PERSON — Any individual, natural persons, partnerships, joint ventures,
societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, corporations or
unincorporated groups; or any officers, agents, employees, servants, factors
or any kind of personal representatives of any thereof in any capacity,
acting either for himself or for any other person, under either personal
appointment or pursuant to law.
PERSONAL PROPERTY — Goods and chattels, rights and credits, moneys
and effects, evidences of debt, and all written instruments by which any
right to, interest in, or lien or encumbrances upon, property or any debt
or financial obligation as created, acknowledged, evidenced, transferred,
discharged or defeated, in whole or in part, and every thing, except real
property as herein defined, which may be the subject of ownership.
PRECEDING AND FOLLOWING — Next before and next after, respectively.
PROPERTY — Real property.
PUBLIC GROUNDS, PUBLIC SQUARES, PUBLIC PLACE OR PUBLIC
PLACES — Severally be construed to mean any and every public ground,
public square, public park or other public place within the Township.
REAL PROPERTY — Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments, all rights
thereto and interests therein.
SIDEWALK — Any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent
property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways.
STREET — Includes a street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway, boulevard,
concourse, driveway, culvert, sidewalk, and crosswalk, and every class of
road, square, place or municipal parking field used by the general public.
TENANT OR OCCUPANT — Applied to a building or land, shall include any
person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, whether
alone or with others.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Deptford in the County of Gloucester and
State of New Jersey.
TOWNSHIP COUNCIL OR COUNCIL — The local legislative body of the
Township, constituted and elected pursuant to the Charter.
WEEK — Seven days.
YEAR — A calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided.
§ 1-3. CONSTRUCTION. [New]
For the purpose of this Revision and any other ordinances heretofore or
hereafter adopted, except as the context may otherwise require:
§ 1-2 § 1-3
1:2
The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future, the
present.
The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
The singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular.
"Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive.
The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding
the first and including the last day and if the last day be a Sunday, a legal
holiday, or a day on which the offices of the Township are closed, that day
shall be excluded.
"Writing" and "written" shall include printing, type-writing and any other
mode of communication using paper or similar material which is in
general use, as well as legible handwriting.
Whenever a specific time is used in this Revision, it shall mean the
prevailing and established time in effect in the State of New Jersey during
any day in any year.
Any citation of a statute, law or ordinance contained in this Revision shall
be deemed to refer to such statute, law or ordinance as amended, whether
or not such designation is included in the citation.
"Chapter" shall mean one of the major divisions of the Revision identified
by a Roman numeral and divided by subject manner.
"Article" shall mean a division of a chapter into specific topics.
"Section" shall mean a major subdivision of a chapter.
"Subsection" shall mean a subdivision of a section, identified by a decimal
number.
"Paragraph" shall mean a subdivision under a subsection, identified by an
alphabetical letter or Arabic number.
§ 1-4. SEVERABILITY. [New]
If any chapter, section, subsection or paragraph of this Revision shall be
declared to be unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative, in whole or in part,
by a court of competent jurisdiction, such chapter, section, subsection or
paragraph shall, to the extent that it is not unconstitutional, invalid or
inoperative, remain in full force and effect, and no such determination shall
be deemed to invalidate the remaining chapters, sections, subsections or
paragraphs of this Revision.
§ 1-5. GENERAL PENALTY.1
§ 1-5.1. Maximum penalty. [New]
For violation of any provision of this Code or other ordinance of the
Township of Deptford unless a specific penalty is otherwise provided in
1. Editor's Note: Penalty provision taken from N.J.S.A. 40:49.5.
§ 1-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-5.1
1:3
connection with the provision violated, the maximum penalty upon
conviction of the violation shall be by one or more of the following:
imprisonment in the County Jail or in any place provided by the municipality
for the detention of prisoners, for any term not exceeding 90 days; or
by a fine not exceeding $1,250; or by a period of community service not
exceeding 90 days.
§ 1-5.2. Minimum penalty. [New]
The Township Council may prescribe that for the violation of any particular
provision of the Code or of any particular ordinance at least a minimum
penalty shall be imposed which shall consist of a fine which may be fixed
at an amount not exceeding $100. The court before which any person is
convicted of violating any ordinance or Code provision shall have power to
impose any fine, term of punishment, or period of community service not
less than the minimum and not exceeding the maximum fixed in the Code or
such ordinance.
§ 1-5.3. Additional fine for repeat offenders. [New]
Any person who is convicted of violating this Code or an ordinance within
one year of the date of a previous violation of the same provision of this
Code or of the same ordinance and who was fined for the previous violation,
shall be sentenced by a court to an additional fine as a repeat offender. The
additional fine imposed by the court upon a person for a repeated offense
shall not be less than the minimum or exceed the maximum fine fixed
for a violation of the ordinance or Code provision, but shall be calculated
separately from the fine imposed for the violation of the ordinance or Code
provision.
If the Township chooses not to impose an additional fine upon a person for
a repeated violation of any municipal ordinance, the Township may waive
the additional fine by ordinance or resolution.
§ 1-5.4. Default of payment of fine. [New]
Any person convicted of the violation of any provision of this Code or any
ordinance may, in the discretion of the court by which he was convicted,
and in default of the payment of any fine imposed therefor, be imprisoned in
the County Jail or place of detention provided by the Township for any term
not exceeding 90 days, or be required to perform community service for a
period not exceeding 90 days.
§ 1-5.5. Separate violations. [New]
Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in which a violation of
any provision of this Code or any other Township ordinance exists shall
constitute a separate violation.
§ 1-5.1 § 1-5.6
1:4
§ 1-5.6. Application. [New]
The maximum penalty stated in this section is not intended to state an
appropriate penalty for each and every violation. At the discretion of the
Judge of the Municipal Court, any lesser penalty, including a nominal
penalty or no penalty at all, may be appropriate for a particular case or
violation.
§ 1-6. ADDITIONS AND AMENDMENTS TO CODE. [Ord. No. 10/23/
67, § 1-6; 1967 Code § 1-7]
Any and all additions or amendments to the "Revised General Ordinances of
the Township of Deptford, 2001" when passed in such form to indicate the
intention of the Township of Deptford to make the same a part thereof, shall
be deemed to be incorporated in the Code so that reference to the Code of
the Township of Deptford shall be understood and intended to include such
additions and amendments.
§ 1-7. SUPPLEMENTATION; TOWNSHIP CLERK'S DUTY. [Ord. No.
10/23/67, § 1-7; 1967 Code § 1-7]
A certified copy of the "Revised General Ordinances of the Township of
Deptford, 2001" shall be kept on file in the office of the Township Clerk.
It shall be the duty of the Township Clerk, or someone authorized by him,
to insert in their designated places all amendments or ordinances which
indicate the intention of the Township to make the same a part of the Code
when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract
from the Code all provisions which may be repealed by the Township. This
copy of the Code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine it and
shall be considered the official Code of the Township of Deptford.
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION
§ 1-5.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-7
1:5

ARTICLE I
Administrative Regulations
§ 2-1. TITLE. [Ord. No. 0-1-72, 1967 Code § 2-1]
This Article shall be known and may be referred to as the "Administrative
Regulations (1972)".
§ 2-2. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 0-1-72, 1967 Code § 2-2]
As used in this chapter and in the interpretation and application of all
other ordinances and resolutions heretofore or hereafter adopted by the
Township:
CHARTER OR TOWNSHIP CHARTER — Council-Manager Plan E of Chapter
210 of New Jersey Laws of 1950, as amended and supplemented, and any
and all general laws (as therein defined) which are or may be applicable to
the Township.
CLERK OR TOWNSHIP CLERK — The Municipal Clerk duly appointed
pursuant to the Charter.
CODE — In this Article I, the Administrative Code as amended and
supplemented.
CODIFICATION — Ordinances heretofore adopted by the Township of
Deptford, as identified by chapter within the Code of the Township.
DEPARTMENT — An organization unit or group of organization units of the
Township government, established or designated as a "department" by this
Article.
DIRECTOR — The administrative head of a department, regardless of his
title.
DIVISION — A subunit of a Department.
DIVISION HEAD — The administrative head of the Division regardless of
his/her title.
GENERAL LAW — Any law or provision of law, not inconsistent with the
Charter, heretofore or hereafter enacted which is by its terms applicable or
available to all municipalities, and the following additional laws whether or
not such additional laws are so applicable or available to all municipalities:
legislation relating to taxation, local courts, education, health, public
authorities serving more than one municipality, and municipalities in
unsound financial condition.
GOVERNING BODY — The Council created and constituted pursuant to the
Charter.
MANAGER — The Township Manager or a designated Acting Manager
appointed and serving pursuant to the Charter or Code.
MONTH — A calendar month unless otherwise specifically provided.
§ 2-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-2
1:7
PERSON — Any corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization or
other entity, as well as individual.
TOWNSHIP OR MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Deptford, in the County
of Gloucester, State of New Jersey, as governed by the provisions of the
Charter.
YEAR — A calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided.
§ 2-3. WORD USAGE. [Ord. No. 0-1-72, 1967 Code § 2-3]
For the purposes of the Administrative Code and any other ordinances
heretofore or hereafter adopted, except as the context may otherwise
require:
§ 2-4. THE COUNCIL.
§ 2-4.1. Presiding officer. [Ord. No. 0-1-72, 1967 Code § 2-4]
The Council shall elect one of its members to serve as Mayor, pursuant to
the Charter for a term of one year, and he may succeed himself. The Council
may designate a Deputy Mayor from among its members to serve in the
place of the Mayor when required in accordance with New Jersey Statutes
and the Code of the Township of Deptford.
§ 2-4.2. Functions of the Mayor. [Ord. No. 0-1-72, 1967 Code § 2-5;
New]
The Mayor shall have only such functions, powers and duties as are
prescribed by the Charter, as follows:
a. The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future the
present.
b. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
c. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural, the singular.
d. Unless otherwise designated by Statutes, the time within which an act
is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the
last day and if the last day be a Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall
be excluded.
e. "Writing" and "written" include printing, typewriting, stencil
duplicating and any other visual mode of reproducing words or figures
on paper or paper-like material which is in general use.
a. The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the Council and shall have a
voice and vote in its proceedings.
b. The Mayor shall execute on behalf of the Township all authorized
bonds, notes, contracts and written obligations of the Township.
§ 2-2 § 2-4.2
1:8
§ 2-4.3. Administration. [Ord. No. 0-1-72, 1967 Code § 2-6]
§ 2-4.4. Compensation. [Ord. No. 0-1-72, 1967 Code § 2-7]
Members of the Council shall be paid such sum as shall be provided by
ordinance, in the same manner as other Township salaries are paid, in full
compensation for their services and expenses except as may be otherwise
provided by resolution with respect to occasional and specific expenses.
§ 2-4.5. Meetings; agenda. [Ord. No. 0-1-72, 1967 Code § 2-8]
Council shall, by resolution and in accordance with the Open Public
Meetings Act, determine its regular meeting time, provide for special
meetings, rules of procedure, its standing order of business and agenda
for each meeting. As to any matter not covered by the rules of procedure,
Roberts' Rules of Order shall apply.
§ 2-4.6. Ordinances; resolutions; contracts. [Ord. No. 0-1-72, 1967
Code § 2-9]
c. Any and all other powers conferred on the Mayor by the Charter or
General Law.
a. All powers of the Township and the determination of all matters of
policy shall be vested in the Council, except as otherwise provided by or
pursuant to the Charter, Code, or General Law.
b. It is the intention of this section that unless otherwise specifically
provided by the Charter, the Township Council shall act in all matters as
a body and it is contrary to the spirit of the Charter for any of its
members to seek individually to influence the official acts of the
Manager, or any other officer, or for the Council or any of its members
to direct or request the appointment of any person to, or his removal
from, office; or to interfere in any way with the performance by such
officers of their duties. The Council and its members shall deal with the
administrative service solely through the Manager, and shall not give
orders to any subordinates of the Manager, either publicly or privately.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Council from appointing
committees or commissions of its own members or of citizens to
conduct investigations into the conduct of any officer or department, or
any matter relating to the welfare of the Township, and delegating to
such committees or commissions such powers of inquiry as the Council
may deem necessary.
a. Preparation of ordinances and resolutions. Ordinances and resolutions
shall be prepared and/or reviewed for presentation to the Council by
the Township Attorney upon the request of a majority of Council or at
the request of the Manager.
b. All ordinances, resolutions and contract documents, shall:
§ 2-4.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-4.6
1:9
§ 2-4.7. Manager-Council relation. [Ord. No. 0-1-72, 1967 Code
§ 2-10]
The Manager shall be responsible to the Council for proper administration
of the affairs of the Township in accordance with the Faulkner Act. The
Manager shall attend all Council meetings, and may participate in Council
discussions.
§ 2-5. (Reserved)
§ 2-6. GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION.
§ 2-6.1. Departments. [Ord. No. 0-1-72, 1967 Code § 2-12; New]
There shall be the following administrative departments among and within
which the Manager shall allocate and assign all administrative functions,
powers and duties of the Township government which are not allocated or
assigned to a particular department by the Charter or Code:
§ 2-6.2. Department heads: general powers and duties. [Ord. No.
0-1-72, 1967 Code § 2-12]
Each department head, under the direction and supervision of the Manager,
shall:
1. Be approved as to form and legality by the Township Attorney or his
authorized representative.
2. Be examined as to administration by the Manager or his authorized
representative.
a. Department of Administration.
b. Department of Finance.
c. Department of Public Works.
d. Department of Public Safety.
e. Department of Community Development.
a. Exercise and discharge such functions, powers and duties as may be
allocated and assigned to the department by the Charter or by any
ordinance.
b. Direct and supervise the work of his department.
c. Organize the activities of the department and allocate and assign
functions to its employees.
d. Have such powers of appointment and removal of subordinates within
the department as may be delegated to him by the Manager pursuant to
the Charter, subject to the statutes, rules and regulations governing the
§ 2-4.6 § 2-6.2
1:10
§ 2-6.3. Appointments; personnel rules and policies. [Ord. No.
0-1-72, 1967 Code § 2-13; New]
The Manager shall be responsible for the administration of personnel rules
and policies, the administration of employee appointment and the manner
of employee removal, demotion and promotion; the classification of all
employees; and the administration of all other personnel policies,
procedures and regulations for all of the employees of the Township as
declared, defined and set forth in "An Ordinance Establishing Personnel
Policies, Procedures and Regulations for All of the Employees of the
Township of Deptford, Gloucester County, New Jersey." All Department
Heads and all Division Heads, except as provided by General Law, shall
serve at the discretion of the Manager and shall not be classified employees
under the Rules and Regulations of the Department of Personnel.
§ 2-7. THE MANAGER.
§ 2-7.1. Qualifications. [Ord. No. 0-1-72, 1967 Code § 2-14]
The Manager shall be chosen by the Council solely on the basis of his
executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to his
actual experience in, or his knowledge of, accepted practice in respect
to the duties of his office as hereinafter set forth. At the time of his
appointment, he need not be a resident of the Township or State, but
during his tenure of office he may reside outside the Township only with the
approval of Council.
§ 2-7.2. Removal. [New]
Removal of the Township Manager shall be done in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:69A-93.
§ 2-7.3. Acting Manager. [Ord. No. 0-1-72, 1967 Code § 2-16]
The Manager may designate a qualified administrative officer of the
Township to perform his duties during his temporary absence or disability.
In the event of his failure to make such designation, or in the event that the
office of Manager is legally unoccupied during such absence, disability or
during the period that the office is legally unoccupied, until he shall return,
the Council may by resolution appoint an officer of the Township to perform
the duties of the Manager during such absence, disability or until he shall
return or his disability shall cease, or until the office of Manager has been
legally occupied by appointment.
appointment and removal of employees under the Department of
Personnel.
e. Unless and until a department head is appointed by the Manager, the
Manager shall serve as acting head of the department without
additional compensation.
§ 2-6.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-7.4
1:11
§ 2-7.4. Powers and duties. [Ord. No. 0-1-72, 1967 Code § 2-17]
The Manager shall:
§ 2-7.5. Delegation of duties. [Ord. No. 0-1-72, 1967 Code § 2-18]
The Manager may in his discretion, allocate, assign or delegate functions
or powers to a department head for more efficient administration of the
Township government, provided that any such delegation, allocation or
assignment shall not relieve the Manager of any of his responsibilities
under the Charter or Code, nor shall it be inconsistent with any express
a. Be the chief executive and administrative official of the Township.
b. Execute all laws and ordinances of the Township.
c. Appoint and remove a Deputy Manager, if one be authorized by the
Council, all department heads and all other officers, subordinates and
assistants for whose selection or removal no other method is provided
in this section, or as prescribed by New Jersey Law, except that he may
authorize the head of a department to appoint and remove subordinates
in such department, supervise and control his appointees, and report all
appointments or removals at the next meeting thereafter of the Council.
d. Negotiate contracts for the Township subject to the approval of the
Council; make recommendations concerning the nature and location of
Township improvements, and execute Township improvements as
determined by the Council.
e. See that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the Township or its
inhabitants in any statute, public utility franchise or other contract are
faithfully kept and performed, and upon knowledge of any violations,
call the same, in writing, to the attention of the Council together with
appropriate recommendations.
f. Attend all meetings of the Council with the right to take part in the
discussions, but without the right to vote.
g. Recommend to the Council for adoption such measures as he may deem
necessary or expedient, keep the Council advised of financial conditions
of the Township, make reports to the Council as requested by it, and at
least once a year make an annual report of this work for the benefit of
the Council and the public.
h. Investigate at any time the affairs of any officer or department of the
Township of his own initiation or upon the request of Council.
i. Perform such other duties as may be required of the Manager by the
Charter, ordinance or resolution of the Council.
j. The Municipal Manager shall be responsible to the Council for carrying
out all policies established by it and for the proper administration of all
affairs of the Township within the jurisdiction of the Council.
§ 2-7.4 § 2-7.5
1:12
requirement of the Code. Any such delegation shall be in writing which shall
be filed with the Clerk and reported to the Council.
§ 2-7.6. Township property and insurance. [Ord. No. 0-1-72, 1967
Code § 2-19; New]
§ 2-8. DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATION.
§ 2-8.1. Creation of department; head. [New]
There shall be a Department of Administration, the head of which shall be
the Manager.
§ 2-9. DIVISION OF THE TOWNSHIP CLERK.
§ 2-9.1. Township Clerk. [Ord. No. 0-1-72, 1967 Code § 2-32; New]
There shall be a Division of the Township Clerk within the Department of
Administration, the head of which shall be the Township Clerk (under the
direction and supervision of the Manager to the extent permitted by General
Law). The Township Clerk shall be appointed by the Council and he/she
shall serve for a term of three years, and shall receive such compensation
as shall be provided by ordinance. The Municipal Clerk shall be appointed
and qualified pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133 et seq.
§ 2-9.2. Deputy Clerk. [Ord. No. 0-1-72, 1967 Code § 2-34;]
There shall be a Deputy Clerk or Clerks appointed by the Manager, the
number of which shall be determined in accordance with the needs of the
community but which number for the purpose of this subsection shall be
indefinite. The Deputy or Deputies so appointed shall have all of the powers
and shall perform all of the duties of the Township Clerk during such times
and for such periods as the Township Clerk shall be absent or otherwise
unavailable.
a. The Manager shall have custody, management and control of all
Township property which is not otherwise allocated or assigned to a
Department by the Code.
b. The Manager shall be required to review the insurance coverage, and
make recommendations to the Council to assure that there is adequate
insurance coverage to protect the Township against risk of loss from
whatever cause. All insurance policies and surety bonds shall be filed
for safekeeping with the Township Clerk, who shall be required to
maintain an index of insurance policies and surety bonds, which index
shall be open for public inspection.
c. The Manager shall be responsible for the submission to Township
Council for recommendations for the renewal of Township insurance.
§ 2-7.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-9.3
1:13
§ 2-9.3. Powers and duties of Clerk. [Ord. No. 0-1-72, 1967 Code
§ 2-35]
The Township Clerk shall:
a. Serve as Clerk of the Council and as Secretary of any special legislative
committees of the Council appointed pursuant to the Charter. He/she
shall attend all meetings of the Council and of such committees when
required by the Chairman thereof, and shall keep the minutes of the
proceedings of the Council and of such committees. The minutes of
each meeting of the Council shall be signed by the officer presiding at
the meeting and by the Clerk.
b. Compile all ordinances and all resolutions of a permanent character in
books to be provided for that purpose. After each ordinance he shall
also publish, engross and certify the proof of publication thereof as
required by law. Each ordinance and resolution so engrossed shall be
signed by the Mayor and Clerk, who shall attest that it was duly
adopted upon a date stated, and when so signed, the engrossed copy
shall be deemed to be a public record of the ordinance or resolution.
Any omission by the Clerk or the Mayor to engross, sign or certify as
herein required shall not impair or affect the validity of any ordinance
which has been duly adopted.
c. At the close of each year, with the advice and assistance of the Township
Attorney, shall bind, compile or codify all the ordinances and
resolutions, or true copies thereof, which then remain in force and
effect. He shall also properly index the record books, compilation or
codification of ordinances and resolutions.
d. Have custody of and shall safely keep all records, books and documents
of the Township, except those committed by Charter or ordinance to
any other office or transferred thereto by the Manager. He shall, upon
request and upon the payment of the fees prescribed therefor by
resolution of the Council for the use of the Township, furnish a certified
copy of any such paper in his custody, under the corporate seal of the
Township.
e. Cause the corporate seal of the Township to be affixed to instruments
and writings when authorized by ordinance or resolution of the Council
or when necessary to exemplify any document on record in his office, or
to certify any act or paper which from the records in his office shall
appear to have been a public act of the Township or a public document.
He shall not affix the seal or cause or permit it to be affixed to any other
instrument or writing or other paper, unless required by law or
ordinance.
f. Issue certificates as to liability for assessment for municipal
improvements in accordance with provisions of N.J.S.A. 54:5-18.1 et
seq. Prior to the issuance of any such certificate, he shall secure from
the Director of Public Works his countersignature, which shall indicate
§ 2-9.3 § 2-9.3
1:14
§ 2-10. (Reserved)2
§ 2-11. through § 2-12. (Reserved)
§ 2-13. DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE.
§ 2-13.1. Creation of department; head. [Ord. No. 0-72, 1967 Code
§ 2-28; New]
There shall be a Department of Finance, the head of which shall be the
Director of Finance and who shall also be the Chief Financial Officer.
§ 2-13.2. Divisions. [Ord. No. 0-1-72, 1967 Code § 2-29; Ord. No.
0-3-73]
Within the Department there shall be the following divisions:
that to the best of his knowledge, information and belief, the certificate
is correct.
g. Issue certificates as to approval of subdivisions of land, as authorized by
law, when a land subdivision has been approved in accordance with
Chapter 22, Land Subdivision. (See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.). Prior to
the issuance of such certificate, he shall secure from the Secretary of
the Planning Board his countersignature, which shall indicate that
according to the records of the Board and his knowledge, information
and belief, the certificate is correct.
h. Maintain a current compilation of all rules and regulations, which shall
be available for public inspection in his office during business hours. No
rule or general regulation made by any department, officer, agency or
authority of the Township, except such as relates to the organization or
internal management of the Township government or a part thereof,
shall take effect until it is filed with the Township Clerk.
i. In addition to such other functions, powers and duties as may be
prescribed by the Charter and subject to the supervision and direction
of the Manager, perform all of the functions required of Clerks by the
general election law (Title 19 of the New Jersey Statutes) and any other
law or ordinance.
j. Administer the license and permit provisions of all regulatory
ordinances not expressly assigned by this Code to any department and
not required by statute to be administered by another Township officer.
a. Division of Tax Collection, the head of which shall be the Tax Collector.
b. Division of Tax Assessments, the head of which shall be the Tax
Assessor.
2. Editor's Note: The Division of Welfare eliminated by Ordinance all responsibilities and
jurisdiction has been transferred to the County of Gloucester.
§ 2-9.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-13.3
1:15
§ 2-13.3. Director of Finance. [Ord. No. 0-1-72, 1967 Code § 2-30;
New]
a. Appointment and compensation. The Director of Finance shall be
appointed by the Manager and shall receive such compensation as shall
be fixed by a general Salary Ordinance.
b. Qualifications. The Director of Finance shall be qualified by training
and experience in office management, municipal budgeting, accounting
and finance.
c. Duties. The Director of Finance shall:
1. Be the Chief Financial Officer of the Township.
2. Supervise the work of the Department and its divisions.
3. Be responsible for the accounting, preauditing, control, receipt,
custody and disbursement of Township revenues and expenditures
and for all fiscal matters and financial policies of the Township.
4. Serve when necessary and without additional compensation as
Acting Township Tax Assessor and Acting Township Tax Collector.
5. Maintain the continuity of the Department by:
(a) Developing, maintaining and enforcing a uniform system of
accounts, including forms, standards and procedures for all
departments of the municipal government. Any uniform system
of accounts shall include appropriate provision for such
records and reports as may be prescribed or approved by the
Manager for the determination of the cost of performance of
each functional program or activity, measured in such work
units as may be appropriate thereto, and for such data, records
and reports as may be prescribed or approved by the Manager
for the preparation and execution of a budget for the
expenditure of public funds for capital purposes to give effect
to general improvement programs.
(b) Maintaining and operating the Township's central bookkeeping
and accounting records according to sound accounting
principles, and in accordance with the requirements of the
Director of the State Division of Local Finance.
(c) Auditing all receipts and disbursements of the municipal
government and of each of its departments and preauditing all
bills, claims and demands against the Township, including
payrolls, and require each department head to certify that the
materials, supplies or equipment have been received and
accepted as specified and that the services have been duly
rendered.
§ 2-13.3 § 2-13.3
1:16
§ 2-13.4. Chief Financial Officer. [Ord. No. 0-11-89 § 1-3]
§ 2-13.5. Purchasing Agent. [Ord. No. 0-1-72, 1967 Code 2-31; Ord.
No. 84-04-R]
There shall be the Office of Purchasing Agent within the Department of
Finance, which shall establish a centralized purchasing system to be
implemented as follows:
(d) Controlling all expenditures to assure that budget
appropriations are not exceeded, and maintain such books and
records as may be required for the proper exercise of such
budgetary control.
(e) Supervising the purchasing of all materials, equipment or
supplies required by the Township.
a. Office created. The office of Chief Financial Officer for the Township of
Deptford is hereby established.
b. The Chief Financial Officer shall be a person who is a "Certified
Municipal Officer" appointed by the Municipality as defined by New
Jersey Statutes.
c. The Chief Financial Officer shall carry out the responsibilities
established by the mandates of New Jersey Statutes and Regulations
relevant thereto.
d. No member of the Township Council of the Township of Deptford shall
be appointed as the Chief Financial Officer.
a. The Office shall make all purchases of material, equipment or supplies
for the Township and shall be responsible for making all such purchases
at the most favorable price for the Township, and shall see to it that the
material, equipment or supplies delivered are correct in number or
amount and comply with the standards and specifications prescribed by
the Office or the governing body.
b. Where the calling for bids is required by law or ordinance, or where
such procedure will benefit the Township, the Office shall prepare the
specifications and notice to bidders and see that the required notices
are published.
c. Any commodity, equipment or supplies purchased in advance of actual
need shall remain in the custody of the Office for delivery to the officer,
department or employee needing it at the time its use is required. The
Office shall keep records of all purchases made and the destination or
ultimate use of such material, equipment or supplies.
d. The Office shall cause to be kept an inventory of all Township property
in custody; and it shall be the duty of each officer or employee having
§ 2-13.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-13.5
1:17
§ 2-13.6. Sale of real estate; collection of rents. [Ord. No. 0-1-72,
Code § 2-32; New]
§ 2-13.7. Other responsibilities of the department. [Ord. No. 0-1-72,
1967 Code § 2-37; New]
Township property in his custody to keep an inventory of such property
and to furnish a copy thereof to the Office on request.
e. The Office shall furthermore have, perform and discharge all the
functions, powers and duties prescribed for the Office by General Law,
Township ordinance and pursuant to the rules and regulations of any
State agency, where applicable.
a. The Director of Finance shall establish and maintain a completed
registry of all real property in which the Township of Deptford has
acquired an interest pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:12-22;
this registry shall also include a record of all real property which the
Township may hereafter acquire, sell or lease. A registry of real
property sold or leased shall be maintained by the Director. A duplicate
copy of each registry shall be maintained and available for inspection in
the Office of the Township Clerk.
b. The Director of Finance shall act and perform all duties under this
section. He shall likewise act as the collector of rents of all property
leased by the Township. In furtherance of these duties he shall maintain
appropriate books and records for the collection of rent and for the
receipt of money due for the purchase of Township land. Except for the
collection of rents, the Director shall not receive any payment from any
prospective purchaser or bidder unless it be by cash, check, certified
check, money order or other negotiable notes or bills made payable to
the order of the Township of Deptford.
c. For the sale of Township land all deposits and sums received shall be
maintained in a separate escrow account, to be administered by the
Director of Finance, which sums shall remain in escrow until the
appropriate conveyance of title or interest is made.
d. The Director shall recommend to the Township Council those properties
to be sold, leased or conveyed. He shall at all times be governed in the
administration of this office in execution of his duties by the provisions
of State Statute (N.J.S.A. 40A:12-1 et seq.) and the applicable rules and
regulations of the Division of Local Finance and other State agencies
where applicable.
a. Under the direction and supervision of the Municipal Finance Director
who also serves as the Chief Financial Officer, the Department shall:
1. Maintain the Township's central bookkeeping and accounting
records, preaudit and control all claims and demands against the
Township, as specifically enumerated in subsection 2-13.3.
§ 2-13.5 § 2-13.7
1:18
§ 2-13.8. Division of Tax Collection. [Ord. No. 0-1-72, 1967 Code
§ 2-38; New]
Within the Department of Finance there shall be a Division of Tax Collection,
the head of which shall be the Tax Collector, who shall be appointed by the
Manager pursuant to law.
2. Keep and maintain books and records of all financial transactions in
accordance with the standards and requirements of the State
Division of Local Finance. It shall make monthly reports to the
Manager of all receipts, expenditures, commitments and
unexpended appropriations. It shall have custody of all investments
and invested funds of the Township or in possession of the
Township in a fiduciary capacity except as otherwise provided by
law, and the investments and invested funds shall be kept safely
invested with the advice and approval of the Manager. It shall
further have the safekeeping of all bonds and notes of the Township
and the receipt and delivery of all Township bonds and notes for
transfer, registration or exchange.
3. Be responsible for the administration of all financial duties and
functions as specifically enumerated in subsection 2-13.3.
b. The Chief Financial Officer shall:
1. Have, perform and exercise all the functions, powers and duties as
are provided by the Charter and Municipal ordinances relating to
Municipal treasurers, and he shall keep proper records and shall
report to the Township Manager at least monthly, all receipts and
deposits made by him and shall in such report account for all
moneys for which he is responsible.
2. Receive all monies through Central Purchasing from any source by
or on behalf of the Township or any department, board, office or
agency, except as otherwise provided by Charter or Municipal
ordinance, who shall on the next ensuing bank day after their
receipt, deposit them to the credit of the Township in an authorized
public depository to the credit of the proper account. Reports of
such payments to the Chief Financial Officer shall be made at the
end of each calendar month by the Municipal Clerk and the Tax
Collector, and shall be made by other officers, agencies,
departments and boards as provided by law.
3. The Chief Financial Officer shall have custody of all current funds
of the Township and shall make disbursements therefrom in
accordance with the Code.
a. The Tax Collector shall have, perform and exercise all the functions,
powers and duties as are provided by the Charter, Municipal ordinances
and General Law relating to municipal tax collectors, and he shall keep
proper records and shall report to the Director of the Department at
§ 2-13.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-13.8
1:19
§ 2-13.9. Division of Assessments. [Ord. No. 0-1-72; 1967 Code
§ 2-39; Ord. No. 0-3-73]
§ 2-14. through § 2-15. (Reserved)
§ 2-16. DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS.
§ 2-16.1. Creation of department. [Ord. No. 0-1-72, 1967 Code
§ 2-40; New]
There shall be a Department of Public Works, the head of which shall be the
Director of Public Works who shall be appointed by the Manager and who
shall receive such salary as shall be fixed by the General Salary Ordinance.
§ 2-16.2. Responsibilities. [Ord. No. 0-1-72, 1967 Code
§§ 2-40—2-44]
least monthly all receipts and deposits made by him and shall in such
report account for all moneys for which he is responsible.
b. The Tax Collector shall receive and collect all moneys assessed or
raised by taxation or assessment for any purpose. He shall keep a
current record for all tax title liens, advising the Director promptly as
liens become subject to foreclosure under the law. He shall enforce the
payment of delinquent taxes by the means provided by law as soon as
the same become delinquent.
c. The Tax Collector shall also serve as Municipal Tax Search Officer and
Collector of Assessments.
d. The Office of the Tax Collector shall be responsible for Central
Receipting. Central Receipting shall receive, post and give receipts for
all funds received by the Township or any Department, Board, Office or
Agency, and turn the same over to the Chief Financial Officer.
a. Within the Department of Finance, there shall be a Division of Tax
Assessments, the head of which shall be the Tax Assessor. The Tax
Assessor shall meet the certification requirements provided for in
N.J.S.A. 54:1-35.25 et seq. He shall have, perform and discharge all the
functions, powers and duties prescribed for assessors by the Charter
and ordinances and shall further make appraisals of property for any
municipal purpose upon direction of the Manager.
b. There may be a Deputy Tax Assessor who shall generally assist the Tax
Assessor in the proper performance of all his duties. The Deputy Tax
Assessor shall also have all of the powers and perform all of the duties
vested in the Tax Assessor at such times as he shall be absent from the
Township or unable to serve by reason of disability or otherwise.
c. The appointment of the Tax Assessor shall be by the Township Council
as provided by general law and ordinance for a term of four years.
§ 2-13.8 § 2-16.2
1:20
a. Streets. The Department shall:
1. Maintain, repair, construct and reconstruct public roads, streets
and drainage facilities of the Township.
2. Maintain, repair and provide public works and services to the
playgrounds of the Township; and trim, plant and care for shade
trees, public parks and greens.
3. When and where required, maintain Township streets and roads in
a clean and safe condition for passage, free of obstructions and
hazards, and remove snow and ice therefrom as required.
4. In cooperation with the Township Engineer and the Department of
Community Development, shall administer and enforce Section
13-1, Construction and Maintenance of Streets and Sidewalks.
b. Sanitation.
1. Supervise contracts for the collection and disposal of domestic
garbage, trash and other wastes.
2. Where and when required, maintain and repair Township buildings
and properties, and provide custodial and janitorial services
therefor, including real estate acquired by tax foreclosure or
otherwise.
3. Operate and maintain Township services for the collection and
disposal of yard waste.
c. General services. The Department shall:
1. Provide technical and mechanical services required by any
department, subject to the direction of the Manager and/or
Department Head.
2. Provide for the care, storage, use and disposition of motor vehicles
and motorized equipment of the Township, except as the Manager
shall otherwise direct.
d. Streetlighting. The Department shall:
1. Provide for the proper maintenance, operation and replacement of
existing streetlights in the Township.
2. Under the direction of the Manager, provide for the installation of
additional streetlighting, where required.
3. Maintain appropriate surveys and records of existing streetlights
and submit a status report upon the request of the Manager.
§ 2-16.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-16.3
1:21
§ 2-16.3. Delegation of authority. [Ord. No. 0-1-72, 1967 Code
§ 2-45]
The Director of Public Works shall receive such compensation as shall be
fixed by a general Salary Ordinance. He shall be qualified by training and
experience for the duties of his office. He shall be subject to the direction
and supervision of the Manager and shall be responsible for the proper and
efficient conduct of all public work functions of the Township government
and shall supervise and direct the work of the Department.
§ 2-16.4. Transfer of personnel. [Ord. No. 0-1-72, 1967 Code § 2-46;
New]
When and where required, the Director may, temporarily, transfer or assign
personnel to effect the purposes and duties prescribed herein. All transfers
shall be in accordance with New Jersey Law.
§ 2-17. through § 2-18. (Reserved)
§ 2-19. DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY.
§ 2-19.1. Creation of department; head. [Ord. No. 0-1-72, 1967 Code
§ 2-47; New]
There shall be a Department of Public Safety, the head of which shall be the
Chief of Police.
§ 2-19.2. Police Department. [New]
The Police Department shall be organized, constituted and administered in
accordance with Section 2-20.
§ 2-19.3. School Traffic Guards. [Ord. No. 0-1-72, 1967 Code § 2-51;
New]
Upon recommendation of the Director, the Township Manager shall appoint,
in the manner designated by law, school traffic guards to control, manage
and enforce pedestrian safety within the Township. School traffic guards
shall be subject to the direction of the Director of Public Safety and paid in
a manner designated by a general Salary Ordinance and resolutions for the
payment of employees within the Township.
§ 2-19.4. Division of Emergency Management Services. [Ord. No.
0-1-72, 1967 Code § 2-52; New]
Within the Department of Public Safety there shall be a Division of
Emergency Management Services, the head of which shall be the
Emergency Management Coordinator who shall have the functions, powers
and duties as described herein.
§ 2-16.3 § 2-19.5
1:22
§ 2-19.5. Ambulance, rescue and first-aid squads. [Ord. No. 0-1-72,
1967 Code § 2-54]
All ambulance, rescue and first-aid squads operating within the Township
shall be classified as services within the Department of Public Safety and,
where required, shall come under the general supervision and control of the
Director of Public Safety.
§ 2-20. DIVISION OF POLICE (DEPTFORD TOWNSHIP POLICE
DEPARTMENT).
§ 2-20.1. Establishment; composition. [Ord. No. 3-25-68; Ord. No.
7-13-70; Ord. No. 0-12-73; 1967 Code § 51-1; Ord. No. 1-96, §§ 1, 2;
New]
§ 2-20.2. Appointments; qualifications. [Ord. No. 3-25-68; Ord. No.
0-12-73; 1967 Code § 51-2; New]
a. A Police Department is hereby established in the Township of Deptford,
under the name of "Deptford Township Police Department".
b. The Police Department shall consist of the Chief of Police, and such
other Deputies, Captains, Lieutenants, Sergeants of Police and any such
number of Police Officers and other employees as shall be deemed
necessary by the Township Manager to preserve peace and good order
within the Township.
c. The Chief of Police shall be held responsible for the discipline and
performance of duty by all members of the Department.
a. All members of the Police Department shall be appointed by the
Township Manager upon recommendation submitted by the Director of
Public Safety.
b. Police Officer.
1. All applicants for appointment as an officer or member of the Police
Department shall meet all requirements prescribed by the statutes
of the State of New Jersey in such case made and provided, as
amended by Municipal ordinance and/or ordinances.
2. Applicants shall submit to and pass such physical and psychological
examination as may be prescribed.
3. Applicants shall submit to and successfully pass such written or
oral examinations as may be prescribed.
4. All appointments of Police Officers shall be made by the Township
Manager in accordance with the rules prescribed by the New
Jersey Department of Personnel.
§ 2-19.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-20.3
1:23
§ 2-20.3. Oaths of allegiance. [Ord. No. 3-25-68; 1967 § 51-4]
Every member of the Police Department, before entering upon the
performance of their duties, shall take and subscribe an oath or affirmation
to bear true faith and allegiance to the government established in this
State under the authority of the people, to support the Constitution of
the United States and the Constitution of the State of New Jersey, and to
faithfully, impartially and justly discharge and perform all the duties of their
respective office, which oath or affirmation shall be filed with the Municipal
Clerk.
§ 2-20.4. Compensation. [Ord. No. 3-25-68; 1967 Code § 51-5]
The compensation of members of the Police Department shall be fixed by
the Salary Ordinance3 of the Township.
§ 2-20.5. Rules and regulations. [Ord. No. 3-25-68; 1967 Code
§ 51-6; New]
§ 2-20.6. Chief of Police; powers and duties. [Ord. No. 3-25-68; 1967
Code § 51-7; Ord. No. 0-2-85, § 2; Ord. No. 1-96 § 2]
a. All Rules and Regulations of the Township Police Department, which
was previously adopted, amended or supplemented are adopted herein.
b. The Township Manager, as the Appropriate Authority, is hereby
empowered to make and establish, amend or repeal, by resolution or
ordinance, such rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the laws of
this State or ordinances of the Township, for the government and
control of the members of the Police Department, as may be deemed
expedient and proper to carry out the objects of this section and with
the view to making the Police Department and all the officers and
members thereof efficient, vigilant, prompt and useful to the Township.
Such rules and regulations may prescribe the duties of the Chief of
Police and all other Police Officers more specifically than is herein
contained, and may provide such penalties not inconsistent with law as
may be deemed necessary and expedient for the proper regulation of
the Police Department.
c. All rules and regulations made pursuant hereto shall be in writing, and
the original copy shall be filed in the office of the Township Clerk and a
copy in the office of the Chief of Police, and shall be binding on all
persons subject to the jurisdiction of the Department after notice
thereof. A typewritten or printed copy of such rules shall be delivered to
each member of the Department and a copy or copies shall be posted
conspicuously in the headquarters of the Department, and such delivery
or posting shall be deemed notice of the adoption and effectiveness
thereof to those subject thereto.
3. Editor's Note: The currently effective Salary Ordinance is on file in the office of the
Township Clerk and is available for examination during office hours.
§ 2-20.3 § 2-20.6
1:24
a. The Chief of Police shall be the executive head of the Police
Department, subject to all rules and regulations authorized by this
section and any amendments thereto, and it shall be his duty and direct
responsibility for the conduct, efficiency and management of the
Department, subject at all times to the rules and regulations of the
Police Department, as established, and instructions and orders of the
Township Manager. All orders and instructions to the members of the
Police Department shall be made to the Chief or, in his absence, through
the next ranking superior officer.
b. The Chief of Police shall have power to assign the members of the Police
Department to any duties for the protection of life, health and public
safety and to enforce the laws of the State of New Jersey, the ordinances
of the Township and the rules and regulations of the Police Department.
c. It shall be the duty of the Chief, or, in his absence, of the officer in
charge, to confer with the Township Manager, and to make a report
monthly and annually to the Township Manager of the activities of the
Police Department, as well as in specific cases as requested, and to
make such recommendations as he shall deem wise and appropriate.
d. The Chief of Police shall have under his control all records and property
of the Police Department. He may designate any member of his
Department to prepare the reports and keep the records in such
manner as he may prescribe, as well as to take charge of such records
and any other property coming into the custody of the Department.
e. The Chief of Police shall see that all persons connected with the
Department are properly instructed in their duties, and shall give
particular attention to the training and instructions of the members
thereof.
f. He shall keep a record in his office of the names, ages, nationalities,
places of residence and date of appointment of each and every officer,
and the date and cause of removal of any officer. He shall also cause
these records to be kept in accordance with good Police practices. He
shall report all violations of the rules and regulations of the Department
which require personal action to the Township Manager. He shall
further keep a record of the conduct of any of the members of the
Department, both of a critical and or commendatory nature.
g. The Chief of Police shall have supervision over all members of the Police
Department and Clerks of such Department.
h. In the absence of the Chief of Police, the Chief shall designate one of the
next highest ranking officers to serve as Acting Chief. In the event of
incapacity of the Chief of Police, the Township Manager shall designate
one of the highest ranking officers to perform in the absence of the
Chief of Police.
§ 2-20.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-20.7
1:25
§ 2-20.7. Deputy Chief of Police: powers, duties. [Ord. No. 3-25-68;
1967 Code § 51-7.1; Ord. No. 0-2-85, § 2; Ord. No. 1-96, §§ 1, 2; New]
§ 2-20.8. Captain of Police. [New]
The Captain of Police, if one is appointed, shall fulfill all duties and
responsibilities designated by Statutes and other duties designated by the
Chief of Police.
§ 2-20.9. Lieutenant: powers, duties. [Ord. No. 3-25-68; 1967 Code
§ 51-7.1; Ord. No. 0-2-85, § 2; Ord. No. 1-96, §§ 1, 2; New]
The Lieutenant of Police shall fulfill all duties and responsibilities
designated by Statutes and other duties designated by the Chief of Police.
§ 2-20.10. Sergeants. [Ord. No. 3-25-68; 1967 Code § 51-8; Ord. No.
1-96, §§ 1, 2]
The Sergeants shall have such duties and responsibilities designated by
Statutes and other duties designated by the Chief of Police.
§ 2-20.11. Communications operators of the Police Department.
[Ord. No. 3-25-68; 1967 Code § 51-9; Ord. No. 0-2-85, § 2; Ord. No.
1-96, §§ 1, 2; New]
§ 2-20.12. General duties of members. [Ord. No. 3-25-68; 1967 Code
§ 51-10]
a. The Deputy Chief of Police, if appointed, shall fulfill all duties and
responsibilities designated by Statute and other designated duties by
the Chief of Police.
b. The Deputy Chief shall be direct assistant to the Chief of Police.
c. In the absence of or incapacity of the Chief of Police, the Deputy Chief
shall perform the duties of the Chief of Police.
a. Under the direction of the Chief of Police or his designee,
Communications Operators shall perform all duties relative to keeping
the records of their tour or duty, answering telephone calls, directing
calls to the appropriate persons, dispatching police personnel, or such
other duties directed by the Chief of Police.
b. They shall be on active duty at all such hours as prescribed by the Chief
of Police.
c. Members of the Police Department, in the absence of the regular
Communications Officer, may perform the duties of such dispatcher
during such term of duty.
a. All members of the Police Department shall perform all duties provided
by law and any further duties as set forth by the Chief of Police.
§ 2-20.7 § 2-20.12
1:26
§ 2-20.13. Disciplinary action. [Ord. No. 3-25-68; 1967 Code
§ 51-11; New]
Each permanently employed member of the Police Department shall hold
his office during good behavior and efficiency and shall not be suspended,
removed, fined or reduced in rank or salary for political reasons or for
any other cause than incapacity, misconduct, or disobedience of rules and
regulations established for the government of the Police Department or for
such other reasons provided in N.J.S.A. 11A-1 et seq. and the New Jersey
Administrative Code promulgated thereto. The right to a hearing shall be
governed by N.J.S.A. 11A-1 et seq. and the New Jersey Administrative Code
promulgated thereto.
§ 2-20.14. Residency preference. [New]
In all matters of appointment, residents of the Township of Deptford shall
be given preference pursuant to the New Jersey Department of Personnel.
§ 2-20.15. Division of emergency services established. [Ord. No.
0.2.97 § 1; Ord. No. 0.6.97 § 2-54]
b. Each member of the Police Department shall devote his full time and
attention to the services of the Department. Although certain hours may
be allotted for the performance of regular tours of duty, officers are
considered at all times available for duty and must act promptly at any
time their services are required except when on authorized leave or in
the event of disability. No permanent officer of the Police Department
shall hold either full or part-time employment other than that of Police
Officer of the Township without the written permission of the Chief of
Police.
a. Division established. The Division of Emergency Services in the Police
Department is hereby created.
b. Head of division; appointment. The Division shall be headed by the
Emergency Management Coordinator who shall be appointed by the
Township Manager.
c. Supervision by Chief of Police. The Division and the Emergency
Management Coordinator shall be under the supervision of the Chief of
Police or his designee.
d. Duties. The Division shall be responsible for:
1. Emergency management;
2. Paid and volunteer ambulance service;
3. 911 compliance;
4. Right-to-know compliance.
§ 2-20.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-20.15
1:27
§ 2-21. through § 2-22. (Reserved)
§ 2-23. DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT.
§ 2-23.1. Creation of department; divisions. [Ord. No. 0-1-72, 1967
Code § 2-55; Ord. No. 0-9-17; Ord. No. 0-21-78; New]
§ 2-23.2. Division of Construction Code Enforcement. [Ord. No.
0-1-72, 1967 Code § 2-58; Ord. No. 0-21-78]
e. All volunteers shall be subject to recognition by the Emergency
Management Coordinator, Chief of Police, and Township Manager, and
shall maintain training standards equal to or greater than the standards
for medical personnel set forth by the New Jersey State Department of
Health, Emergency Medical Services.
f. Ambulance, rescue and first aid squads. All ambulance and emergency
medical services to be provided within the corporate boundary lines of
the Township of Deptford shall be provided by the Division of
Emergency Services.
a. There is hereby created a Department of Community Development, the
head of which shall be the Director of Community Development.
b. There shall be the following divisions in the Department:
1. Division of Construction Code Enforcement.
(a) Office of Code Enforcement.
2. Division of Planning and Zoning.
a. Within the Department of Community Development, there shall be a
Division of Construction Code Enforcement, the head of which shall be
the Construction Official appointed pursuant to Section 10-1 of this
Code and New Jersey Law and under the supervision of the Director of
the Department of Community Development.
b. Appointment of construction official. A qualified Construction Code
Official shall be appointed by the Manager pursuant to Statute. He shall
be paid such compensation as shall be fixed by a general Salary
Ordinance.
c. Duties of construction official.
1. The Construction Official shall be charged with the administration
and enforcement of the Uniform Construction Code, all
construction, housing and maintenance codes duly adopted by the
Township Council, Section 10-1 of this Code, and the
administration of the Uniform Construction Code Enforcing Agency
established pursuant thereto. He shall undertake such other duties
as may be prescribed by general law and ordinance.
§ 2-20.15 § 2-23.2
1:28
2. The Construction Official shall, when required, in the absence or
disability of a designated enforcing officer, serve as substitute
enforcing officer for the administration and enforcement of Section
10-3, Housing Code; Section 4-8, Junkyards; Section 3-2, Littering;
Chapter 11, Property Maintenance; Section 10-4, Unsafe
Structures; and Section 4-6, Establishments for the Sale, Rental
and Repair of Motor Vehicles, and as substitute Public Officer for
administering the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2A:42-85 to 2A:42-97.
3. The Construction Official shall perform such inspections,
investigations and other duties as the Department Head or
Township Manager may direct under present statute, codes,
ordinances, rules and regulations or pursuant to statute, codes,
ordinances and rules and regulations hereinafter adopted.
d. This Division shall, to the extent practicable, consolidate and
coordinate all regulatory inspections relating to the construction,
maintenance, use and occupancy of buildings and structures which are
not vested in any other department or division by the Administrative
Code; and shall, to the extent practicable, provide for cooperative
inspection and enforcement with such regulatory inspections as may be
vested in any other department or division by the Administrative Code;
and shall, to the extent practicable, provide for cooperative inspection
and enforcement with such regulatory inspections as may be vested in
any other department, division thereof or public agency.
e. Construction subcode officials. Those persons appointed as subcode
officials in accordance with Section 10-1 of this Code shall be under the
direction and supervision of the Construction Official subject to the
direction and supervision of the Director of Community Development to
the extent permitted by law. The Manager may appoint such additional
personnel as may be required.
f. Within the Department of Community Development, there shall be an
Office of Licensing, Inspections and Code Enforcement. The Manager
shall appoint Housing and Code Enforcement Officials who shall be
responsible to the Director of Community Development who shall have
the following duties:
1. Shall administer and enforce inspections and Code enforcement
under the following Township regulations: Chapter 20, Service
Stations; Section 3-2, Littering; Chapter 21, Property Maintenance.
It shall make such inspections and conduct such investigations as
may be necessary related to such administration and enforcement.
2. Administer the inspection and Code enforcement in connection
with Section 4-6, Establishments for the Sale, Rental and Repair of
Motor Vehicles. It shall make such inspections, investigations and
perform all duties necessary as required to effect the intent,
administration and enforcement of this Chapter.
§ 2-23.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-23.2
1:29
3. Issue and/or execute all orders and notifications resulting from
decisions on all ordinances and codes administered; and prosecute
violations thereof.
4. Perform such inspections and other duties as the Township
Manager may direct in the enforcement of Section 4-8, Junkyards,
of this Code.
5. The Code Enforcement Officer shall, when required, in the absence
or disability of the delegated enforcing officer serve as substitute
enforcing officer for the administration and enforcement of Section
10-1, Building Code.
6. Perform such other duties as the Manager may require under
present statutes, codes, ordinances, rules and regulations, or
pursuant to statutes, codes, ordinances, rules and regulations
hereinafter adopted.
7. Administer and enforce the Property Maintenance Code as adopted
in Chapter 11, Property Maintenance Section 11-1.
8. The Housing and Code Enforcement Officer shall be designated as
a Public Officer to administer and enforce Section 10-4, Unsafe
Structures. He shall assume the duties of custodian pursuant to
subsections 10-4.16 through 10-4.18 of this Code.
9. This Division shall perform such other duties as the Manager may
require under present statutes, codes, ordinances, rules and
regulations, or pursuant to statutes, codes, ordinances, rules and
regulations hereinafter adopted.
g. Additional duties of the Division of Construction Code Enforcement.
1. Other projects. Administer housing and building programs
sponsored by the Township.
2. Investigation of citizen complaints and enforcement: substandard
dwellings.
(a) This Division shall be responsible for investigating all citizen
and tenant complaints in regard to substandard, unsafe, and
unsanitary housing conditions alleged to exist within the
Township. Accordingly, the Housing Officer shall act as the
public officer to administer, enforce and maintain proceedings
on behalf of the Township as defined in "An Act Promoting Safe
and Sanitary Housing for Tenants of Substandard Dwellings
and Supplementing Chapter 42 of Title 2A of the New Jersey
Statutes" (N.J.S.A. 2A:42-85 to 2A:42-97). Where an apparent
criminal violation of statute or ordinance is alleged, such
complaint shall be investigated jointly with and under the
supervision of the Township Police Department or such other
designated law enforcement agency. (The grant of powers and
§ 2-23.2 § 2-23.2
1:30
§ 2-23.3. Office of Division of Planning and Zoning. [Ord. No.
0-1-72, 1967 Code § 2-63; Ord. No. 0-38-75; New]
duties enumerated herein shall be supplemental to the
delegation of authority pursuant to Section 10-4 of this Code.)
(b) Shall maintain a permanent record of all complaints received,
investigations made, and the disposition thereof and make
such report and/or recommendations to the appropriate
administrative department, division or Township Council.
a. There shall be a Division of Planning and Zoning, the head of which
shall be the Director of Community Development.
b. Duties. The Director shall have the following duties:
1. When requested by the Planning Board or Manager, the Director
shall coordinate research studies and prepare and recommend a
comprehensive plan, including the development of more detailed
plans and programs based on the comprehensive plan for area
renewal, conservation, rehabilitation or redevelopment.
2. The Director shall review and submit written comments to the
Manager, Township Council or Planning Board upon all proposals
to amend the Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision Ordinance, Official
Map and Standards Ordinance and such other ordinances as the
Manager, Township Council or Planning Board may refer to him. He
shall make recommendations for the updating and revision of the
ordinances concerned or for the adoption of new ordinances
related thereto.
3. The Director shall coordinate the maintenance of the Official
Zoning Map and keep it up-to-date.
4. Where authorized or directed by the Planning Board, he shall
provide information to the public on community development
problems and develop a program of citizen participation in
furtherance of proper planning and municipal development.
5. Attend the meetings of the Planning Board and coordinate the
rendering of professional services and opinions as may be required.
6. When requested, shall assist other departments in the development
of specific projects.
7. Shall administer the Uniform Development Ordinances.
8. Documents. The Division Head shall maintain all papers,
documents, memorandums, reports and other materials relating to
the administration of this Division.
9. Shall supervise and coordinate acceptance of applications for and
the granting of licenses required by the Board of Health.
§ 2-23.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-24
1:31
§ 2-24. through § 2-28. (Reserved)
§ 2-29. DUTIES OF DIVISIONS.
§ 2-29.1. Preparation of forms and applications. [Ord. No. 0-1-72;
1967 Code § 2-59]
Each Division shall prepare such applications and forms necessary to carry
out its duties. Such documents shall be approved by the Manager and
Solicitor prior to publication and use.
§ 2-29.2. Filing of applications, permits, licenses, etc. [Ord. No.
0-1-72, 1967 Code § 2-60]
All applications received, permits and/or licenses issued by each Division
shall be assigned by year a permanent numerical designation and indexed
in proper sequence in a journal which shall be maintained for public
inspection. All other proceedings, orders and records of each Division shall
be processed, filed and indexed in such manner as the Manager may
approve, and shall be maintained for public inspection.
§ 2-29.3. Reports. [Ord. No. 0-1-72, 1967 Code § 2-61; New]
Each Division shall file with the Manager and Township Council such report
as the Manager and/or Township Council may direct.
§ 2-29.4. Financial reports and records. [Ord. No. 0-1-72, 1967 Code
§ 2-62]
Each Division shall maintain an appropriate system of financial accounts
and records for the receipt and distribution of funds acquired in the
operation of its duties. Such system of accounts and records, as well as the
manner of distribution and disbursement of funds, shall be approved by the
Chief Financial Officer and Manager.
§ 2-30. OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES IN GENERAL.
§ 2-30.1. Dual appointments. [Ord. No. 0-1-72, 1967 Code § 2-79]
The Manager may serve as head of one or more departments. The Manager
may appoint the same person to serve as head of two or more departments;
and a department head may also be appointed by the Manager to serve as
head of a division within his department without additional compensation.
§ 2-30.2. Transfer of personnel. [Ord. No. 0-1-72, 1867 Code § 2-64]
When and where required, the Manager may, temporarily and permanently,
transfer or assign personnel of any division to another to effect the purposes
and duties prescribed herein. All transfers shall be made in accordance with
the Laws of New Jersey.
§ 2-24 § 2-30.3
1:32
§ 2-30.3. Staff services. [Ord. No. 0-1-72, 1967 Code § 2-78]
The Manager shall appoint and may remove such technical, professional
and clerical personnel as may be required for the administration of any
office, board or commission referred to in this section, in accordance with
the Charter.
§ 2-30.4. Vacancies; temporary absences; disabilities. [Ord. No.
0-1-72, 1967 Code § 2-81]
In the event of the temporary absence or disability of any administrative
officer or employee, or in the event of a vacancy in any office, the Manager
or Acting Manager may designate a qualified person to serve in such office
temporarily in an acting capacity, and any such appointee shall have all
the functions, powers and duties of an incumbent until such absence or
disability terminates or such vacancy is filled by an appointment.
§ 2-30.5. Surety bonds. [Ord. No. 0-1-72, 1967 Code § 2-81; Ord.
0-22-74; New]
a. Every officer or employee of the Township who, by virtue of his office or
position, is entrusted with the receipt, custody or expenditure of public
moneys or funds, and any other officer or employee who may be
required so to do by the Council, shall before entering upon the duties
of his office or position execute and deliver a surety bond in such
amount as may be fixed by resolution of Council or as determined by
State statute or regulations, binding him to the Township in its
corporate name and conditioned upon the true and faithful
performance of his duty. Each office or employee required by law to
give bond shall execute such a bond with sufficient surety and deliver
his bond to the Clerk.
b. In every case in which any person is required by the laws of the State or
by any ordinance to give bond for the faithful performance of his duties,
such bond shall be secured by a corporate surety authorized to do
business in this State and the premium therefor shall be paid by the
Township. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prevent the
use of one or more blanket bonds when so approved.
c. Professional liability insurance.
1. Every officer or employee of the Township who by virtue of his
office or position provides professional services for the benefit of
the Township shall maintain a professional liability insurance
coverage providing an amount of coverage to be determined by the
Township Manager.
2. The term "professional services" means services rendered or
performed by a person authorized by law to practice a recognized
profession and whose practice is regulated by law, including but
§ 2-30.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-30.5
1:33
§ 2-30.6. Public records. [Ord. No. 0-1-72, 1967 Code § 2-82]
§ 2-30.7. Delivery of funds and records. [Ord. No. 0-1-72, 1967 Code
§ 2-83]
Upon the termination of the term of office or the employment of any officer
or employee, he shall forthwith deliver to his successor or, if there is no
successor, to the Manager all moneys, papers, books, memoranda, accounts
and data of any official nature whatever pertaining to his office.
§ 2-30.8. Public office hours. [Ord. No. 0-1-72, 1967 Code § 2-84]
The public, administrative and executive business offices shall be open for
the transaction of public business between such hours as the Manager may
prescribe with the approval of the Council, except as otherwise provided
by law. All Departments in times of emergency shall provide Municipal
services for 24 hours a day. The Manager or a Department Head may
require any officer or employee to be in attendance for work on any day
or days whenever he determines that a public exigency or emergency so
requires.
§ 2-31. TOWNSHIP ATTORNEY.
§ 2-31.1. Appointment of Attorney. [Ord. No. 0-1-72; 1972 Code
§ 2-20a]
The Township Attorney shall be appointed by the Council by a majority vote
of a quorum of its members and shall serve for a term of one year from the
first day of January of the year of his appointment and until his successor
has been appointed and qualified. The Attorney shall be an attorney at law
of New Jersey. In lieu of appointing an individual attorney, Council may
appoint a firm of attorneys, all members of which shall be attorneys-at-law
of New Jersey. The Attorney shall be appointed in a manner consistent with
the Local Public Contracts Law and shall execute a written contract with
the Township and the Township Attorney shall receive such compensation
as shall be agreed upon by the Township Council.
§ 2-31.2. Duties. [Ord. No. 0-1-72; 1972 Code § 2-20b]
not limited to the Township Auditor, Township Engineer and
Township Solicitor.
3. Whenever the Township Council so determines, it may require
additional liability insurance, it may require an increase in liability
insurance for the purpose of that project.
a. Be provided upon request in accordance with the procedures adopted
by the Township Manager.
b. Be made available within a reasonable time during office hours
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq. Public Records Act.
§ 2-30.5 § 2-31.2
1:34
§ 2-31.3. Additional duties. [Ord. No. 0-1-72; 1972 Code § 2-20c]
§ 2-31.4. Special Counsel. [Ord. No. 0-1-72; 1972 Code § 2-20d;
New]
Whenever he deems that the interests of the Township so require, the
Township Attorney, may recommend to the Township Council the
appointment of special counsel with the approval of the Council and within
the limits of available appropriations, may appoint special counsel to assist
him in the preparation, trial or argument of any issue or in such other
capacity as he may determine. If the Township Attorney should be
disqualified with respect to any matter or recommend the appointment of
special counsel for any reason, the Council may appoint special counsel
to represent the Township for and with respect to such matter, within the
limits of available appropriations.
a. The Township Attorney shall:
1. Represent the Township in all legal matters and shall advise and
assist the Council, the Manager and the Departments as required
in the administration of Township Government.
2. Attend meetings of the Council, draft ordinances and resolutions as
directed by the Manager or the majority of the members of Council,
and give opinions and rulings on questions of law which may arise
at Council meetings at the request of a majority of the members of
Council or the Township Manager.
3. Prepare or approve all legal instruments relating to the business of
the Township.
4. Represent the Township in any litigation, and conduct trials,
appeals and other proceedings affecting the interest of the
Township as he may in his discretion determine to be necessary or
desirable, subject to the approval of the Council.
a. The Township Attorney shall also:
1. Maintain records of all action suits, proceedings and matters which
relate to the Township's interest, and report thereon as the
Manager or Council may require.
2. Have power to enter into any agreement, compromise or
settlement or any litigation in which the Township is involved,
subject to the prior approval or ratification of the Council.
3. Upon the termination of his service with the Township, forthwith
surrender to his successor all Township property, papers and
records, together with written consent to substitution of his
successor in any pending actions or proceedings.
§ 2-31.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-31.5
1:35
§ 2-31.5. Residence. [Ord. No. 0-1-72, 1967 Code §§ 2-20, 2-22;
New]
The Township Attorney need not be a resident of the Township.
§ 2-32. TOWNSHIP PROSECUTOR.4
§ 2-32.1. Appointment of; duties. [Ord. No. 0-1-72, 1967 Code
§ 2-21; New]
§ 2-32.2. Residence. [Ord. No. 0-1-72, 1967 Code § 2-22]
The Township Prosecutor need not be a resident of the Township.
§ 2-33. PUBLIC DEFENDER.
§ 2-33.1. Appointment. [Ord. No. 0.20.00]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2B:24-1 et seq., the Office of Public Defender is hereby
recognized in the Township of Deptford and a Public Defender shall be
appointed annually by Township Council whose salary shall be established
by way of agreement approved and executed simultaneously with such
appointing resolution.
§ 2-33.2. Representation requirements. [Ord. No. 0.2.00]
Pursuant to the requirements of N.J.S.A. 2B:24-1 et seq. and 2B:24-17, the
Municipal Court Judge is hereby authorized to require a person applying for
representation by a Municipal Public Defender or Court-approved counsel
to pay an application fee of not more than $200 pursuant to the terms of
N.J.S.A. 2B:24-1 et seq.
a. Whenever required for the conduct of matters before the Municipal
Court or for appeal from the Municipal Court to the Superior Court, the
Council may appoint a Township Prosecutor who shall serve for a term
not to exceed one year.
b. The Prosecuting Attorney shall prosecute the criminal, quasi-criminal,
disorderly persons offenses, motor vehicle offenses and any other
matters in which the Municipal Court of the Township of Deptford has
jurisdiction pursuant to law and rule of the Supreme Court. The
Prosecutor shall receive such compensation for services as shall be
fixed by the general Salary Ordinance5 plus such fees for the defense of
such appeals as shall be deemed reasonable, and such fees as are
chargeable by the Township or State Police discovery.
4. Editor's Note: For provision concerning Application Fees for Public Defender, see
subsection 2-33.2 of this Code.
5. Editor's Note: The currently effective Salary Ordinance of the Township is on file in the
office of the Township Clerk and is available for examination during office hours.
§ 2-31.5 § 2-34
1:36
§ 2-34. TOWNSHIP AUDITOR.
§ 2-34.1. Appointment; compensation.6 [Ord. No. 0-1-72, 1967 Code
§ 2-23]
An independent auditor shall be appointed by the Council pursuant to
general law, by a majority vote of its membership for a term of one year
from the first day of January in the year of his appointment and until his
successor is appointed and qualified. He shall receive such compensation as
may be agreed upon and determined by the Council.
§ 2-34.2. Requirements. [Ord. No. 0-1-72, 1967 Code § 2-24]
The Auditor shall be a registered municipal accountant of the State of New
Jersey, but need not be a resident of the Township. In lieu of appointing an
individual auditor, the Council may appoint a firm of auditors, one or more
members of which shall be a registered municipal accountant of New Jersey.
§ 2-34.3. Powers and duties. [Ord. No. 0-1-72, 1967 Code § 2-25]
The Auditor shall make the annual audit and shall have the powers and
perform the duties prescribed by general law, ordinance or rules and
regulations of the Division of Local Finance in the Department of the
Treasury of the State of New Jersey. He shall also perform such duties and
render such services as may be prescribed by resolution or motion of the
Council or at the direction of the Manager.
§ 2-35. TOWNSHIP ENGINEER.
§ 2-35.1. Appointment; term; compensation. [Ord. No. 0-1-72, 1967
Code § 2-26]
There shall be a Township Engineer who shall be appointed by the Manager
for a term not to exceed three years, and shall be under a contract for
services to be performed with the Township. In lieu of appointing an
individual, the Manager may appoint a firm of engineers. The member of
the firm acting as Township Engineer shall be a licensed civil engineer
of the State of New Jersey. The Township Engineer shall receive such
compensation as may be agreed upon and determined by the Council.
§ 2-35.2. Duties. [Ord. No. 0-1-72, 1967 Code § 2-27]
The Township Engineer shall perform such duties as are prescribed by
general law and ordinance, and in addition shall be subject to approval by a
majority of Township Council or the Manager:
6. Editor's Note: The currently effective Salary Ordinance of the Township is on file in the
office of the Township Clerk and is available for examination during office hours.
§ 2-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-35.2
1:37
§ 2-36. LOCAL HISTORIAN. [Ord. No. 0.16.98]
a. Prepare or cause to be prepared plans, designs and specifications for
public works and improvements undertaken by the Township either on
force account or by public contract.
b. Provide and maintain surveys, maps, plans, specifications and control
records with respect to public works and facilities owned or operated
by the Township.
c. Provide technical and engineering advice and assistance to other
Township departments as needed.
d. Maintain all papers, documents, memoranda, reports and other
materials relating to the administration of engineering duties of the
Township Engineer within the property of the Township. Upon the
termination of his services with the Township, the Township Engineer
shall forthwith surrender to the Township all such property.
e. Provide services to the Tax Assessor to update the Tax Map on a current
basis.
f. Attend all Council meetings and Planning Board meetings as requested
by the Manager, and/or Township Council.
g. Provide planning and general inspection advice as directed by the
Manager to other departments.
a. The position of Local Historian for the Township of Deptford is hereby
established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:10A-1 et seq.
b. The Local Historian shall serve without compensation.
c. The Local Historian may not obligate the Township or expend Township
funds or donated funds without the prior written approval of the
Township Manager.
d. The Local Historian shall not be considered an employee of the
Township.
e. The Local Historian shall be appointed by Township Council and shall
serve at the pleasure of the Township Council.
f. The Local Historian shall carry out an historical program, including but
not restricted to, collecting, preserving and making available materials
relating to the history of Deptford Township. The Historian shall store
such materials in such a manner as to ensure their preservation in the
Township building or at such other location as directed by the Township
Manager and shall notify the State Archivist, New Jersey Historical
Commission, County Local Historian and Local governing body of any
materials that should be acquired for preservation. The Local Historian
of any donated or purchased funds or materials relating to the history of
Deptford Township. Upon leaving the position, the Historian shall turn
§ 2-35.2 § 2-36
1:38
over all materials, records and reports into the possession of the
successor, if then appointed, or to the governing body until a successor
shall be appointed.
g. The Local Historian shall make an annual report to the Township
Manager and governing body stating all of the work performed and
accomplished during the year. The Historian shall transmit a copy of
such report to the New Jersey Historical Commission.
h. The Historian may research, write and cause to have published a
Municipal History with the prior written approval of the Township
Manager and governing body and may recommend appropriate
historical materials for publications.
i. The Historian may assist, with the prior written approval of Deptford
Township Council, any Landmark Commission, as well as advise the
governing body, concerning the acquisition, administration, use and
disposition of any landmark or historic site, including such places
within Deptford Township included on the New Jersey Register of
Historic Places. Such advice may be furnished to the Historic Site
Section, Department of Environmental Protection with the prior written
consent of the Deptford Township Council.
j. The Local Historian may assist in projects of commemoration, including
the erection of monuments, historic markers and guide signs with the
prior written consent of the Township Council.
k. The Local Historian may not employ any clerical assistants or other
employees to assist such Historian in the carrying out of such
Historian's duties and responsibilities without the prior written consent
of the Township Manager and prior authorization by the Township
Council for the creation of any such position.
l. Any records, documents or other tangible objects of any kind acquired
by or received by the Historian during such Historian's appointment by
gift, donation, devise or otherwise shall be deemed Township property
and shall be included in a register to be created by and maintained by
the Township Historian of all writings, documents or tangible items
received by the Township Historian and all predecessors of the
Township Historian and shall, upon receipt of any such item, notify the
Township Manager and Council of all items received, the amount of
compensation paid for any such item, and the source of the item and
whether such item was received as a gift, donation, devise or otherwise.
m. Any funds received by the Township Historian through fund-raising
activities, by gift, donation, devise or otherwise shall be immediately
reported to the Township Manager and turned over to the Township's
Chief Financial Officer for deposit into the appropriate Township
Historical Account.
n. The Township Historian may engage in fund-raising activity with the
prior written approval of the Township Manager.
§ 2-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-36
1:39
§ 2-37. through § 2-41. (Reserved)
o. Any Historian accepting the appointment of Local Historian for the
Township of Deptford by acceptance of such appointment or carrying
out the duties of Local Historian shall be bound and governed by the
conditions set forth in the within section and any rules and regulations
promulgated by the Township Manager for the conduct of the
performance of such local Historian's duties and the Township Manager
be and the same is hereby authorized to promulgate such rules and
regulations not inconsistent with the within section.
p. In the event the powers and responsibilities of the Local Historian as
set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:10A-1 et seq. differ from those contained in this
section, this section shall govern.
§ 2-36 § 2-37
1:40
ARTICLE II
Establishment of the Municipal Court
§ 2-42. MUNICIPAL COURT.7
§ 2-42.1. Court established. [Ord. No. 9-27-48; 1967 Code § 39-1]
There shall be established in the Township, in accordance with the
provisions of State Statutes made and provided, a Municipal Court to be
known as the Municipal Court of the Township of Deptford.
§ 2-42.2. Officers appointed; compensation. [Ord. No. 9-27-48; 1967
Code § 39-2; New]
§ 2-42.3. Jurisdiction. [Ord. No. 9-27-48; 1967 Code § 39-3; New]
The jurisdiction of the court shall be in accordance with N.J.S.A. and the
Rules of the Supreme Court of the State of New Jersey.
§ 2-42.4. Discovery fees. [New]
Any person requesting discovery relating to any matter to be heard in the
Municipal Court of Deptford Township or arising within the jurisdiction of
the Municipal Court of Deptford shall pay a discovery fee of $20. In the
event such request relates to a matter involving the State Police, the fee
shall be payable to the Municipal Prosecutor.
§ 2-43. through § 2-44. (Reserved)
a. The Township Council shall, by resolution, have power to appoint the
Judge of the Municipal Court to preside over the Municipal Court and
shall be the Department Head of the Municipal Court.
b. The Township Manager shall appoint the Municipal Court
Administrator, any Deputy Administrator and such other Clerks, officers
and employees of the Municipal Court.
7. Editor's Note: For provisions concerning Application Fees for Public Defender, see
subsection 2-33.2 of this Code.
§ 2-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-43
1:41

ARTICLE III
Boards, Committees and Commissions
§ 2-45. BOARD OF HEALTH.
§ 2-45.1. Short title. [Ord. No. 2-9-70; 1967 Code § 10-1]
This section shall be designated and referred to as the "Township Board of
Health Regulation."
§ 2-45.2. Composition of the Board. [Ord. No. 2-9-70; 1967 Code
§ 10-3]
The local Board of Health shall be composed of seven members, all of whom
shall reside in the Township.
§ 2-45.3. Terms of office. [Ord. No. 2-9-70; 1967 Code § 10-4]
All appointments shall be made by the Township Council for a period of four
years and vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term only. Members
shall serve until their successors are appointed and shall qualify.
§ 2-45.4. Compensation. [Ord. No. 2-9-70; 1967 Code § 10-5; New]
Members of the Board of Health shall serve without compensation, except
that they may be reimbursed for legitimate costs approved by the Township
Council upon proper submission and review.
§ 2-45.5. Territorial jurisdiction of Board. [Ord. No. 2-9-70; 1967
Code § 10-6]
The jurisdiction of the Board of Health shall be coextensive with the limits
of the Township.
§ 2-45.6. Meetings. [Ord. No. 2-9-70; 1967 Code § 10-7]
The Board of Health shall appoint, on the day of its organization, a place,
day and hour for the regular meeting of the Board for the hearing of
complaints, reports and general business and shall cause to be published
in a newspaper circulating in the Township notice of the same. At least one
regular meeting shall be held in each year. Special meetings may be called
at any time by the Chairman.
§ 2-45.7. Appointment of personnel. [Ord. No. 2-9-70; 1967 Code
§ 10-8]
The Board of Health may employ such personnel as it may deem necessary
to carry out its duties and functions and such other personnel as provided in
N.J.S.A. 26:3-19 et seq. within the budget provided by the Township Council.
§ 2-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-45.8
1:43
§ 2-45.8. Specific powers and duties. [Ord. No. 2-9-70; 1967 Code
§ 10-9]
The Board of Health shall have power to pass, alter or amend ordinances
and make rules and regulations in regard to the public health within its
jurisdiction for the purposes enumerated in N.J.S.A. 26:3-31 et seq.
§ 2-46. ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION.
§ 2-46.1. Creation. [Ord. 0-3-78; 1967 Code § 22-1]
There is hereby established an Environmental Commission in the Township
for the protection, development and use of natural resources, including
water resources, located within the territorial limits of this Township.
§ 2-46.2. Membership; compensation. [Ord. No. 0-3-78; 1967 Code
§ 22-2; Ord. No. 0.2.02 § 1]
The Environmental Commission of the Township shall consist of seven
members, all of whom shall be appointed by the Mayor and no less than
one of whom shall be a member of the Township Planning Board. The Mayor
shall designate one of its members to serve as Chairman and presiding
officer of the Commission. All members of the Environmental Commission
shall serve without compensation.
§ 2-46.3. Terms of office. [Ord. No. 0-3-78; 1967 Code § 22-3]
Each Commissioner shall be appointed for a term of three years and until
the appointment and qualification of his respective successor.
§ 2-46.4. Alternate members. [New]
Two alternate members shall also be appointed who shall be designated as
Alternate No. 1 and Alternate No. 2, who shall serve for a two-year term.
During the first term of the first alternate member, one member shall be
appointed for one year and one member shall be appointed for a term of two
years.
§ 2-46.5. Removal. [Ord. No. 0-3-78; 1967 Code § 22-4]
The Township Council may remove any member of the Commission for
cause, on written charges served upon the member and after a hearing
thereon at which the member shall be entitled to be heard in person or by
counsel.
§ 2-46.6. Vacancies. [Ord. No. 0-3-78; 1967 Code § 22-5]
A vacancy on the Commission occurring other than by expiration of a term
shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as an original
appointment.
§ 2-45.8 § 2-46.7
1:44
§ 2-46.7. Powers and duties. [Ord. No. 0-3-78; 1967 Code § 22-6]
The Commission shall have the power to conduct research into the use
and possible use of the open land acres of the Township; may coordinate
the activities of unofficial bodies organized for similar purposes; and may
advertise, prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts, plans and
pamphlets which, in its judgment, it deems necessary for its purposes. It
shall keep an index of all open areas, publicly or privately owned, including
open marshlands, swamps and other wetlands, in order to obtain
information on the proper use of such areas and recommend to the Planning
Board of the Township plans and programs for inclusion in a Municipal
Master Plan and the development and use of such areas.
§ 2-46.8. Acquisitions. [Ord. No. 0-3-78; 1967 Code § 22-7]
The Environmental Commission may, subject to the approval of the
Township Council, acquire property, both real and personal, in the name
of the Township by gift, purchase, grant, bequest, devise or lease for any
of its purposes and shall administer the same for such purposes subject to
the terms of the conveyance or gift. Such an acquisition may be to acquire
the fee or any lesser interest, development right, easement (including
conservation easement), covenant or other contractual right (including a
conveyance on conditions or with limitations or reversions), as may be
necessary to acquire, maintain, improve, protect, limit the future use of or
otherwise conserve and properly utilize open spaces and other land and
water areas in the municipality.
§ 2-46.9. Records and annual reports. [Ord. No. 0-3-78; 1967 Code
§ 22-8]
The Environmental Commission shall keep records of its meetings and
activities and shall make an annual report to the Township Council.
§ 2-46.10. Appropriation of funds. [Ord. No. 0-3-78; 1967 Code
§ 22-9]
The Township Council may appropriate funds for the expenses incurred by
the Environmental Commission. The Commission may appoint such Clerks
and other employees as it may require and as shall be within the limits of
funds appropriated to it.
§ 2-47. BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
§ 2-47.1. Committee created. [Ord. No. 0.17.91 § I]
In order to advertise the advantages of Deptford Township, to analyze the
economic potential and development of Deptford Township and to mobilize
and assist in the development of potential resources and economic
conditions of the Township, there is hereby created and established by this
section, a Committee to be known as the "Business Development Advisory
Committee of the Township of Deptford."
§ 2-46.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-47.2
1:45
§ 2-47.2. Membership. [Ord. No. 0.17.91 § II]
The Committee so created shall consist of 14 members. Eleven of the
members shall be voting members and three members shall be non-voting
members as set forth hereafter.
§ 2-47.3. Appointment of members; terms; vacancies; qualifications.
[Ord. No. 0.17.91 § III; New]
§ 2-47.4. Election of officers; quorum. [Ord. No. 0.17.91 § IV]
Members of the Committee shall annually choose from among its voting
members a Chairman and such other officers as it may deem necessary. A
majority of the voting members shall constitute a quorum.
§ 2-47.5. Compensation. [Ord. No. 0.17.91 § V]
The members and officers of the Committee shall serve without
compensation except for legitimate costs approved by Township Council
upon proper submission and review.
§ 2-47.6. Oath of office. [Ord. No. 0.17.91 § VI]
Each member and officer of the Committee shall, before assuming office,
take and subscribe an oath that he/she will faithfully and impartially
discharge the duties of his/her office.
a. The members of the Committee shall be appointed by Township
Council. Each member shall be, for the last five years preceding his
appointment, a citizen of the United States and a qualified voter of the
State of New Jersey. Members shall be appointed for a term of one year.
Vacancies in the membership of the Committee, occurring for whatever
cause, shall be promptly filled by appointment for the unexpired term
thereof. The appointments shall take place in the same manner in which
the original appointments are made. Members shall serve for their
respective terms and until their successors are appointed and qualified.
b. The Mayor, the Director of Community Development (or if there is no
Director, then the Division Head of the Division of Planning and
Zoning), and the Municipal Manager shall automatically be non-voting
members of the Committee.
c. Each voting member shall be chosen with a view to his/her
qualifications and fitness for service, shall have had experience in
industry and commerce, shall be conversant with the economic needs
and facilities in Deptford Township and shall be of known devotion to
public service.
§ 2-47.2 § 2-47.7
1:46
§ 2-47.7. Powers and duties. [Ord. No. 0.17.91 § VII]
The Business Development Advisory Committee shall be strictly an advisory
committee. It shall perform the functions and exercise the powers
hereinafter numerated:
§ 2-47.8. Limitation of powers. [Ord. No. 0.17.91 § VIII]
The Committee shall not have any powers other than those set forth, and
specifically shall have no power to pledge the credit of the municipality or
to enter into contracts or authorize to create debts except as authorized.
They shall operate within the appropriation made by the Township Council
in its annual budget. The Committee shall make an annual report to the
municipality during December of each year, setting forth in detail its
operations and recommendations covering the preceding 12 months.
§ 2-48. MULTIPLE DWELLING EMERGENCY COMMISSION.
§ 2-48.1. Authorization. [Ord. No. 0-26-73; 1967 Code § 38A-2]
The Township Multiple Dwelling Emergency Commission is hereby
authorized and directed to enforce all of the provisions of Section 10-5,
Multiple Dwelling Security Funds.
§ 2-48.2. Duties of Commission. [Ord. No. 0-26-73; 1967 Code
§ 38A-3]
The duties of the Township Multiple Dwelling Emergency Commission when
enforcing Section 10-5, Multiple Dwelling Security Funds, shall consist of
the following:
a. They will develop ways and means of attracting industry and commerce
into Deptford Township within budgetary limitations.
b. They will make recommendations to attract this industry and
commerce, and forward same to the Mayor and Township Council for
consideration.
c. They will assist in coordinating programs and projects aimed at the
retention of existing businesses as well as the attraction of new or
expanded business opportunities within the Township of Deptford.
d. They will submit written reports to the Mayor and Township Council
outlining their recommendations and advice on business development
within the Township of Deptford.
a. Receiving, administering and expending security funds deposited
pursuant to the terms of Section 10-5, Multiple Dwelling Security
Funds.
§ 2-47.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-48.2
1:47
§ 2-49. RECREATION ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
§ 2-49.1. Committee established; members; Council liaison. [Ord.
No. 0.14.90 § 2; New]
There shall be a Recreation Advisory Committee that is comprised of 13
members appointed by the Township Council, all of whom shall be residents
of the Township. In addition, Township Council shall designate a member of
Council to serve as liaison to the Township Council and act as an ex officio
nonvoting member of the Committee. The Director of Public Works or his
designee shall also serve as an ex officio nonvoting member.
§ 2-49.2. Term of office. [Ord. No. 0.14.90 § 3]
All members shall be appointed for a term of one year provided all terms
expire December 31st of the year of appointment. Vacancies shall be filled
for the unexpired terms. The Council liaison member shall be appointed in
the same manner.
§ 2-49.3. Powers and duties. [Ord. No. 0.14.90 § 4]
The Recreation Advisory Committee shall have the following duties:
b. Authorizing examinations by a duly authorized officer of those items
defined as creating an emergency condition under Section 10-5,
Multiple Dwelling Security Funds.
c. Arranging, in accordance with the terms of Section 10-5, Multiple
Dwelling Security Funds for the prompt repair, maintenance, supply or
replacement of those items of structure, equipment or supplies which
are necessary to correct, eliminate or alleviate the emergency
conditions.
a. Appoint a Chairman, Vice Chairman and Secretary.
b. Schedule monthly meetings with additional meetings to be called by the
Chairman who shall be elected by the members of the Recreation
Advisory Committee.
c. Advise the Township Council regarding ordinances which affect the
recreation of the Township.
d. Advise the Township Council as to the recreational needs of the
Township including quarterly assessment reports to the Township
Council on recreational achievements and problems.
e. Advise the Planning Board and Environmental Commission concerning
recreation and open space, including an annual review of the
"recreation and open space" components of the Township's Master
Plan.
§ 2-48.2 § 2-49.3
1:48
§ 2-49.4. Approval required to expend funds. [Ord. No. 0.14.90 § 5]
The Recreation Advisory Committee shall not expend funds for any purpose
unless the approval of the Township Manager has been secured and the
amount is within the budgetary constraints set by the Township Council.
§ 2-50. COMMISSION ON AGING.
§ 2-50.1. Creation. [Ord. No. 0.3.87 § 1; Ord. No. 0.1.90 § 1]
The Commission on Aging for the Township of Deptford is hereby created.
§ 2-50.2. Composition. [Ord. No. 0.3.87 § II; Ord. No. 0.1.90 § 1]
The Commission on Aging shall consist of nine members appointed by the
Township Council. One member of the Township Council shall serve as a
member for a term of one year.
§ 2-50.3. Terms of members. [Ord. No. 0.3.87 § III; Ord. No. 0.1.90
§ 1]
New members and members being reappointed shall serve for a term
of three years and until their respective successor shall be appointed.
Appointments to vacancies shall be for the unexpired term.
§ 2-50.4. Organization; meeting; by-laws. [Ord. No. 0.3.87 § IV]
f. Sponsor and administer cultural and recreational programs and
activities in cooperation with other public and private agencies and
organizations, and provide specialized programs for the aged, the
handicapped and other special purposes.
g. Advise the Director of the Department of Public Works and recommend
procedures and programs for the repair, maintenance, restoration and
enhancement of Township's recreational facilities: said
recommendations to include, but not be limited to, capital
improvements and operating functions.
h. Formulate and present a recreation budget to the Township Manager
on or before November 1 of the calendar year.
i. Undertake any other duties that may be assigned by the Township
Council.
a. The members of the Commission on Aging shall reorganize annually
and select a Chairman and Vice Chairman. The Chairman and Vice
Chairman shall serve as such until the first day of January next
following their respective appointments and until their successors shall
be appointed and shall qualify. Vacancies in the Chairmanship and Vice
Chairmanship shall be filled in like manner for the unexpired term only.
b. Members shall receive no compensation for their services as members.
§ 2-49.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-50.4
1:49
§ 2-50.5. Powers and duties. [Ord. 0.3.87 § V]
The Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
§ 2-50.6. Cooperation from other agencies. [Ord. 0.3.87 § VI]
All municipal agencies shall cooperate with the Commission in furnishing
such reports and information as the Commission shall deem necessary to
carry out the functions and purposes of this Commission.
c. The Commission shall meet at least once a month and at such other
times as the Commission may direct.
d. The Commission shall establish bylaws which shall govern the conduct
of the Commission at its meetings. Bylaws shall be adopted within three
months of the organization of the first Commission.
a. To advise in the coordination and integration of programs and services
affecting the welfare of older adults (55 years and older) who are
residents of the Township.
b. To conduct research through public hearings and other means, operate
demonstration programs, and conduct evaluation studies in the
problems of the aged.
c. To advise the Mayor and Township Council on the establishment of
policies that will assist in the resolution of the problems of the aged.
d. To confer with appropriate Municipal, County, State, Federal and
private agencies concerned with programs for the aged, for the purpose
of improving the scope and efficiency of the services rendered to the
aged.
e. To contact any individual or public or private agency for the purpose of
securing such funds as may be deemed necessary or convenient for the
carrying out of its purposes.
f. To make, amend and rescind rules, regulations and bylaws for its own
government.
g. To serve as a coordinating body to insure that older adults are aware of
programs and services made available to them by civic and religious
organizations and by Municipal, County, State and Federal
Governments and private agencies.
h. To prepare and submit annually, by November 15th, for the
consideration of the Mayor and Township Council, a proposed budget
for its activities.
i. To report upon its activities and recommendation to the Mayor and
Township Council annually and at such times as the respective
governing bodies shall request or as the Commission shall deem
advisable.
§ 2-50.4 § 2-50.7
1:50
§ 2-50.7. Fiscal regulations. [Ord. No. 0.3.87 § VII]
The Mayor and Council shall have the power to approve the annual budget
submitted by the Commission in whole or in part or to modify same, and
the budget as finally approved by the Mayor and Council, shall constitute
the budget for the Commission for the budget year and the amount shown
therein as revenue from the municipal sources shall constitute the limitation
of the governing body's contribution to the Commission for that year.
§ 2-51. LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES.
§ 2-51.1. Creation. [New]
There is hereby established a Board of Trustees for the Library Board in the
Township of Deptford.
§ 2-51.2. Appointment; terms. [New]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:54-9, the Mayor, with advice and consent of the
Township Council, shall appoint Trustees for the Library Board within the
Township of Deptford. Each member shall serve for a term of five years.
§ 2-52. (Reserved)
§ 2-53. ADVISORY BODIES. [Ord. No. 0-1-72; 1967 Code § 2-77]
In addition to such offices and boards as are provided by this section, there
shall be such advisory boards and committees as are otherwise constituted
and empowered by the Charter or Code.
§ 2-54. CODE OF CONDUCT COMMITTEE.
§ 2-54.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 0.19.01 § I]
YOUTH SPORTS TEAM — As used herein shall mean and refer to any sports
organization organized pursuant to a nonprofit or similar charter which
is affiliated with or received monetary or other support from Deptford
Township or the Deptford Township Recreational Advisory Committee or
regularly utilizes any facilities owned, operated, or maintained by Deptford
Township, which sports organization participates in sporting competitions
involving minors.
§ 2-54.2. Membership. [Ord. No. 0.19.01 § II]
The Code of Conduct Committee shall be made up of the president of each
youth sports team who is duly elected pursuant to the Bylaws or rules and
regulations governing each respective youth sports team.
§ 2-54.3. Township Clerk to be advised of each Team President.
[Ord. No. 0.19.01 §§ III-V]
§ 2-50.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-54.3
1:51
§ 2-54.4. Team President to represent only one team on committee.
[Ord. No. 0.19.01 § VI]
In the event the same person is the president of more than one youth
sports team, the person shall serve on the Code of Conduct Committee as a
representative of only one youth sports team and shall designate an active
member of such other youth sports teams to appear and act at a Code of
Conduct Committee Meeting with full voting powers.
§ 2-54.5. Enforcement of Code of Conduct. [Ord. No. 0.19.01 § VII]
The Code of Conduct Committee shall be charged with enforcing the
provisions of the ordinance establishing a Youth Sports Code of Conduct,
Section 2-75.
§ 2-54.6. Organization. [Ord. No. 0.19.01 § VIII]
The Code of Conduct Committee shall meet in January of each year to
elect a Chairman, Secretary and such other officers as the Code of Conduct
Committee shall deem appropriate, and may meet as often as is necessary
to conduct its business and for the purposes of enforcing the provisions of
the Ordinance Establishing a Youth Sports Code of Conduct, Section 2-75.
§ 2-54.7. Establishment of rules and procedures. [Ord. No. 0.19.01
§ IX]
The Code of Conduct Committee may establish rules and procedures as it
deems appropriate for the conduct of its business and in default thereof
shall operate pursuant to Roberts Rules of Order to the extent they are not
in conflict with the within section or the Ordinance Establishing a Youth
Sports Code of Conduct, Section 2-75.
§ 2-55. through § 2-67. (Reserved)
a. Each youth sports team shall annually advise in writing the Deptford
Township Clerk of the name, address and telephone number of its duly
elected president who shall serve on the Code of Conduct Committee
commensurate with his/her term of office with the youth sports team.
b. Each youth sports team shall notify the Township Clerk in writing
promptly upon any change of the identity of the youth sports team's
president.
c. Any youth sports team president serving on the Code of Conduct
Committee may designate an active member of such youth sports team
to appear and act as his/her designee with full voting powers at any
meeting of the Code of Conduct Committee.
§ 2-54.3 § 2-55
1:52
ARTICLE IV
Administrative Procedures
§ 2-68. PAYMENT OF CLAIMS.
§ 2-68.1. Submission of bills. [Ord. No. 0.10.90 § I; New]
All persons/entities claiming payment from the Township of Deptford shall
submit a detailed bill to the Chief Financial Officer.
§ 2-68.2. Submission of voucher. [Ord. No. 0.10.90 § II]
Attached to such bill shall be a completed voucher form to be provided by
the Township of Deptford. Such vouchers shall be signed by the person/
representative requesting payment and shall be completed according to the
instructions of the Township of Deptford.
§ 2-68.3. Confirmation of receipt of goods or services. [Ord. No.
0.10.90 § III; New]
It shall be the duty of the Chief Financial Officer to see that the vouchers
submitted have been fully completed, that the claimant's signature appears
on each voucher certifying that the bill is correct in all its particulars,
and that the articles or services rendered, as stated on the bill, have been
furnished and rendered. In addition, each Department Head for which the
claim is presented shall also sign the voucher, indicating the Department
Head's verification that the services rendered have been properly
authorized and received by the Township.
§ 2-68.4. Signature of voucher by two members of Council. [Ord.
No. 0.10.90 § IV; New]
Vouchers claiming payment, that have been presented to Council by the
Chief Financial Officer, shall be signed by two members of Council.
§ 2-68.5. Approval or rejection by Township Council. [Ord. No.
0.10.90 § V; New]
After the foregoing requirements have been satisfied, the Township Council
shall consider the approval or rejection of bills or vouchers. Only after
approval has been given by the majority vote of a quorum of Council may
the Chief Financial Officer make payment to the claimant.
§ 2-68.6. Listing and recording of claims. [Ord. No. 0.10.90 § VI]
It shall be the duty of the Township Clerk to record and maintain the listing
of bills and vouchers that are approved by the Township Council for the
official record of the Township.
§ 2-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-68.7
1:53
§ 2-68.7. Preparation of checks for payment. [Ord. No. 0.10.90 § VII;
New]
After the vouchers have been approved, the Chief Financial Officer shall
prepare the necessary checks for payment. The checks shall be signed by
the Township Manager and Chief Financial Officer; facsimile signatures
shall be permitted. After preparation of the checks for payment of vouchers,
the Chief Financial Officer shall record the same in the proper books of
accounts for the Township of Deptford and thereafter disburse the checks
to the claimants.
§ 2-68.8. Nonapplicability of this section. [Ord. No. 0.10.90 § VIII]
This section shall not be applicable to payroll checks or deductions required
as part of the Township payroll.
§ 2-69. (Reserved)
§ 2-70. PAYROLLS.
§ 2-70.1. Procedure for payment. [Ord. No. 2-24-64; 1967 Code § 7;
New]
In the case of payrolls, the Department of Finance shall prepare the
necessary payrolls for all employees, which payrolls shall be based upon
time records duly certified by Department and Division Heads. The payroll
shall then be approved by Chief Financial Officer and, after approval, shall
be paid in due course.
§ 2-70.2. Reimbursement for traveling expenses. [Ord. No. 2-24-64;
1967 Code § 9]
In the case of reimbursement for actual and necessary traveling expenses,
itemized claims supported by receipts where avail-able should be presented
in order to obtain reimbursement for expenses incurred by local officials
when authorized to travel.
§ 2-71. RESTRICTION ON PAYMENT OF FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS.
§ 2-71.1. Conditions for payment; withholding portion upon appeal.
[Ord. No. 0-1-81; 1967 Code § 27A-1]
a. No insurance company authorized to issue fire insurance policies in the
State of New Jersey shall pay to a claimant any claim in excess of
$2,500 for fire damages on any real property located within the
Township pursuant to any fire insurance policy issued or renewed after
the adoption of this section and the filing of this section with the State
Commission of Insurance, until such time as:
1. All taxes and assessments and all other municipal liens or charges
due and payable appearing on the official certificate of search for
§ 2-68.7 § 2-71.1
1:54
§ 2-71.2. Payment by installments. [Ord. No. 0-1-81; 1967 Code
§ 27A-2]
The Township Council may, by resolution, enter into an agreement with the
owner of any fire-damaged property situated in the Township to pay in full
all delinquent taxes, assessments or other Municipal liens by installments
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-19 or for the redemption of a tax sale lien by
installment payments pursuant to Article 7 of Chapter 5 of Title 54 of the
Revised Statutes of New Jersey, if the Township Council is satisfied that the
claim for fire damages is to be used to restore or improve the fire damaged
property. In the event of such a resolution, a certified copy of the resolution
shall be sent to the insurance company authorizing the insurance company
to make full payment on the claim to the insured.
§ 2-71.3. Payment to mortgagee. [Ord. No. 0-1-81; 1967 Code
§ 27A-3]
municipal liens pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-12 shall have been paid
either by the owner of such real property or by the insurance
company; or
2. The municipality submits to the insurance company a copy of a
resolution adopted pursuant to subsection 2-71.2.
b. In the event that an appeal is taken on the amount of any lien or charge,
other than an appeal on the assessed valuation of real property
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:3-21, the insurance company shall withhold 75%
of the full amount of lien or charge being contested pending
termination of all proceedings, at which time such moneys and all
interest accruing thereon at a rate paid on interest-bearing accounts in
banking institutions or savings and loan associations in the State of
New Jersey, shall be disbursed in accordance with a final order or
judgment of the court.
a. Notwithstanding the provision of subsection 2-71.1, an insurance
company may pay proceeds of a fire insurance policy to a mortgagee of
fire-damaged real property where the fire insurance policy, at the time
of the loss, listed the mortgagee as a named insured, provided that the
payment may not be in an amount which exceeds that due and payable
to the mortgagee under the mortgagee contract.
b. Any claim on behalf of the Township may in accordance with the
provisions of this section and P.L. 1978, c. 184,8 shall be paramount to
any other claims on the proceeds of the fire insurance policy, except the
claim of a holder of a mortgage on the fire-damaged property, where the
fire insurance policy at the time of the loss listed the mortgagee, as a
named insured, in which event the claim of the mortgagee to the
proceeds shall be paramount to the municipal lien only to the extent of
8. N.J.S.A. 17:36-8 to 36-13.
§ 2-71.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-71.3
1:55
§ 2-71.4. Amendment to certificate of search. [Ord. No. 0-1-81; 1967
Code § 27A-4]
The official certificate of search may be altered, by the bonded official
responsible for preparing such certificates, in order to cancel any error or
omissions or to add any municipal liens or related charges due and payable
subsequent to the preparation of the official certificate.
§ 2-71.5. Filing of copy. [Ord. No. 0-1-81; 1967 Code § 27A-5]
Upon the adoption of this section, a certified copy shall be filed by the
Township Clerk with the State Commissioner of Insurance pursuant to
Section 2 of P.L. 1978, c. 184.9
§ 2-71.6. Incorporation of provisions by reference; repealer. [Ord.
No. 0-1-81; 1967 Code § 27A-6]
§ 2-72. PAYMENT OF TAXES REQUIRED IN ADVANCE OF ISSUING
MUNICIPAL LICENSES OR PERMITS.
§ 2-72.1. Proof of payment of taxes or municipal assessments
required. [Ord. No. 0-14-87 § I]
All applicants for municipal licenses or permits, as a condition of issuance or
renewal of said licenses or permits, shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the issuing authority that all taxes and/or assessments are current as of the
date the license or permit is issued. This shall apply to the property wherein
the business or activity for which the license or permit is sought or wherein
the business or activity is to be conducted.
§ 2-72.2. Revocation of license if owner fails to pay taxes. [Ord. No.
0-14-87 § II]
The Township of Deptford may revoke or suspend a license or permit
previously issued in the event when a licensee or permittee, who is the
the amount due and payable to the mortgagee under the mortgage
contract.
a. All other powers conveyed and reserved to the Township by N.J.S.A.
17:36-8 through N.J.S.A. 17:36-13 as now or hereafter amended not
specifically set forth in this section are hereby incorporated by
reference and enacted by the Township.
b. Any provision of this section inconsistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
17:36-8 through N.J.S.A. 17:36-13, as now or hereafter amended, are
hereby modified or repealed to the extent of such inconsistencies, but
all other parts of this section shall remain in full force and effect.
9. N.J.S.A. 17:36-9.
§ 2-71.3 § 2-72.2
1:56
owner of the property upon which the activity is conducted, has failed to
pay for at least three consecutive quarters.
§ 2-72.3. Not applicable to alcoholic beverage license or permit.
[Ord. No. 0-14-87 § III]
This section shall not be applicable to include any alcoholic beverage
license or permit issued pursuant to the "Alcohol Beverage Control Act."
§ 2-73. PUBLIC RECORDS: RIGHT OF INSPECTION; FEES FOR
COPIES AND TRANSCRIPTIONS.
§ 2-73.1. Right to inspect, copy and purchase records; fees. [Ord.
No. 0-1-72, 1967 Code § 2-88.1; Ord. No. 0-16-77; New; Ord. No.
0.15.02]
a. All the books, maps, papers, accounts, statements, vouchers and other
documents whatsoever acquired or produced in any Department shall
be carefully and conveniently filed, kept and preserved and be and
remain the sole property of the Municipality and shall not at any time be
removed from the offices of such Department except when required for
use in official business and shall then be returned to such office without
delay. Each Department Head shall be responsible for enforcing the
requirements of this subsection in his Department. This subsection
shall be subject to the provisions of the Destruction of Public Records
Law 1953 (N.J.S.A. 47:3-15 et seq.).
b. All public documents and records, as defined by New Jersey Law
N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq. Public Records Act, shall, during office hours,
be open to public search, inspection and examination, subject to and
within the limitations prescribed by law, provided that such search,
inspection and examination may be made under such regulations as the
officer having custody of such records, books and documents shall
establish for the safety and preservation thereof.
c. Fees. A copy or copies of a government record may be purchased by any
person upon payment of the fee prescribed by law or regulation, or if a
fee is not prescribed by law or regulation, upon payment of the actual
costs of duplicating the record; and
d. Except as otherwise provided by law or regulation or the within section,
the fee assessed for the duplication of a governmental record embodied
in the form of printed matter shall be:
1. Business size reproduction:
Page 1 through 10 — $0.75 per page
Page 11 through
20
— $0.50 per page
All pages over 20 — $0.25 per page
§ 2-72.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-73.1
1:57
2. Blueprint reproduction:
1st page — $15
2 through 25 — $8 per page
All pages over 25 — $6 per page
e. If Deptford Township can demonstrate that its actual costs for
duplication of a government record exceed the foregoing rates,
Deptford Township shall be permitted to charge the actual cost of
duplicating the records.
f. Whenever the nature, format, manner or collation, or volume of a
government record embodied in the form of printed matter to be
inspected, examined, or copied is such that the record cannot be
reproduced by ordinary document copying equipment in ordinary
business size or involves an extraordinary expenditure of time and
effort to accommodate the request, Deptford Township may charge, in
addition to the actual cost of duplicating the record, a special service
charge that shall be reasonable and shall be based upon the actual
direct costs of providing the copy or copies.
1. The rates for such service charges shall be the hourly pay rate of
the Township employee or employees who expend time in fulfilling
such requests times the number of hours expended by such
employees.
2. Whenever it is necessary to use the services of a person or agency
not employed by Deptford Township to fulfill a request, the
additional service charge shall consist of those charges under
paragraph f,1 above and the actual charges of such non-Deptford
Township employees and/or agency.
3. The requestor shall have the opportunity to review and object to
the custodian's best estimate of such service charges prior to such
charge being incurred.
g. If the request is for a record: (1) in a medium not routinely used by
Deptford Township; (2) not routinely developed or maintained by
Deptford Township; or (3) requiring a substantial amount of
manipulation or programming of information technology, Deptford
Township may charge, in addition to the actual cost of duplication, a
special charge that shall be reasonable and shall be based on the cost
for any extensive use of information technology, or for the labor cost of
personnel providing the service, that is actually incurred by the agency
or attributable to the agency for the programming, clerical, and
supervisory assistance required, or both.
h. The custodian may request a deposit or advance payment as permitted
by the Open Public Records Act or when payment is required to a
person who is not a Deptford Township employee or a non-Deptford
Township agency.
§ 2-73.1 § 2-73.1
1:58
§ 2-73.2. Production of transcripts; fees. [Ord. No. 0-1-72, 1967
Code § 2-88.2; Ord. No. 0-16-77; New]
§ 2-73.3. Disposition of fees; escrow account. [Ord. No. 0-1-72, 1967
Code § 2-88.3; Ord. No. 0-16-77]
i. If a request for access to a governmental record would substantially
disrupt Deptford Township's or any of its departments' operations, the
custodian may deny access to the record after attempting to reach a
reasonable solution with the requestor that accommodates the interests
of the requestor and Deptford Township.
a. Any person may request the Township Clerk, or any Township custodian
or person required by law, to transcribe any public meeting, any public
hearing or other Township public event so recorded, or portion thereof,
upon payment of a transcription fee to cover production of no less than
an original and one copy of each transcript. The original transcript, and
such additional copies ordered, shall be provided to the person
requesting transcription, one copy to be retained by the Township or
Township entity whose public meeting, hearing or event, or portion
thereof, was transcribed.
b. The transcription fee shall be as charged by the transcribing company.
A statement of account signed by the maker of the transcript,
calculated in the manner aforesaid, shall be tendered at the time the
transcript(s) is (are) completed and delivered.
c. Deposits; final payment.
1. The Township Clerk, custodian or person authorized or designated
to make the transcript shall secure from the person making the
transcript request a sum equal to the estimate of cost for
completion. No transcript of any public meeting, hearing or other
Township event, or portion thereof, shall be commenced unless
such deposit is made.
2. Prior to delivery of any completed transcript, or copies thereof, the
Township Clerk, custodian or person so authorized or designated to
make the transcript shall first collect any balance of payment due.
In the event that the initial deposit exceeds final transcript costs,
the difference thereof shall be refunded to the party who tendered
the deposit.
3. There shall be an additional charge of $5 for a Clerk's or
custodian's certificate of certification.
d. If requested, the Township Clerk may at the Clerk's option, provide an
audio tape of the meeting upon payment of a reasonable fee.
a. All fees received for the copying of public documents or for the
production of any transcripts of any public meeting, hearing or any
§ 2-73.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-73.3
1:59
§ 2-74. POLICY ON WAIVER OF CERTAIN FEES FOR HANDICAPPED
PERSONS OR QUALIFIED SENIOR CITIZENS.10
§ 2-74.1. Accessibility by handicapped; construction fee waived.
[Ord. No. 0-14-0 §§ 1, 2]
§ 2-74.2. Waiver of zoning and construction permit surcharge or
enforcing agency fees for qualified senior citizens residing in the
Township. [Ord. No. 0-2-01 §§ 1, 2]
§ 2-75. YOUTH SPORTS CODE OF CONDUCT.
§ 2-75.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 0.18.01 § I]
CODE OF CONDUCT — A written specification of the behavior of parents,
guardians, coaches and officials prepared by each sports team which must
at a minimum incorporate the within section and must be agreed to in
writing by the parents and legal guardians of the minor participants of each
youth sports team.
YOUTH SPORTS EVENT — Any competition, practice or instructional event
involving one or more youth sports teams.
YOUTH SPORTS TEAM — Refer to any sports organization organized
pursuant to a nonprofit or similar charter which is affiliated with or received
monetary or other support from Deptford Township or the Deptford
Township Recreational Advisory Committee or regularly utilizes any
facilities owned, operated, or maintained by Deptford Township, which
sports organization participates in sporting competitions involving minors.
§ 2-75.2. Establishment of code of conduct. [Ord. No. 0.18.01 §§ IIIX]
public event, or part thereof, shall be paid over to the Township Clerk,
to be received as general Township revenues.
a. A disabled person or a parent or sibling of a disabled person shall not be
required to pay any Township fee or charge in order to secure a
construction permit for any construction, reconstruction, alteration or
improvement which promotes accessibility to his own living unit.
b. A "disabled person" shall be as defined in 52:27D-125e.
a. A senior citizen aged 62 years or older and who is qualified under the
State of New Jersey PAAD Program shall not be required to pay any
Township fee or charge in order to secure a zoning and construction
permit for any alterations or improvements to one's own living unit.
b. Alteration or Improvements shall not include new construction or
additions.
10.Editor's Note: See subsection 10-1.2, Construction Fees.
§ 2-73.3 § 2-75.2
1:60
a. Every sports team shall be required to establish an athletic Code of
Conduct incorporating at a minimum the requirements of this section.
b. The parents and guardians of each child participating in a sports team
shall be required by the sports team to execute an agreement
acknowledging receipt of the sports team's Code of Conduct and
agreeing to be bound thereby.
c. Any parent, guest, spectator, coach or official at any youth sports event
who initiates a fight, scuffle, or any type of physical abuse or threats of
abuse towards any player, coach, official, parent, or spectator shall be
banned from attendance at all youth sports events within the Township
of Deptford for a period of 12 months from the date of the incident.
d. Any parent, guest, spectator, coach or official at any youth sporting
event who enters the field of play, court, or rink during any youth
sporting event for the purpose of physically or verbally abusing or
confronting coaches, players or officials shall be banned from
attendance at all youth sports events within the Township of Deptford
for a period of 12 months from the date of the incident.
e. Any parent, guest, spectator, coach or official at any youth sports event
who verbally abuses officials, players or spectators including the use of
obscene or profane language or gestures, racial, ethnic or sexual slurs
may be banned from all youth sports events for a period of up to 12
months from the date of the incident and shall be subject to such
discipline as provided for by the applicable sports team's code of
conduct.
f. Any parent, guest, spectator or official at any youth sports event who
throws or causes to be deposited any object on the field of play, court, or
rink during any youth sports event may be banned from attendance at
all youth sports events for a period of 12 months from the date of the
incident and shall be subject to such discipline as provided for by the
applicable sports team's code of conduct.
g. Anger management program. Any person banned for 12 months from
youth sports events for a violation of this Code of Conduct prior to being
allowed to resume attendance at any youth sports event shall be
required to complete an anger management or equivalent counseling
program consisting of no less than 12 hours of instruction and shall
provide proof of satisfactory completion to the Code of Conduct
Committee. Any banning for less than 12 months may include up to 12
hours of anger management.
h. Any parent, official, coach or spectator at any youth sporting event shall
be subject to the authority of all field officials including umpires and
referees and elected league officials of the youth sports team or teams
sponsoring the youth sports event or in the absence of such persons at a
youth sports team's practice or instructional event to the authority of
the ranking youth sports team coach on the premises. Such authority
shall include the authorization to direct any person or persons involved
§ 2-75.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-75.2
1:61
§ 2-75.3. Violation procedures and hearing. [Ord. No. 0.18.01 § X]
in any incident in violation of this section or the applicable sports
team's code of conduct to immediately remove themselves from the
premises.
a. Upon a determination by a majority vote of the highest ranking elected
official and the governing board of a youth sports team that a parent,
guest, spectator, coach or official at any youth sports event sponsored
by such youth sports team has violated a provision of this section or the
Code of Conduct of the youth sports team, such official shall forward to
such violator a notice via regular and certified mail indicating the date
and location and nature of the violation and the period of banning or
other action to be taken in response to such violation.
b. Any person receiving such a notice who wishes to contest same shall
appeal to the Deptford Township Code of Conduct Committee within
seven calendar days of the mailing of the notice by forwarding a copy of
the notice with a written request for appeal specifically setting forth the
basis of such person's contest of the notice of violation via personal
delivery or certified mail to the Chairperson of the Code of Conduct
Committee at 1011 Cooper Street, Deptford, New Jersey.
c. Upon receipt of such an appeal, the Code of Conduct Committee shall
convene within seven days and provide an opportunity for the person
and any interested person to appear and be heard with respect to the
occurrence of any violation and the action taken by the youth sports
team.
d. The Code of Conduct Committee shall be authorized to hear testimony
under oath, review affidavits and such other further information or
documentation relevant to the violation and upon a majority vote of the
members of the Committee present at such hearing, may sustain,
overturn, or modify the youth sports team's notice of violation and the
period of banning or other action taken in response to such violation
consistent with this ordinance or the youth sports team bylaws or Code
of Conduct.
e. All notices of violation and bannings shall remain in effect until
overturned or modified by the Code of Conduct Committee.
f. In the event any notice of violation is not appealed within seven days of
such notice, the notice of violation and the action taken by the youth
sports team official including banning from youth sports events shall
become final.
§ 2-75.2 § 2-75.3
1:62
Chapter 3
POLICE REGULATIONS
§ 3-1. NOISE CONTROL.
§ 3-1.1. Title. [Ord. No. 0-17-86 § 1]
This section may be cited as the "Noise Control Regulation of the Township."
§ 3-1.2. Legislative findings; policy; applicability. [Ord. No. 0-17-86
§ 2]
§ 3-1.3. Definitions. [Ord. No. 0-17-86 § 3]
As used in this section:
COMMERCIAL AREA — A group of commercial properties and the abutting
public rights-of-way and public spaces.
COMMERCIAL PROPERTY — Any facility or property used for activities
involving the furnishing or handling of goods or services, including but not
limited to:
a. The Mayor and Township Council find that excessive sound is a serious
hazard to the health, safety, general welfare and the quality of life of the
citizens of Deptford. Since a substantial body of science and technology
exists by which excessive sound may be substantially abated and the
people have a right to and should be ensured an environment free from
excessive sound, it is the policy of the Township to prevent excessive
sound that may jeopardize the health and welfare or safety of the
citizens or degrade the quality of life.
b. This section shall apply to the control of sound originating from
stationary and mobile sources within the limits of the Township.
a. Commercial dining;
b. Off-road vehicle operations, such as repair, maintenance and
terminalling;
c. Retail services;
d. Wholesale services;
e. Banking and office activities;
f. Recreation and entertainment;
g. Other commercial activities.
CONSTRUCTION — Any site preparation, assembly, erection, repair,
alteration or similar action, but excluding demolition of buildings or
structures.
§ 2-75.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-1.3
1:63
DBA — The abbreviation designating both the unit of measured sound
level (the decibel) and the mode of measurement that uses the Aweighting
of a sound level meter.
DECIBEL (DB) — The practical unit of measurement for sound pressure
level. The number of decibels of a measured sound is equal to 20 times
the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the sound pressure of
the measured sound to the sound pressure of a standard sound (20
micropascals). It is abbreviated dB.
DEMOLITION — Any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of
buildings or structures.
EMERGENCY WORK — Any work or action necessary to deliver
essential services, including but not limited to repairing water, gas,
electricity, telephone, sewer facilities and public transpiration facilities,
removing fallen trees on public rights-on-way or abating life
threatening situations.
GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING (GVWR) — The value specified
by the manufacturer as the recommended maximum loaded weight
of a single motor vehicle. In cases where trailers and tractors are
separable, the gross combination weight rating (GCWR), which is the
value specified by the manufacturer as the recommended maximum
loaded weight of the combined vehicle, shall be used.
INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY — Any facility or property used for activities
involving the production, fabrication, packaging, storage, warehousing,
shipping or distribution of goods.
MOTOR CARRIER VEHICLE ENGAGED IN INTERSTATE COMMERCE
— Any vehicle for which regulations apply pursuant to Section 18 of the
Federal Noise Control Act of 1972 (P.L. 92-574), as amended, pertaining
to motor carriers engaged in interstate commerce.
MOTORCYCLE — An unenclosed motor vehicle having a saddle for the
use of the operator and two or three wheels in contact with the ground,
including but not limited to motor scooters, mopeds and minibikes.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle that is propelled or drawn on land by
an engine or motor.
MUFFLER — A sound-dissipative device or system for abating sound of
escaping gases of an internal combustion engine.
MULTI-DWELLING-UNIT BUILDING — Any building wherein there are
two or more dwelling units.
NOISE — Any sounds of such level and duration as to be or tend to
be injurious to human health or welfare or which would unreasonably
interfere with the enjoyment of life or property.
NOISE CONTROL OFFICER — An officially designated member or
members of the Township Police Department (Police Department)
trained in the measurement of sound and empowered to issue
summonses for violations of this section.
§ 3-1.3 § 3-1.3
1:64
§ 3-1.4. Administration; powers and duties of Noise Control
Officers. [Ord. No. 0-17-86 § 4]
§ 3-1.5. Maximum permissible sound levels. [Ord. No. 0-17-86 § 5]
NOISE DISTURBANCE — Any sound that endangers the safety or
health of any person, or disturbs a reasonable person of normal
sensitivities, or endangers personal or real property.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, association, society,
firm, partnership, joint-stock company, the State or any political
subdivision, agency or instrumentality of the State.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road,
highway, sidewalk or alley or similar place that is owned or controlled
by a governmental entity.
PUBLIC SPACE — Any real property or structures thereon that are
owned or controlled by a governmental entity.
REAL PROPERTY LINE — Either the imaginary line, including its planar
extension, that separates one parcel of real property from another or
the vertical or horizontal boundaries of a dwelling unit that is one in a
multi-dwelling-unit building.
RESIDENTIAL AREA — A group of residential properties and the
abutting public rights-of-way and public spaces.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Any property used for human habitation.
SOUND LEVEL — The sound pressure level measured in decibels with a
sound level meter set for A-weighting; sound level is expressed in dBA.
SOUND LEVEL METER — An instrument for the measurement of sound
levels as specified in N.J.A.C. 7:29B, which provisions are incorporated
herein by reference.
WEEKDAY — Any day, Monday through Friday, which is not a legal
holiday.
a. The noise control program established by this section shall be
administered by the Police Department or Noise Control Officer.
b. The Police Department shall be empowered to stop any motor vehicle or
motorcycle operated on a public right-of-way, public space or private
property suspected of violating any provision of this section.
c. The Noise Control Officer must be qualified according to N.J.A.C.
7:29B-1.11.
d. Noise measurements made by Noise Control Officers must be taken
according to procedures specified by N.J.A.C. 7:29B, which provisions
are incorporated herein by reference.
e. Noise Control Officers shall not use this section in situations within the
jurisdiction of the Federal Occupational Safety and Health Act.
§ 3-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-1.5
1:65
a. Stationary sources.
1. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the operation of any
source of sound on a particular category of property or any public
space or right-of-way in such a manner as to create a sound level
that exceeds the particular sound level limits as contained in Title
7, Chapter 29 of the New Jersey Administrative Code, which
provisions are incorporated herein by reference and when
measured at or within the real property line of the receiving
property, except as provided in subparagraph 3. below.
2. When measuring noise within a dwelling unit of a multi-dwellingunit
building, all exterior doors and windows shall be closed and
the measurements shall be taken in the center of the room.
3. Exemptions. The following are exempt from the sound level limits
of Title 7, Chapter 29 of the New Jersey Administrative Code.
(a) Noise from domestic power tools, lawn mowers and
agricultural equipment when operated with a functioning
muffler between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on
weekdays and 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. weekends and legal
holidays, provided that they produce less than 85 dBA at or
within any real property line of a residential property.
(b) Sound from church bells and church chimes when a part of a
religious observance or service.
(c) Noise from construction activity, provided that all motorized
equipment used in such activity is equipped with functioning
mufflers, except as provided in paragraph b,6 herein.
(d) Noise from snowblowers, snow throwers and snowplows when
operated with a muffler for the purpose of snow removal.
(e) Noise from stationary emergency signaling devices that
conform to the provisions of N.J.A.C. 7:29-13, which provisions
are incorporated herein by reference.
(f) Noise from an exterior burglar alarm of any building or motor
vehicle, provided that such burglar alarm shall terminate its
operation within 15 minutes after it has been activated.
(g) Assigned activity of Municipal employees performing
employment tasks of approved Municipal public events.
b. Mobile sources.
1. Motor vehicles and motorcycles on public rights-of-way. No person
shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the operation of a public or
private motor vehicle or motorcycle on a public right-of-way at any
time in such a manner that the sound level emitted by the motor
vehicle or motorcycle exceeds the level set forth in Table I.
§ 3-1.5 § 3-1.5
1:66
§ 3-1.6. Prohibited acts. [Ord. No. 0-17-86 § 6]
2. Recreational motorized vehicles operating off public rights-of-way.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the operation of a
recreational vehicle in such a manner that the sound level emitted
therefrom exceeds the limits set forth in Table II at either a
distance of 50 feet (15 meters) or more from the path of the vehicle
when operated on a public space or (2) at or across a real property
line when operated on a private property. This subsection shall
apply to all recreational vehicles, whether or not duly licensed or
registered.
3. Adequate mufflers.
(a) No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the operation of
any motor vehicle or motorcycle not equipped with original
muffler or equivalent replacement in good working order and
in constant operation.
(b) No person shall remove or render inoperative or cause to be
removed or rendered inoperative other than for purposes of
maintenance, repair or replacement, any muffler on a motor
vehicle or motorcycle.
4. Motor vehicle horns and signaling devices. The following acts and
the causing thereof are declared to be in violation of this section:
(a) The sounding of any horn or other auditory signaling device
that produces a sound level in excess of 100 dBA at 25 feet (7.5
meters).
5. Standing motor vehicles. No person shall operate or permit the
operation of any motor vehicle or any auxiliary equipment attached
to such a vehicle for a period longer than three minutes in any hour
while the vehicle is stationary, for reasons other than traffic
congestion, on a public right-of-way or public space within 150 feet
(46 meters) of a residential area between the hours of 8:00 p.m.
and 7:30 a.m. the following day.
a. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit to be made, verbally or
mechanically, any noise disturbance. Noncommercial public speaking
and public assembly activities conducted on any public space or public
right-of-way shall be exempt from the operation of this subsection.
b. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the following acts:
1. Sound reproduction systems. Operation, playing or permitting the
operation or playing of any radio, television, phonograph or similar
device that reproduces or amplifies sound in such a manner as to
create a noise disturbance for any person other than the operator
of the device.
§ 3-1.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-1.6
1:67
§ 3-1.7. Variances. [Ord. No. 0-17-86 § 7]
2. Loudspeakers/public address system. Using or operating of any
loudspeaker, public address system or similar device other than as
may otherwise be permitted in other regulations of the Township.
3. Animals and birds. Owning, possessing or harboring any pet animal
or pet bird that frequently or for continued duration makes sounds
that create a noise disturbance across a residential real property
line. Fore the purpose of this subsection, a noise disturbance from a
barking dog shall be defined as that crated by a dog barking
continually for 10 minutes or intermittently for 30 minutes, unless
provoked.
4. Loading and unloading. Loading, unloading, opening, closing or
other handling of boxes, crates, containers, building materials,
liquids, garbage cans, refuse or similar objects or the compacting
of refuse:
(a) Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following
day in such a manner as to exceed any applicable limit set forth
in Title 7, Chapter 29 of the New Jersey Administrative Code
across a residential property line.
(b) By persons engaged in the business of scavenging or garbage
collection, whether private or municipal, between the hours of
7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following day, except by permit.
5. Motor vehicle repairs and testing. Repairing, rebuilding, modifying
or testing any motor vehicle or motorboat in such a manner as to
exceed any applicable limit in Title 7, Chapter 29 of the New Jersey
Administrative Code across a residential real property line.
6. Construction and demolition. Operation or permitting the
operation of any tools or equipment used in construction, drilling,
earthmoving, excavating or demolition work between the hours of
6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day or weekday or any time
on weekends or legal holidays; except for emergency work or by
special variance issued pursuant to subsection 3-1.7 of this chapter
and provided that such equipment is equipped with a proper
muffler.
7. Air conditioning, air handling devices and wind energy conversion
systems. The operation of air conditioning, air-handling devices,
including heat pumps, or wind energy conversion systems that
produces a sound level greater than 55 dBA at a real property line
of a residential property, except when the operation produces less
than an increase of five dBA in the sound level that exists in the
absence of such sound.
a. Any person who owns or operates any stationary noise source may
apply to the Noise Control Officer of the Township through the
§ 3-1.6 § 3-1.7
1:68
§ 3-1.8. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 0-17-86 § 8; New]
Township Manager for a variance from one or more of the provisions
of this section. Applications for a permit of variance shall supply
information including but not limited to:
1. The nature and location of the noise source for which such
application is made.
2. The reason for which the permit of variance is requested, including
the hardship that will result to the applicant, his/her client or the
public if the permit of variance is not granted.
3. The nature and intensity of noise that will occur during the period
of the variance.
4. The part or parts of this section for which the permit of variance
shall apply.
5. A description of interim noise control measures to be taken by the
applicant to minimize noise and the impacts occurring therefrom.
6. A specific schedule of the noise control measures which shall be
taken to bring the source into compliance with this section within a
reasonable time.
b. A copy of the permit of variance must be kept on file by the Township
Manager for public inspection.
c. Failure to supply to the Noise Control Officer the information required
hereby shall be cause for rejection of the application.
d. The Township Manager shall charge the applicant a fee of $10 to cover
expenses resulting from the processing of the permit of variance
application.
e. The Noise Control Officer may impose such terms and conditions as he
deems necessary and grant such variances for the protection of the
health, welfare and environment of the public. No permit shall be
issued for longer than one year.
f. Appeal from a denial of a variance by the Noise Control Officer may be
filed with the Township Council within 10 days of such denial.
a. Issuance of summons. Violation of any provision of this section shall be
cause for a summons to be issued by the Noise Control Officer or, in the
case of prohibited acts specified in subsection 3-1.6, by any member of
the Township Police Department.
b. Abatement orders.
1. Except as provided in subsection 3-1.2, hereof, the Noise Control
Officer may issue an order requiring abatement of any source of
sound alleged to be in violation of this section within a reasonable
§ 3-1.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-1.8
1:69
time period and according to guidelines which the Noise Control
Officer may prescribe.
2. An abatement order shall not be issued for any violation covered by
paragraph c,2 below or when the Noise Control Officer has reason
to believe that there will not be compliance with the abatement
order.
c. Penalties.
1. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
subject to the General Penalty, as established in Section 1-5 of this
Code.
2. If the violation is of a continuing nature, each day during which it
continues shall continues shall constitute an additional, separate
and distinct offense.
d. Other remedies. No provision of this section shall be construed to
impair any common law or statutory cause of action or legal remedy
therefrom of any person for injury or damage arising from any violation
of this section or from other law.
Table I
Maximum Permissible Sound Levels From Motor Vehicles and
Motorcycles*
Vehicle Class
Sound Level in
dBA at 50 feet (15
Meters) From
Center Line of
Vehicle Travel
Speed Limit 35
m.p.h. or less
Speed Limit
Over 35
m.p.h
Stationary
Run-Up
Motor carrier
vehicle engaged in
inter-state
commerce of
GVWR or GCWR of
10,000 pounds or
more
85 90 88
All other motor
vehicles of GVWR
or GCWR of 10,000
pounds or more
86 90 —
Any motorcycle 82 86 —
§ 3-1.8 § 3-1.8
1:70
§ 3-2. LITTERING.
§ 3-2.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 0-6-88, Preamble]
The Township Council wishes to promote the long established goals of the
Township to maintain a litter free and aesthetically pleasing environment
for the health, safety and welfare of the residents; and the Township of
Deptford further wishes to incorporate provisions promulgated by the New
Table I
Maximum Permissible Sound Levels From Motor Vehicles and
Motorcycles*
Vehicle Class
Sound Level in
dBA at 50 feet (15
Meters) From
Center Line of
Vehicle Travel
Speed Limit 35
m.p.h. or less
Speed Limit
Over 35
m.p.h
Stationary
Run-Up
Any other motor
vehicle or any
combination of
vehicles towed by
any motor vehicle
76 82 —
Any motor vehicle
or motorcycle with
a GVWR of less
than 10,000 pounds
80
Table II
Maximum Permissible Sound Levels for Recreational Motorized
Vehicles Off Public Rights-of-Way
Vehicle Type
Sound Level
(dBA)
Motorcycle
(Unit manufactured before
1975)
86
(Unit manufactured after
1975)
84
Any other vehicle
(Unit manufactured before
1975)
84
(Unit manufactured after
1975)
80
§ 3-1.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-2.1
1:71
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection relating to the "Clean
Communities Model Programs for Municipalities."
§ 3-2.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 0-6-88 § 2]
As used in this section:
AIRCRAFT — Any equipment now known or hereafter invested, used or
designated for navigation or for flight in the air. The word "aircraft" shall
include helicopters and lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons.
AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE — A "litter" storage and collection
receptacle.
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER — "Garbage," "refuse" and "rubbish," as defined herein, and all
other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited,
tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare.
PARK — A park, reservation, playground, recreation center or any other
public area in the Township owned or used by the Township and devoted to
active or passive recreation.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any dwelling, house, building or other structure
designated or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes,
whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant,
and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule
or mailbox belonging to or appurtenance to such dwelling, house, building
or other structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other
public ways and any and all public "parks" squares, spaces, grounds and
buildings.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body
wastes), including "garbage," "rubbish," ashes, loose earth, street
cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and solid market and
industrial wastes.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes,
cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, wood, grass, glass, bedding, household
and commercial appliances, crockery and similar materials.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Deptford.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
§ 3-2.1 § 3-2.3
1:72
§ 3-2.3. Littering prohibited. [Ord. No. 0-6-88 § 3]
No person shall within the limits of the Township discard, deposit, throw
or leave any litter, garbage, refuse, rubbish or any other material upon the
public streets, roads, avenues, parks, sidewalks or other public place or
upon any other lot or other premises excepting containers for that purpose
or so placed as to be collected by the proper authorities.
§ 3-2.4. Litter receptacles. [Ord. No. 0-6-88 § 4]
Litter receptacles and their servicing is required by the Township at the
following public places: sidewalks used by pedestrians in active retail
commercially zoned areas, such that there shall be no single linear quarter
mile without a receptacle; buildings held out for use by the public, including
schools, government buildings, and railroad and bus stations; parks; drivein
restaurants; any street vendor locations; self-service refreshment areas;
construction sites; gasoline service station islands; shopping areas; parking
lots; marinas, boat moorage and fueling stations; boat launching areas;
public and private piers operated for public use; beaches and bathing areas;
and at special events to which the public is invited, including sporting
events, parades, carnivals, circuses and festivals. The proprietors of these
places or the sponsors of these events shall be responsible for providing and
servicing the receptacles such that adequate containerization is available.
§ 3-2.5. Use of authorized receptacles. [Ord. No. 0-6-88 § 5]
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in a manner as to prevent it from being carried or
deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or public place.
§ 3-2.6. Household or commercial solid waste. [Ord. No. 0-6-88 § 6]
No person shall discard or dump any household or commercial solid waste
in any place not specifically designated for the purpose of solid waste
storage or disposal.
§ 3-2.7. Storage of bulky household items. [Ord. No. 0-6-88 § 7]
No person shall store in any areas zoned residential any bulky household
items including but not limited to appliances, furniture, mattresses, tanks,
barrels except in a fully enclosed structure wherein such item is not visible.
§ 3-2.8. Tire storage. [Ord. No. 0-6-88 § 8]
No person shall store tires in any area zoned residential except in a fully
enclosed structure wherein they are not visible.
§ 3-2.9. Parking and storage of vehicles. [Ord. No. 0-6-88 § 9]
No person shall park or store vehicles on residential lawns.
§ 3-2.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-2.10
1:73
§ 3-2.10. Accumulation of debris at construction sites. [Ord. No.
0-6-88 § 10]
No person shall accumulate debris on or around construction sites or permit
the storage of debris in such a manner that it is likely to be removed by
natural forces unto adjacent property.
§ 3-2.11. Overflow of disposal bins. [Ord. No. 0-6-88 § 11]
No commercial, industrial or residential waste disposal bins shall be
permitted to be open or overflowing.
§ 3-2.12. Maintenance of sidewalks and curbs. [Ord. No. 0-6-88
§ 12]
Every owner, leasee, tenant, occupant or person in charge of any building
or structure shall keep and cause to be kept the sidewalk and curb abutting
the building or structure or the curb and abutting area if there is no
sidewalk, free from obstruction and nuisances of every kind, and shall keep
the sidewalks, areaways, back yards, courts and alleys from litter and other
offensive materials.
§ 3-2.13. Depositing materials by gutters, streets and catch basins.
[Ord. No. 0-6-88 § 13]
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, catch basin
or other public place any accumulation of litter or dirt from any public
or private sidewalk or driveway. Each person is required to properly
containerize all sweepings from such areas.
§ 3-2.14. Litter from vehicle loads on wheels. [Ord. No. 0-6-88 § 14]
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the
Township unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent
any load or contents of litter from being blown or deposited upon any
street, alley or other public place. Nor shall any person drive or move any
vehicle or truck within the Township, the wheels or tires of which carry
onto or deposit in any street, alley or other public place, mud, dirt, sticky
substances or foreign matter of any kind.
§ 3-2.15. Littering waters. [Ord. No. 0-6-88 § 15]
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream,
bay or other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the Township.
§ 3-2.16. Littering by persons in aircraft. [Ord. No. 0-6-88 § 16]
No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the
Township any litter, handbill or other object.
§ 3-2.10 § 3-2.17
1:74
§ 3-2.17. Owners of private property maintain premises free of
litter. [Ord. No. 0-6-88 § 17]
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times
maintain the premises free of litter. Provided, however, that this section
shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for
collection.
§ 3-2.18. Littering open or vacant private property. [Ord. No. 0-6-88
§ 18]
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property within the Township, whether owned by such person or not.
§ 3-2.19. Tampering with receptacles or removing contents. [Ord.
No. 0-6-88 § 19]
If shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with or take or remove any
of the contents from any public or private receptacle containing garbage,
refuse, rubbish, junk or other waste material which has been placed or
deposited along any public highway, street, lane, or alleyway for collection
by the Township or any of its agents or servants, and any person who
violates the purpose and intent of this section shall be subject to the
penalties set forth herein.
§ 3-2.20. Notices to abate; noncompliance procedures, collection of
costs incurred by the Township. [Ord. No. 0-6-88 § 20]
a. Notice to remove. The Health Officer, Code Enforcement Officer or
other enforcing officer of the Township is hereby authorized and
empowered to notify the owner of any open or vacant private property
within the Township, or agent of such owner, to properly dispose of
litter located on such owner's property which is in violation of the
provisions set forth herein. Such notice shall be either by personal
service or certified mail addressed to the owner at his last known
address.
b. Action upon noncompliance. In the event that paragraph a. above has
been complied with by the Township and the violations have not been
remedied within 10 days after receipt of the written notice as provided
by paragraph a. above or within 15 days after the date of such notice in
the event same is returned to the Township by the post office because of
the inability to make delivery thereof, provided that same was properly
addressed to the last known address of such owner or agent, the
Township Official is hereby authorized and empowered to order the
abatement and disposal of the litter by the Township.
c. Charges included in tax bill. When the Township has effected the
removal of the litter or has paid for its removal, the actual cost thereof,
plus accrued interest at a rate of 10% per annum from the date of the
completion of the work, if not paid by such owner prior thereto, shall be
§ 3-2.17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-2.20
1:75
§ 3-2.21. Violations and penalties. [Ord. No. 0-6-88 § 21; New]
Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this section
shall be fined not less than $100, and upon conviction, the penalty shall be
stated in Section 1-5, General Penalty.
§ 3-3. TOWING, ROAD SERVICE AND STORAGE OF VEHICLES.
§ 3-3.1. Purpose and intent. [Ord. No. 0-4-94]
The purpose and intent of this section is to provide criteria and standard
operating procedures that are reasonably nonexclusionary and
nondiscriminatory in the selection and use of towing operators, for
providing towing, road services and the storage of vehicles, including but
not limited to the towing of vehicles that are abandoned, disabled, illegally
parked or stolen, vehicles involved in accidents and/or those vehicles
suspected or identified by the Township as being involved in criminal
activities.
§ 3-3.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 0-4-94]
The following words and terms, when used in this section, shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES — Any motor vehicle which has remained
on or along any highway or other public property or on private property
without consent for a period of more than 48 hours or for any period without
charged to the owner of such property on the next regular tax bill
forwarded to such owner by the Township, and this charge shall be due
and payable by the owner at the time of the payment of such bill.
d. Recorded statement constitutes a lien. Where the full amount due the
Township is not paid by such owner within 30 days after the disposal of
such litter, as provided for in paragraphs a. and b. above, then in that
event the designated Township Official shall cause to have filed in the
Tax Collector's Office of the Township a sworn statement showing the
cost and expense incurred for the work, the date the work was done and
the location of the property on which the work was done. The filing of
such sworn statement shall constitute a lien on the property and shall
remain in full force and effect for the amount due in principal and
interest, plus costs of court and attorneys fees if any, for the collection
until final payment as been made. The costs and expenses shall be
collected in the manner fixed by law for the collection of taxes. Sworn
statements recorded in accordance with the provisions hereof shall be
prima facie evidence that all legal formalities has been complied with
and that the work has been done properly and satisfactorily and shall be
full notice to every person concerned that the amount of this statement,
plus interest and other costs, constitutes a charge against the property
designated or described in this statement and that the same is due and
collectable as provided by law.
§ 3-2.20 § 3-3.2
1:76
current license plates. Vehicles used or to be used in the construction,
operation or maintenance of public utility facilities and which are left in a
manner which does not interfere with the normal movement of traffic shall
not be considered abandoned vehicles for the purposes of this section.
AUTOMOBILE — A private passenger automobile of a private-passenger or
station-wagon type that is owned or hired and is neither used as a public
or livery conveyance for passengers nor rented to others with a driver,
and a motor vehicle with a pickup body or a delivery sedan, a van or a
panel truck or a camper-type vehicle used for recreational purposes owned
by an individual or by a husband and wife who are residents of the same
household, not customarily used in the occupation, profession or business
of the insured other than farming or ranching. An "automobile" owned by a
farm family copartnership or corporation, which is principally garaged on a
farm or ranch and otherwise meets the definitions contained in this section,
shall be considered a private passenger automobile owned by two or more
relatives resident in the same household.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organizations of any kind.
PRIVATE PROPERTY — Any real property within the Township which is
privately owned and which is not public property as defined in this section.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Any street or highway, which shall include the entire
width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained for the
purposes of vehicular travel, and shall also mean any other publicly owned
property or facility.
TOWING SERVICE — A person engaged in the business or offering the
services of a vehicle wrecker or towing service whereby abandoned motor
vehicles are towed or otherwise removed from the places where they are
abandoned by use of a wrecker or truck so designed for that purpose.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Deptford, County of Gloucester and State of
New Jersey.
§ 3-3.3. List of contractors established. [Ord. No. 0-4-94]
There shall be established a list of towing contractors authorized to provide
vehicle towing and storage services as required by the Township. The Chief
of Police shall be responsible for the administration of towing services once
the towing contractors are approved. It shall be within the authority of
the Chief of Police to administer the list of towing contractors within the
Township provided that the towing contractor continues to abide by and
meet all criteria set forth in this section. Nothing herein shall be construed
to prevent the Chief of Police from establishing a rotation list or a primary/
secondary list of towing contractors provided that the list is established
in a nondiscriminatory and nonexclusionnary basis pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.49.
§ 3-3.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-3.4
1:77
§ 3-3.4. Abandonment prohibited. [Ord. No. 0-4-94]
The abandonment of a motor vehicle or any part thereof on any highway in
this Township is unlawful and subject to the penalties as set forth herein.
The abandonment of a motor vehicle or any part thereof on private or public
property in view of the general public anywhere in the Township is unlawful,
except on property of the owner or bailee of such abandoned vehicle. A
motor vehicle or any part thereof so abandoned on private property may be
authorized for removal by or upon the order of the Chief of Police, after a
waiting period of 48 hours or more has expired. (This provision shall not be
deemed to limit any other remedy or enforcement of remedy provided by
State Statute or local ordinance.)
§ 3-3.5. Application for license; required information; affidavit.
[Ord. No. 0-4-94]
§ 3-3.6. Approval of towing contractor for Township list. [Ord. No.
0-4-94]
Contractor shall be approved for the delegation of towing services set forth
herein on a one year basis. All licenses issued pursuant to the provisions
of this section shall expire 12:00 a.m. midnight on January 31st, next
succeeding the date of the issuance thereto, and all persons desiring to
continue as approved Towing Contractors after the expiration of any license
granted hereunder, shall make application before January 5th for a new
license for the ensuing year in the same manner that is required for the
issuance of the original license.
§ 3-3.7. Qualifications of towing contractors, indemnification of
Township. [Ord. No. 0-4-94]
It shall be the responsibility of the Township Council, or its designee, to
approve all applications for towing operators to be utilized for the purpose
of providing emergency towing, road and storage services to owners of
motor vehicles utilizing Township roads when it is determined that the
following requirements have been met by the applicant. The following
requirements apply to insurance and indemnification of Township.
a. Applications for licenses issued hereunder shall be made upon bland
forms prepared by the Director of Public Safety and made available by
the Township Clerk which shall incorporate all information necessary to
establish that the contractor can meet the minimum standards set forth
hereafter.
b. The application shall have affixed thereto an affidavit by the applicant
that all of the information given in the application is true and correct,
and the application shall be submitted to the Township Clerk.
a. All towing operators shall submit a certificate of insurance with the
application and the certificate shall name the Township as an additional
§ 3-3.4 § 3-3.7
1:78
§ 3-3.8. Minimum standards governing operator performance. [Ord.
No. 0-4-94; Ord. No. 0.24.2]
insured. The certificate shall provide evidence that the towing operator
carries the following insurance coverages:
1. Automobile liability: in an amount not less than $1,000,000
combined single limits.
2. Garage keeper's liability coverage: in an amount not less than
$60,000 per location.
3. Garage liability insurance: in an amount not less than $1,000,000
combined single limits.
4. Workers' compensation coverage: as required by Statute.
b. Indemnification. The towing operators agree that, to the fullest extent
permitted by law, they shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the
Township from and against any and all claims, suits, judgments and
demands whatsoever, including without limitation, cost, litigation
expenses, counsel fees and liabilities with respect to injury or death of
any person or persons whatsoever or damage to property of any kind by
whomever owned arising out of or caused or claimed to have been
caused, in whole or in part, by the negligent acts or omissions of the
towing operators or any person directly or indirectly employed by the
towing operators while in the performance of rending any services
pursuant to the scope of this section.
c. All of the coverages set forth in subsection 3-7a. above shall name of the
Township as additional insureds on the policy. The endorsement shall
also provide that 30 days notice to the Township is required to the
extent that any material changes are made with regard to the policy or
to the extent that the policy is to be cancelled.
a. Any person maintaining a principal place of operation within the
Township shall conform to a legally approved zoning and/or site plan
and shall comply fully with the Township's Zoning, Land Use and
Property Maintenance Code. Failure to comply with the Township's
Zoning, Land Use and Development and/or Property Maintenance Code
may subject any applicant/operator to suspension from the service list
of approved towing contractors and/or deem that contractor ineligible
for service on that list.
b. The towing service shall provide plans showing a sufficient area,
controlled by the towing service, for the storage of abandoned vehicles
towed at the request of the Township. The storage facility shall be
lighted, fenced and/or secured in order to guarantee the safe stored of
all vehicles.
§ 3-3.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-3.8
1:79
c. In addition to other equipment which is necessary for the safe
performance of towing, emergency road and storage services, all
towing operators must be equipped with at least the following:
1. Two light-duty wreckers which are able to handle all makes of
passenger cars and small trucks up to one ton, such as pickup and
small panel trucks. The garage from which the light-duty wrecker
originates must be equipped with a portable car dolly. Each lightduty
wrecker shall be equipped with the following:
(a) Dual rear wheels or equivalent;
(b) Power take-off controlled winch with a minimum cable
thickness of 1/2 inch or equivalent;
(c) Comparable weight equal to the vehicles to be towed, with a
minimum of 5,500 pounds;
(d) A 3/8 inch safety chain. The left chain and safety chain shall not
be attached in any form or manner to the same part of the
wrecker;
(e) Two double-faced rear flashing amber lights mounted high
enough to be seen over the towed vehicle;
(f) A 360° rotating amber beacon light mounted over the cab;
(g) All lights shall be of such candle power and intensity as to be
visible 1/4 mile away or shall be equal to the candle power of
lights on Township Police vehicles.
2. One heavy-duty wrecker equipped with the following:
(a) Dual rear wheels;
(b) Manufacturer rating: gross vehicles weight of 10,000 pounds.
Manufacturer rating may be obtained from the factory where
the truck originates. Other written evidence of gross vehicle
weight may be accepted by the Township is verified;
(c) Power take-off control winch with a minimum cable thickness
of 5/8 inch;
(d) Two double-faced rear flashing amber lights mounted high
enough to be seen over the towed vehicle;
(e) All lights shall be of such candle power and intensity as to be
visible 1/4 mile or shall be equal to the candle power of the
lights on a Township Police vehicle;
(f) One-half inch safety chain. The lift chain and safety chain shall
not be attached in any form or manner to the same part of the
wrecker;
§ 3-3.8 § 3-3.8
1:80
(g) Air brakes;
(h) Connecting air lines for connection with the air compressor
and air brake lines of the towed vehicle;
(i) Detachable amber flashing lights attached to the rear of the
towed vehicle;
(j) Two speed rear axle and differential or dual transmission of
five speed transmission.
3. One flat-bed truck for removal of vehicles from the roadway.
d. All owning operators' trucks must be equipped with either two way
radio and/or mobile telephone communications equipment with their
principal places of business, including their garages and/or facilities, to
ensure the proper availability of services and equipment on behalf of
the Township and motorists.
e. All towing operators' trucks shall be equipped with brooms, shovels and
any other street-sweeping equipment for the purpose of clearing debris
off the roadways. The towing operator shall, at the time of removing any
motor vehicle in response to a Police request, remove from the public or
private roads or highways any motor vehicle debris or material in the
area surrounding the vehicle, except for any debris or material which
may be hazardous, such as oil, gasoline, kerosene or other petroleum or
chemical products. The cleanup of debris, other than hazardous
materials, shall be performed by the towing operator, without charge to
the Township or the vehicle owner.
f. The towing operator's wrecker(s) and all other vehicles shall be
properly licensed and registered with the New Jersey Division of Motor
Vehicles. All towing operator vehicles shall display New Jersey
commercial license plates.
g. All towing operators shall have facilities and equipment that will ensure
and guarantee the furnishing of prompt and efficient services for all
standard passenger automobiles.
h. The towing operator's company name, address and telephone
number(s) shall be prominently and permanently displayed on both
sides of all wrecker(s) and other tow vehicles.
i. A towing operator shall not permit a vehicle to be removed from the site
of a vehicular accident or the scene of a crime without the prior
approval and permission of a Police Officer. Once removed from the
scene to the towing operator's premises, the towing operator shall be
required to allow the owner of any such vehicle to remove items of
personal property from such vehicle and shall not require the owner of
such vehicle to obtain a release or other documentation from the
Deptford Police Department unless the Deptford Police Department has
advised the towing operator in writing that the towing operator is not to
§ 3-3.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-3.8
1:81
§ 3-3.9. Towing information to be supplied to the Township. [Ord.
No. 0-4-94]
Each towing contractor performing services for the Township as set forth
herein shall provide the Chief of Police, on a quarterly basis, with an
informational report setting forth the details of each towing service
provided under this section. The report shall include the date; the
description of the vehicle that was towed; information specifically
identifying the vehicle; details surrounding the hiring of the towing service;
names of the owners of the towed vehicle and of the patron engaging him;
charges submitted by the towing service and amount paid to the towing
contractor, specifying whether the payment was made by an insurance
company or the individual engaging the service. This quarterly report shall
cover periods of February 1st to April 30th; May 1st to July 31st; August
1st to October 31st; and November 1st to January 31st. The report shall be
due no later than 15 days after the conclusion of the quarter as set forth
above. Failure to submit these reports shall immediately be grounds for the
Chief of Police to terminate the contractor from providing towing services
for the Township until a complete report as set forth above is submitted by
the contractor.
§ 3-3.10. Enforcement by Chief of Police. [Ord. No. 0-4-94]
The Chief of Police, and/or his designee, shall be responsible for the
enforcement of this section. It shall be his responsibility to periodically
inspect the towing contractors' vehicles and yard to insure continued
compliance with this section and New Jersey law applicable to the service.
If at any time the Chief of Police shall deem the equipment inadequate or
unsafe, or that the contractor is not in compliance with this section, he
shall have the power to demand immediate correction, and, if not corrected
to the full satisfaction of the Chief within five days, he shall then have
the power to revoke or suspend the license of the contractor for up to
30 calendar days for failure to comply with any subsection of this section.
release items of personal property due to an ongoing criminal
investigation.
j. Towing services shall be available and provided on a seven day per
week, twenty-four-hour per day basis for the entire geographic area of
the Township. A contractor on the approved list must be able to respond
to any tow scene within 20 minutes of the Township's request and shall
tow any automobile including but not limited to abandoned vehicles
which the towing operator is directed to tow by a Deptford Police
Officer.
k. Failure of any towing contractor to meet the minimum standards set
forth above shall be grounds, through the Chief of Police, to recommend
suspension and/or termination of the Towing Contractor from the
approved list and shall further constitute grounds for nonrenewal in
subsequent years.
§ 3-3.8 § 3-3.10
1:82
A subsequent violation may result in a permanent removal of a towing
operator from the duty service list for a twelve-month period. A towing
operator may appeal the Chief's ruling of either a suspension or permanent
removal. In such cases, an appeal may be filed with the Township Clerk
within 10 business days of the delivery of the Chief's decision to the towing
operator. A hearing will then be held by the Township Council within 30
business days of the filing of the appeal. The Township Council shall render
its determination within 15 business days following the conclusion of the
hearing. The governing body's determination as rendered shall be final and
conclusive under this section. The suspension of the towing operator from
the service list shall continue until the point in time that the Township
Council renders a decision as set forth above, notwithstanding the fact that
the suspension may exceed 30 days. If Township Council fails to make a
decision within the time period set forth above, then the towing contractor
shall automatically be reinstated.
§ 3-3.11. Rate schedule. [Ord. No. 0-4-94; Ord. No. 0.3.97 § 1; Ord.
No. 0.24.02]
§ 3-3.12. Towing of Township vehicles. [Ord. No. 0-4-96]
Any Township vehicle shall be towed by the towing contractor free of
charge.
§ 3-3.13. Violations and penalties. [Ord. No. 0-4-94; New]
a. Any towing service called to tow a vehicle at the request of the Police
Department shall charge no more than the following maximum tow
charges and storage fees:
1. For towing any abandoned or disabled motor vehicle from any point
within the Township 24 hours per day, seven days per week, shall
be no more than $65 for two axle vehicles and $75 for vehicles with
more than two axles.
2. For every day of dead storage per vehicle, a flat rate fee of $20 may
be charged.
b. Every operator of a towing service shall give the owner of the vehicle a
written receipt for the fee paid.
c. In no event shall the Township of Deptford, its departments or agencies
or its officers, agents or employees while acting in the course of their
employment be charged any storage fees or tow charges for charges for
canceled tows.
a. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section
1-5. A minimum fine of $100 per conviction has been established.
b. In addition to the penalty provided in paragraph a, the towing operator
shall be subject to the suspension provisions set forth above.
§ 3-3.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-4
1:83
§ 3-4. MINIBIKES.
§ 3-4.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 0-18-76; 1967 Code § 41-1]
As used in this section:
MINIBIKE — An unlicensed motor-driven vehicle or conveyance, including
but not necessarily limited to two-wheel motor vehicles known as minibicycles,
trail bicycles or motor scooters. The term "minibike" shall not
include motorized bicycles as defined in Chapter 250 of the Laws of 1975.
PERSON — Any individual, association or corporation.
§ 3-4.2. Registration required. [Ord. No. 0-18-76; 1967 Code § 41-2;
Ord. No. 84-01-R § 1]
a. From and after the effective date of this section, no person shall own,
ride or operate a minibike within the Township unless such minibike is
registered pursuant to the terms of this section.
b. Registration procedure.
1. Application for registration shall be made by the owner of a
minibike to the Municipal Clerk upon a form approved by the
Director of Public Safety, which form shall require the name and
address of the owner; the make, model and serial number of the
minibike; and such information as the Director of Public Safety
shall deem necessary and proper.
2. The owner shall sign the registration form and shall certify that the
information contained thereon is true.
3. A separate registration shall be required for each minibike.
4. A registration fee in the amount of $4 shall accompany each
registration form.
c. Minibike tags.
1. Upon receipt of the registration fee and a completed registration
form signed by the owner, the Municipal Clerk shall submit the
registration form to the Director of Public Safety or his designee.
2. The Director of Public Safety or his designee, upon receipt of the
registration form from the Municipal Clerk, shall issue to the
registrant a minibike tag which shall be attached to the seat of the
minibike in a prominent place so as to be visible from the rear. The
tag number shall be noted on the registration form.
3. The Director of Public Safety or his designee shall be responsible
for the custody and maintenance of all registration forms.
4. No person shall remove, destroy, mutilate or alter any minibike tag
or the number which appears thereon.
§ 3-4 § 3-4.2
1:84
§ 3-4.3. Use and operation. [Ord. No. 0-18-76; 1967 Code § 41-3]
§ 3-4.4. Violations and penalties. [Ord. No. 0-18-76; 1967 Code
§ 41-4; New]
§ 3-4.5. Impoundment. [Ord. No. 0-18-76; 1967 Code § 41-5]
d. Transference of ownership. Every person who sells or transfers
ownership of a registered minibike shall report such sale or transfer to
the Municipal Clerk and shall return the minibike tag issued for such
minibike.
a. No person shall operate a minibike on the private property of another
without the express written permission to do so by the owner of the
property.
b. No person shall operate a minibike on any public street located within
the Township.
c. No person shall operate a minibike on public grounds without express
written permission to do so by the Director of Public Safety.
d. No person shall operate a minibike in a manner so as to create loud,
unnecessary or unusual noise so as to disturb or interfere with the
peace and quiet of other persons.
e. No person shall operate a minibike in a careless, reckless or negligent
manner so as to endanger or be likely to endanger the safety of any
person or the property of any other person.
a. Any person under the age of 18 years who violates or fails to comply
with any of the provisions of this section shall be, for the first offense,
reprimanded in writing by the Police Department.11 Such writing shall
be addressed to the parents or guardian of the offender and shall state
the nature of the violation. Upon a second or subsequent violation of
this section, the parents or guardian of the offender shall be charged
with a violation of Section 3-12 of this chapter, entitled "Parental
Responsibility."
b. Any person 18 years of age or older who violates or fails to comply with
any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, but
subject to the General Penalty established in Section 1-5 of this Code.
a. Any minibike which is used or operated and which does not display a
minibike tag issued pursuant to this section shall be impounded by the
Township Police and shall be stored in such a place as is designated by
the Director of Public Safety.
b. The owner of any minibike so impounded may reclaim the same upon
proof of compliance of the provisions of this section and upon payment
11.Editor's Note: As to the Police Department generally, see Chapter 5.
§ 3-4.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-4.5
1:85
§ 3-5. ALARM SYSTEMS.
§ 3-5.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 84-03-R § 1]
The purpose of this section is to establish regulations concerning the
operation and maintenance of certain alarm systems within the Township,
and to provide penalties upon conviction for violations of any of the
provisions set forth herein.
§ 3-5.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 84-03-R § 2]
As used in this section:
ALARM SYSTEM — Any mechanical, electrical or electronic device which is
designed or used for the detection of an unauthorized entry into a building,
structure, or facility, or for alerting others about the commission of any
unlawful act in a building, structure or facility, or for alerting others about
the existence of any other condition requiring response of Police, Fire, or
Ambulance personnel; and which omits and/or transmits an audible and/or
visible signal or message when activated. Alarm systems include, but are
not limited to direct-dial telephone devices, audible alarms, and subscriber
alarms.
§ 3-5.3. General regulations. [Ord. No. 84-03-R § 3]
of all costs and charges incurred by the Township for towing and
storage of the minibike. The Director of Public Safety is authorized to
prepare a schedule of costs and charges for towing and storage. Such
schedule shall become effective upon publication and filing with the
office of the Clerk and the Township Council. Any modifications to the
schedule shall be accomplished in a like manner.
c. When a minibike is impounded, the Police Department shall keep and
maintain a record which shall contain, where possible, the color, make,
model, year and serial number. These records shall also include the
date and hour of impoundment, the location from which impounded, the
reason for impoundment, the name of the impounding officer and the
location at which the minibike is stored.
a. It shall be the responsibility of all persons, entities, firms, corporations
or other groups that maintain alarm systems within the Township, to
provide current information to the Police, consisting of the names and
telephone numbers of responsible persons who may be contracted in
case of emergency, or who are authorized to provide services to the
alarm systems; either being on a twenty-four-hour basis. This
information is to be filed with the Township Police Department when
the alarm system is initially placed into service, and must be revised
immediately whenever changes are necessary.
b. Audible alarms must be silenced within 60 minutes after a designated
responsible person is notified to do so by the Police or, the alarm system
§ 3-4.5 § 3-5.3
1:86
§ 3-5.4. False alarms; penalties. [Ord. No. 84-03-R § 4]
For any false alarm, the following penalties shall be applied:
§ 3-5.5. Exceptions. [Ord. No. 84-03-R § 5]
The provision of this section shall not apply to the General Alerting Alarms
that may be used by Fire Companies, Ambulance Squads, or Civil Defense
Agencies, to summon response of their members. The provisions of this
section further shall not apply to alarm systems that are affixed to motor
vehicles such as Police, Ambulance, and/or Fire Vehicles.
may be equipped with a timing device that will automatically silence
the audible alarm within 60 minutes after it is activated.
c. The direct-dial alarm shall not be connected to the Township Police
Department emergency phone number. A secondary phone will be
provided for direct-dial alarms only. Direct-dial alarms must be
equipped with a device that will prevent more than three repeated
transmissions of an alarm for the same emergencies to the Township
Police Department. Recorded messages must also include the name and
telephone number of a responsible person who may be contacted by the
Police in case of an emergency, on a twenty-four-hour basis.
d. It shall be the responsibility of all persons, entities, firms, corporations,
or other groups that maintain alarm systems within the Township to
prevent the transmission of false alarms through a program of training,
and periodic inspection and maintenance of their respective alarm
system.
a. For the first and second false alarm in any given calendar year, a
warning shall be issued by the Township through a letter to the owner
of the premises on which the false alarm was sounded.
b. For the third false alarm in the same calendar year, a fine of $50 shall be
paid to the Township.
c. For the fourth and each subsequent false alarm in the same calendar
year, a fine of $100 shall be paid to the Township.
d. When an investigation by the Police Department discloses continued
abuse of the privilege of connection of the alarm system to the Police
Department and disregard of the subscriber for taking remedial steps
to avoid false alarms, the Township Council reserves the right to
authorized the Chief of Police to disconnect any subscriber alarm from
the Township Police Department after giving written notice to the
subscriber.
e. Any person, entity, firm, corporation or other group that is found guilty
of violating any of the other provisions of this section shall be subject to
a fine of not more than $250.
§ 3-5.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-5.6
1:87
§ 3-5.6. Applicability. [Ord. No. 84-03-R § 6]
The provisions contained herein shall apply equally to those alarm systems
that were placed in service prior to or subsequent to the effective date of
this section.
§ 3-6. RIDING HORSES IN STREETS.12
§ 3-6.1. Riding restrictions. [Ord. No. 4-11-49; 1967 Code § 58-1]
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to ride any horse on any of the
streets, avenues or highways within the Township, at a speed faster than a
walk of such horse.
§ 3-6.2. Control. [Ord. No. 4-11-49; 1967 Code § 58-2]
Every horse being ridden by any person or persons shall at all times by
under the immediate control of the person or persons riding such horse
within the limits of the Township.
§ 3-6.3. Horse left unattended. [Ord. No. 4-11-49; 1967 Code § 58-3]
No horse shall be left unattended in any of the streets, avenues or highways
of the Township.
§ 3-6.4. Racing prohibited. [Ord. No. 4-11-49; 1967 Code § 58-4]
No person shall run or race a horse on any of the streets, avenues or
highways in the Township, nor permit the running, racing or trotting of such
horse on such highways in the Township at any time.
§ 3-6.5. Treatment of horses. [Ord. No. 4-11-49; 1967 Code § 58-5]
No person shall ill-treat, over-ride or cruelly treat a horse within the limits
of the Township.
§ 3-6.6. Violations and penalties. [Ord. No. 4-11-59; 1967 Code
§ 58-6]
Any person or persons who shall neglect or violate any of the provisions of
this section shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $100 for each and every
offense, to be determined by the court before whom the proceeding shall
be instituted, and the court may commit the defendant or person guilty of
such violation to the County jail until a fine be paid, with costs or until he
be otherwise discharged according to law.
§ 3-7. FIRE LANES.
Part I Deptford Mall and Other Public Places
12.Editor's Note: As to riding academies, see Section 4-9.
§ 3-5.6 § 3-7.1
1:88
§ 3-7.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 0-11-76; Ord. No. 0-41-77; Ord. No.
0-26-78; Ord. No. 0-14-81; 1967 Code § 75B-1]
a. As used in this Article.
DEPTFORD MALL — The area located adjacent to the buildings and the
buildings located within Block 220A, Lots 16,17, 18, 19 and 22 on the
Tax Maps.
FIRE LANE — All that area and roadway 34 feet in width, located
adjacent to the buildings located within Block 200A, Lots 16, 17, 18
19 and 22, on the Tax Maps of the Township, commonly referred to as
the "Deptford Mall," commencing at the southeast corner of the Sears
building, and thence continuing along the perimeter of the Deptford
Mall building to the place and point of beginning, as described in
the Traffic Sign Plan, drawn by Ballinger Architects/Engineers, dated
November 1, 1974, and filed with the Township Clerk of the Township
of Deptford; and all that area and roadway 34 feet in width, located
adjacent to the Sears T.B.A. facility, commencing at the entrance of the
facility along the perimeter of this building to the place and point of
beginning.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle which is self-propelled and designed
to travel along the ground, including but not limited to automobiles,
buses, motorbikes, motorcycles, motor scooters, trucks, tractors, gocarts,
campers and trailers.
PARKING — The standing or waiting within the Deptford Mall area, as
defined, of a vehicle not actually engaged in receiving or discharging
passengers or merchandise, unless in obedience to traffic regulations
or traffic signs or signals.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PUBLIC BUILDINGS — Any building, structure, facility or complex used
by the general public, including but not limited to theaters, concert
halls, auditoriums, museums, schools, libraries, recreations facilities,
public transportation terminals and stations, factories, office buildings,
business establishments, passenger vehicle service stations, shopping
centers, hotels or motels and public eating places, constructed by any
State, County or Municipal government agency or instrumentality or
any private individual, partnership, association or corporation, with the
following exceptions: one- to four- family private residences, warehouse
storage areas and all buildings classified as hazardous occupancies.
As used herein, "hazardous occupancy" means the occupancy or use
of a building or structure or any portion thereof that involves highly
combustible, highly flammable or explosive material or which has
inherent characteristics that constitute a special fire hazard.
STOPPING OR STANDING — When prohibited, any cessation of
movement of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when
§ 3-7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-7.1
1:89
§ 3-7.2. Stopping, standing or parking prohibited; exception. [Ord.
No. 0-11-76; Ord. No. 0-33-76; Ord. No. 0-9-83; 1967 Code § 75B-2]
§ 3-7.3. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 0-11-76; 1967 Code § 75B-3]
The terms and provisions of this Article shall be enforced by the Township
Police Department, the Fire Marshall or his designee, and such other
persons as the Township Manager may designate to enforce this Article.
§ 3-7.4. Violations and penalties. [Ord. No. 0-11-76; 1967 Code
§ 75B-4]
Anyone who shall violate this Article may be fined, upon conviction, not
more than $100.
§ 3-7.5. Towing. [Ord. No. 0-11-76; 1967 Code § 75B-5]
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a Police Officer or traffic control sign or signal.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Deptford, County of Gloucester and
State of New Jersey.
b. Other Words an Phrases Defined. Whenever any other words or phrases
are used in this section where meaning is ascribed to them in Subtitle 1
of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey, that meaning shall be
deemed to apply to such words and phrases used herein; in all other
instances such words and phrases not so ascribed shall be given their
ordinary and common meaning.
a. No person shall park, stop or stand a motor vehicle at any time within
any fire lane.
b. Exceptions.
1. A person may stop or stand a motor vehicle for a period not to
exceed 30 minutes for the sole purpose of parcel pickup in those
areas specifically designated for such parcel pickup.
2. Transport of New Jersey buses may stop, stand or layover for the
purpose of discharging and boarding passengers in the area
designated as D.S. No. 4, southeast quadrant on the Traffic Sign
Plan drawn by Ballinger Architects/Engineers, dated November 1,
1974, and filed with the Municipal Clerk.
a. When a motor vehicle shall be improperly parked, stopped or standing
within any fire lane, in violation of this Article, for a period in excess of
two hours, or where that motor vehicle shall constitute an immediate
danger to the public health, safety or welfare of those persons or
property adjacent thereto, any enforcing officer, in addition to any other
remedies provided herein, may order that motor vehicle removed by a
towing service authorized and licensed by the Township. The owner of
§ 3-7.1 § 3-7.5
1:90
§ 3-7.6. Definitions. [Ord. No. 0-21-77; 1967 Code § 75B-7]
such motor vehicle removed shall be responsible for all towing and
storage charges in accordance with the provisions of Section 3-3,
Abandoned Vehicles, of this chapter.
b. Any enforcing officer who shall order the towing away of any motor
vehicle pursuant to the provisions of this Article shall immediately
report the towing away of such vehicle to the Chief of Police or his
designee. The Police Department shall maintain a permanent log of all
such information in accordance with the record keeping required under
subsection 3-3.11 of this chapter.13
c. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit any owner of lands and
premises hereinbefore defined and designated as the Deptford Mall
from exercising any other statutory or legal remedy in regard to the
towing away of any motor vehicle illegally within any fire lane.
Part II Knightsbridge Condominium Association Parking in Fire Lanes
a. As used in this Article:
FIRE LANES — All that area and roadway designated as Knightsbridge
Road, commencing at Delsea Drive and running to the vehicle parking
area beyond Building C, and that area designated as Winding Way
Road, commencing and terminating at Knightsbridge Road aforesaid,
and further, all access roads to be designated and identified as that
area of roadway between Building A and Building B, and Building B
and Building C to Knightsbridge Road, and further, the parking area
to Building D, Building D to Building E, Building E to Building F and
Building F to Building G to Winding Way Road.
MOTOR VEHICLES — Any vehicle which is self-propelled and designed
to travel along the ground, including but not limited to automobiles,
buses, motor bikes, motorcycles, motor scooters, trucks tractors, gocarts,
campers and trailers.
PARKING — The standing or waiting within the Knightsbridge
Condominium area, as defined, of a vehicle not actually engaged in
receiving or discharging passengers or merchandise, unless in
obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
STOPPING OR STANDING WHEN PROHIBITED — Any cessation of
movement of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a Police Officer or traffic control sign or signal.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Deptford, County of Gloucester and
State of New Jersey.
13.Editor's Note: Section 3-3, Abandoned Vehicles.
§ 3-7.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-7.6
1:91
§ 3-7.7. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 0-21-77; 1967 Code § 75B-8]
The terms and provisions of this Article shall be enforced by the Township
Police Department, the Fire Marshal or his designee, the Township Manager
and such other persons as the Township Manager may designate to
enforced this Article.
§ 3-7.8. Parking in fire lane prohibited. [Ord. No. 0-21-77; 1967
Code § 75B-8.1]
No person shall park, stop or stand a motor vehicle in any fire lane.
§ 3-7.9. Violations and penalties. [Ord. No. 0-21-77; 1967 Code
§ 75B-9]
Anyone who shall violate this Article may be fined not more than $100.
§ 3-7.10. Towing of vehicles in violation. [Ord. No. 0-21-77; 1967
Code § 75B-10]
OTHER WORDS AND PHRASES DEFINED — Whenever any other
words or phrases are used in this Article where meaning is ascribed to
them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of News Jersey,
that meaning shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases used
herein. In all other instances, such words and phrases not so ascribed
shall be given their ordinary and common meaning.
a. When a motor vehicle shall be improperly parked, stopped or standing
within any fire lane in violation of this Article for a period in excess of
two hours or where that motor vehicle shall constitute an immediate
danger to the public health, safety and welfare of those persons or
property adjacent thereto, any enforcing officer may, in addition to any
other remedies provided herein, order that motor vehicle removed by a
towing service authorized and licensed by the Township. The owner of
such motor vehicle removed shall be responsible for all towing and
storage charges in accordance with the provisions of Section 3-3,
Abandoned Vehicles of this chapter.
b. Any enforcing officer who shall order the towing away of any motor
vehicle pursuant to the provisions of this Article shall immediately
report the towing away of such vehicle to the Chief of Police or his
designee. The Police Department shall maintain a permanent log of all
such information in accordance with the record keeping required under
subsection 3-3.11 of this chapter.
c. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit any owner of lands and
premises hereinbefore defined and designated as the "Knightsbridge
Condominium" from exercising any other statutory or legal remedy in
regard to the towing away of any motor vehicle illegally within any fire
lane.
§ 3-7.6 § 3-8
1:92
§ 3-8. CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN PUBLIC
PLACES.
§ 3-8.1. Terms and phrases. [Ord. No. 12-27-57; Ord. No. 0-13-80;
1967 Code § 4-6A; Ord. No. 0.7.91 § 1]
§ 3-8.2. Unlawful possession, consumption, distribution and
delivery of alcoholic beverages. [Ord. No. 12-27-57; Ord. No. 0-2-80;
Ord. No. 0-13-80; 1967 Code § 4-8; Ord. No. 0.7.91 § 2]
a. Possession of an alcoholic beverage. A person shall be deemed to be in
possession of an alcoholic beverage within the meaning of this section,
if he intends to or does exercise custody, control or dominion over such
alcoholic beverage; provided, however, that actual physical or manual
possession is not required if the intention to exercise such custody,
control or dominion over the alcoholic beverage is manifested from the
direct or circumstantial evidence where it is reasonable to infer that the
capacity to do so exists. Possession, custody or control need not be
exclusive, but may be jointly exercised by two or more persons. A
person shall be presumed to be jointly in possession, custody or control
of the alcoholic beverage if the owner or person in physical control of
the alcoholic beverage is in close proximity to him and the alcoholic
beverage is not sealed or has been partially consumed.
b. Consumption of an alcoholic beverage. A person shall be deemed to
consume if he drinks, swallows or imbibes any fluid or solid capable of
being converted into a fluid as defined in subsection 3-8.3 of this
section. A person shall be presumed to have consumed such alcoholic
beverage in violation of the provisions of subsection 3-8.2 and 3-8.4 if
the owner or other person in physical control of the alcoholic beverage
is in close proximity to him, the alcoholic beverage is not sealed or has
been partially consumed and he emits an odor of alcoholic beverage
coming from his person or exhibits physical conduct, attributes or
demeanor associated with the consumption of alcoholic beverages; or a
person is in possession of an alcoholic beverage that is not sealed, has
been partially consumed or is in a container, such as a glass or cup, and
the person emits an odor of alcoholic beverage coming from his person
or exhibits physical conduct, attributes or demeanor associated with
the consumption of alcoholic beverages.
a. In any public place or in any motor vehicle on any public highway, road,
street or alley in the Township, it shall be unlawful for any person under
the legal age for the consumption of alcoholic beverages established by
the State of New Jersey to:
1. Attempt to consume or possess any alcoholic beverage.
2. Consume or possess any alcoholic beverage.
3. Engage in or attempt to engage in, in concert with one or more
persons, an act of consuming or possessing any alcoholic beverage.
§ 3-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-8.2
1:93
§ 3-8.3. Definitions. [Ord. No. 0-10-76; 1967 Code § 4-14; Ord. No.
0.7.91 § III]
As used in this section:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Any fluid suitable for human consumption
containing alcohol including, but not limited to beer, lager beer, ale, porter,
naturally fermented wine, treated wine, blended wine, fortified wine,
sparkling wine, distilled liquors, blended distilled liquors and any brewed,
fermented or distilled liquors fit for use for beverage purposes, or any
mixture of the same and fruit juices.
PRIVATE PLACE — Any place which is not a public place as defined below.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place, either publicly or privately owned, which is or
may be frequented by the public.
§ 3-8.4. Consumption of alcoholic beverages in public and quasipublic
places. [Ord. No. 0-10-76; Ord. No. 0-13-80; 1967 Code
§ 4-15; Ord. No. 0.7.91 § V]
§ 3-8.5. Violations and penalties. [Ord. No. 0-10-76; Ord. No.
0-13-80; 1967 Code § 4-16; New; Ord. No. 0.7.91 § IV]
4. Distribute, deliver or make available for consumption any alcoholic
beverages to any person under the legal age for the consumption of
alcoholic beverages established by the State of New Jersey, or to
attempt to perform such acts.
5. Possess, display, dispense or distribute any alcoholic beverage out
of its original container.
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage
or possess any alcoholic beverage in an open or unsealed container or
glass on any sidewalk, street, avenue, highway, public parking lot or
other public place, or in any motor vehicle not on private property,
within the Township at any time. For purposes of this section, the term
"unsealed" shall mean a container with its original seal broken or a
container such as a glass or cup.
b. It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage
or to possess any alcoholic beverage in an open container with intent to
consume the same on any parking lot, yard or other open area which is
open to the public or to which the public is invited at any time.
c. It shall be unlawful for the owner or any other person in control of any
such parking lot, yard or other open area, which is open to the public or
to which the public is invited as described in paragraph b. above, to
knowingly permit or suffer the consumption or possession of an
alcoholic beverage in an open or unsealed container by any person.
a. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 3-8.2 § 3-8.5
1:94
§ 3-9. (Reserved)
§ 3-10. LIBRARY RULES.
§ 3-10.1. Notice of failure to return books. [Ord. No. 0-20-74; 1967
Code § 36A-1]
No person shall detain or fail to return any book or article borrowed from
the Deptford Public Library contrary to the rules and regulations of the
library after 30 days have elapsed from the date of posting by certified
mail, return receipt requested, of the notice demanding the return thereof,
addressed to the person at the last address furnished to the library or
branch. In the event the person is a minor, the notice shall be sent to the
parent or guarantor as shown on the records of the library.
§ 3-10.2. Destruction of library property. [Ord. No. 0-20-74; 1967
Code § 36A-2]
No person shall willfully or maliciously cut, tear, deface, disfigure, damage
or destroy any book or other article or any part thereof which is owned by
or is in the custody of the Public Library.
§ 3-10.3. False information. [Ord. No. 0-20-74; 1967 Code § 36A-3]
No person shall register under or furnish a false name or address or use any
card other than the one issued to such person for the purpose of borrowing
any book or any article or material from the library.
§ 3-10.4. Violations and penalties. [Ord. No. 0-20-74; 1967 Code
§ 36A-4; New]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to
a fine not exceeding $50 for each and every violation. For the purpose of this
subsection, each book and article borrowed from the Public Library shall
constitute a separate violation. The penalties contained in this subsection
do not in any way affect a person's responsibility to return borrowed library
material, or its value, plus any accrued fines on that material.
§ 3-11. LOITERING.
b. When the Municipal Court suspends the imposition of a defendant's
sentence, or a portion thereof, or sentences him to be placed on
probation, the Municipal Court may attach such reasonable conditions
authorized by N.J.S.A. 2C:45-1, including the performance of
community related services and the imposition of conditions reasonably
related to the rehabilitation of the defendant including but not limited
to alcoholic rehabilitation programs or other such programs related to
alcoholic education or rehabilitation.
§ 3-8.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-11.1
1:95
§ 3-11.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 0-8-73; 1967 Code § 37A-1]
As used in this section:
LOITERING — Remaining idle in essentially one location and shall be
deemed to include lounging, sleeping or spending time idly.
PARENT OR GUARDIAN — Any person over 18 years of age having lawful
care or custody of a minor, whether by reason of blood relationship or order
of any court or otherwise.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public has access and shall
include any street, highway, road, alley or sidewalk. Also includes the front
or vicinity of any store, shop, restaurant or other place of business, and
public grounds, areas, parks, schools, parking lots, shopping centers or
other private property not owned by or under the control of the person
charged with violating this section, or in the case of the minor, not owned
or under the control of his parents or guardian.
§ 3-11.2. Certain types of loitering prohibited. [Ord. No. 0-8-73;
1967 Code § 37A-2]
No person shall loiter in a public place in such a manner as to:
§ 3-11.3. Refusal to obey order of police officers. [Ord. No. 0-8-73;
1967 Code § 37A-3]
Whenever any Police Officer of the Township, the State of New Jersey or
other Police Officer with lawful jurisdiction in the Township, in the exercise
of reasonable judgment, determines that the presence of any person in any
public place is causing any of the conditions described in subsection 3-11.2
of this section, he may, if he deems it necessary for the preservation of the
public peace and safety, order that person to leave that place. Any person
who shall refuse or fail to leave after being ordered to do so by such a Police
Officer shall be guilty of a violation of this subsection.
§ 3-11.4. Violations and penalties. [Ord. No. 0-8-73; 1967 Code
§ 37A-4; New]
a. Create a danger to immediate, actual physical violent reaction from any
person, which violent reaction will cause a threat to the peace and
order of the public.
b. Create any disturbance or annoyance to the comfort and repose of any
person.
c. Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles.
d. Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in any public
place as defined in subsection 3-11.1 of this section. This paragraph
shall also include the making of any unsolicited, audible remarks of an
offensive or insulting nature which are calculated to annoy or disturb
the person to whom or in whose hearing they are made.
§ 3-11.1 § 3-11.4
1:96
§ 3-11.5. Construction of provisions. [Ord. No. 0-8-73; 1967 Code
§ 37A-5]
Nothing in this section shall be construed so as to limit any right of free
speech or assembly guaranteed under the Constitution of the State of New
Jersey.
§ 3-12. CURFEW.
§ 3-12.1. Curfew hour for minors. [Ord. No. 7-13-64; Ord. No.
5-26-69; 1967 Code § 17-1]
It shall be unlawful for any child under the age of 18 years to loiter, wander,
ride, run through or stroll through or remain upon any of the streets,
parks, or other areas or places open to the public or upon private lands
not belonging unto such child or ward or his blood relatives without the
permission of any owner not related to the child or ward by blood in the
Township, after the hour of 11:00 p.m., prevailing time, unless such minor
is accompanied by his or her parent or parents, legal guardian or some
duly authorized and accredited custodian of at least 21 years of age who
exercises control of such minor as hereinafter provided.
§ 3-12.2. Halloween. [Ord. No. 7-13-64; Ord. No. 5-12-83; 1967 Code
§ 17-1.1]
It shall be unlawful for any child under the age of 18 years to loiter, wander,
ride, run through or stroll through or remain upon any of the streets after
the hour of 8:00 p.m. prevailing time on that date designated each year for
the celebration of Halloween and on the two days preceding the Halloween
celebration, unless such minors are accompanied by his or her parent or
parents, legal guardian or some duly authorized and accredited custodian
of at least 21 years of age who exercises control of such minor hereinafter
provided.
§ 3-12.3. Responsibility of parents and legal guardians. [Ord. No.
7-13-64; Ord. No. 5-26-69; Ord. No. 0-5-83; 1967 Code § 17-2]
a. Any adult, parent or guardian convicted to a violation of the provisions
of this section shall be subject to the General Penalty established in
Section 1-5 of this Code.
b. Any juvenile charged with a violation of this section shall be treated in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 2A:4-14 et seq. and the Rules Governing the
Administration of the Juvenile-Domestic Relations Court.
a. It shall be unlawful for any parent, legal guardian or duly authorized
and accredited custodian having lawful care or custody of any child
under the age of 18 years to allow or permit any such child or ware to
ride, loiter, wander or stroll or remain unaccompanied on or about any
of the streets, parks or other areas or places open to the public or upon
private lands not belonging unto such child or ward or his blood
§ 3-11.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-12.3
1:97
§ 3-12.4. Exceptions. [Ord. No. 7-13-64; 1967 Code § 17-3]
The provisions of this section shall not apply to any minor child who shall be
gainfully and lawfully employed, or to any minor child who shall be a bona
fide student of a school, college or university of evening instruction, or to
any child who shall be in attendance at an evening function sponsored by a
religious or school organization, or who shall be in attendance at a properly
supervised recreational program during the time necessarily required to
travel between such minor child's residence and the place of assembly.
§ 3-12.5. Emergency. [Ord. No. 7-13-64; 1967 Code § 17-4]
Should an emergency arise necessitating a minor child under the age of
18 years being dispatched upon an errand requiring his presence upon
any street, highway, road or roadway or any other place or area open to
the public during the hours to which the use thereof by such unattended
minor child is prohibited hereunder, such child shall have in his or her
possession a note or message in writing signed by a person of his or
her household over the age of 21 stating the nature of the errand, the
necessity therefor, the place of destination at which the mission is to be
accomplished, the time such message was executed and the approximate
time required for the errand. Any abuse of the purpose or spirit of this
subsection shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this section
punishable as hereinafter provided.
§ 3-12.6. Authority of policemen. [Ord. No. 7-13-64; 1967 Code
§ 17-5]
Any Policemen or any special officer duly appointed by the Township
Council is hereby authorized and empowered to take into custody any such
minor child who may be in the act of violating the provisions of this section.
relatives without the permission of any owner not related to the child or
ward by blood in the Township within the periods and hours established
and prohibited for use by a child or children of the ages aforesaid in the
preceding subsection 3-12.1 entitled "Curfew Hour for Minors" of this
chapter unless escorted or attended by a parent, legal guardian or duly
authorized and accredit custodian, except as hereinafter provided.
b. A parent, legal guardian or duly authorized and accredited custodian
shall not be deemed in violation of paragraph a. of this subsection
unless the child under his custody or control shall have been convicted
for a prior violation of this section, or that parent, legal guardian or
authorized accredited custodian shall have received a warning from the
Township Police Department or any other lawfully constituted authority
that such child under his custody or control shall have been seen on the
streets or public places of the Township unescorted or unattended by a
parent, legal guardian or authorized and accredited custodian in a
manner not otherwise permitted in this section during the hours for
which the curfew is in effect.
§ 3-12.3 § 3-12.6
1:98
Such officer shall notify the parent or person having the legal care and
custody of such child of the violation of this section and the penalty therefor
of a second or subsequent violation and shall report the violation to the
Chief of Police of the Township who shall cause a record thereof to be made.
The child shall be released immediately in the custody of such parent or
person having his or her legal care or custody.
§ 3-12.7. Violations and penalties. [Ord. No. 7-13-64; Ord. No.
0-5-83; 1967 Code § 17-6]
§ 3-13. PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY.
§ 3-13.1. Responsibility of parents; juvenile delinquency. [Ord. No.
0-10-73; 1967 Code § 45-1]
a. A minor child under the age of 18 years of age convicted of violating any
of the provisions of this section shall be punished by a fine not in excess
of $100 for the first offense; for a subsequent offense by a fine not in
excess of $250 or by imprisonment not to exceed 10 days, or by both
fine and imprisonment. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the
court may attach such reasonable conditions authorized by N.J.S.A.
2C:45-1, including the performance of community-related services and
the imposition of conditions reasonably related to the rehabilitation of
the violator, including but not limited to educational vocational or other
social service programs.
b. A person of the age of 18 years or older, including but not limited to any
parent, guardian or any other person having the legal care and custody
of the child convicted of violating any part of this section shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $500 or by imprisonment not to exceed
30 days, or by both fine and imprisonment; provided, however, that any
such person convicted of a second or subsequent violation shall pay a
fine of not less than $250. In addition to the penalties provided herein,
the court may attach such reasonable conditions authorized by N.J.S.A.
2C:45-1, including the performance of community-related services and
the imposition of conditions reasonably related to the rehabilitation of
the violator, including but not limited to educational, vocational or other
social service programs.
a. It is unlawful for a parent, guardian or one charged with the custody of
a minor to knowingly fail to properly supervise the conduct of any child
or ward under the age of 18 years such that this child or ward is
adjudged to be a juvenile delinquent.
b. For purposes of this section, juvenile delinquency may be founded upon
the following:
1. Any violation of N.J.S.A. 2A:4-14 as administered by the Juvenile
and Domestic Relations Court.
§ 3-12.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-13.1
1:99
§ 3-13.2. Offense; place of commission. [Ord. No. 0-10-73; 1967
Code § 45-2]
§ 3-13.3. Notice to parents of violation. [Ord. No. 0-10-73; 1967
Code § 45-3]
§ 3-13.4. Violation of loitering regulation; notice to parents. [Ord.
No. 0-10-73; 1967 Code § 45-4]
2. Violation of any rule or regulation promulgated by the Division of
Alcoholic Beverage Control.
3. The violation of any ordinance of the Township.
a. If the parent, guardian or child shall not be a resident of the Township,
an offense in violation of subsection 3-13.1 shall be deemed to have
taken place if the act of juvenile delinquency as defined in subsection
3-13.1b shall have occurred within the Municipal boundaries of the
Township.
b. If the parent, guardian or child shall reside within the Township, an
offense in violation of subsection 3-13.1a shall be deemed to have
occurred if the act of juvenile delinquency as defined in subsection
3-13.1b shall have occurred within or without the Municipal boundaries
of the Township.
a. Whenever any parent or guardian is charged with a violation of this
section, there shall be a rebuttal presumption that he has knowingly
failed to properly supervise the conduct of his child or ward if such
violation upon which this juvenile delinquency is based occurred within
180 days after notice to the parent that his child or ward has violated an
act under subsection 3-13.1, paragraph b. of this section or within 180
days of the child or ward being adjudicated a juvenile delinquent.
b. Sufficient notice to the parent or guardian may be founded upon notice,
either oral or written, from a duly authorized representative of the
Gloucester County Probation Department, notice from the Township
Police Department or a final determination of a court of competent
jurisdiction.
c. The provisions of paragraphs a. and b. shall not be applicable to acts of
juvenile delinquency arising out of the violation of an "Ordinance to
Prohibit Loitering Within the Township," hereinafter referred to as
Section 3-11, Loitering.14
a. Whenever any minor under the age of 18 years is charged with a
violation of any part of Section 3-11, Loitering, sufficient notice of this
act to the parent or guardian may be founded upon notice, either
written or oral, from the Chief of Police or any person designated by
14.Editor's Note: See Section 3-11, Loitering.
§ 3-13.1 § 3-13.4
1:100
§ 3-13.5. Violations and penalties. [New]
Any adult, parent or guardian convicted of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to the General Penalty in Section 1-5 of this Code.
§ 3-14. through § 3-15. (Reserved)
§ 3-16. BINGO AND RAFFLES.
§ 3-16.1. Operation of bingo and raffles on Sunday. [Ord. No.
3-27-61; Ord. No. 0-20-75; 1967 Code § 9-1; Ord. No. 0.3.98 § 9-1]
Upon proper application and approval of the Township Council, it shall
hereafter by lawful for any organizations or associations who are authorized
under the "Bingo Licensing Law" and the "Raffles Licensing Law" of the
Revised Statutes of The State of New Jersey to conduct, hold or operate
bingo games, lotto and/or raffles as described in the Acts on the first day of
the week, commonly known and designated as Sunday. Bingo games, lotto
and/or raffles shall not be conducted under any license on Sunday, unless
the License specifically so provides.
§ 3-16.2. Licensing fees payable to municipality. [Ord. No. 0.3.98
§ 9-2]
At the time of application for any license issued for bingo pursuant to this
section, at the time of application, a licensing fee of $5 for each occasion
on which any game or games of bingo are to be conducted under the
license shall be tendered to the Township Clerk made payable to Deptford
Township.
§ 3-16.3. For all other raffles, lottos or other games as described
under the raffles licensing law. [Ord. No. 0.3.98 § 9-3]
The Township shall collect a fee in an amount equal to the amount charged
by the Legalized Game of Chance Control Commission.
§ 3-17. DRUG FREE SCHOOL ZONES.
§ 3-17.1. Title. [Ord. No. 0.3.91 § 1]
This section shall be known and shall be cited as the "Drug Free School
Zones Ordinance."
him to give such notice; or such other parties enumerated in subsection
3-12.3, paragraph b.
b. If at any time within 60 days following the giving of notice as provided
in paragraph a. hereof, the minor to whom the notice related again is
charged and subsequently convicted of a violation of Section 3-11,
Loitering, it shall be rebuttably presumed that the minor did so with the
knowingly permission or sufferance of his parent or guardian.
§ 3-13.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-17.2
1:101
§ 3-17.2. Drug free school zones. [Ord. No. 0.3.91 § 2]
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7, a
Drug Free School Zone Map was produced on May 16, 1998, by Remington
and Vernick Engineers establishing the locations and boundaries of areas
on or within 1,000 feet of property owned by or leased to any elementary,
junior high and high schools, including public, private and parochial schools
located within the jurisdiction of the Township of Deptford. The locations of
"Drug Free School Zones" are as follows:
Name of School Location
Deptford High School Fox Run Road
Monongahela Junior High Bankbridge & Tanyard Roads
Almonesson School Almonesson Road
Central School Delsea Drive
Delaware Valley Academy Sickel Lane
Gloucester County
College
Tanyard Road
Good Intent School Good Intent Road
ICYA Building 966 Mail Avenue
Jericho School Cedar Lane
Lake Tract School Iszard Road
Mount Holy Redeemer
School
Delsea Drive
New Sharon School Delsea Drive
Oak Valley Elementary College & University Boulevard
Pine Acres Elementary Lynne & Purdue Avenues
Shady Lane School Shady Lane & Pine Avenues
St. John of God School Delsea Drive
Westville School Summit Avenue
Board of Education
Administrative Building
2022 Good Intent Road
§ 3-17.3. Drug free school zone map changes. [Ord. No. 0.3.91 § 3]
a. The Board of Education or its designee, or the Chief Administrative
Officer in the case of any private or parochial school, shall have the
continuing obligation to promptly notify the Chief of Police, Township
Engineer, Township Solicitor and Township Clerk of any changes or
contemplated changes in the location of any property owned by or
leased and used for school purposes.
b. The Township Clerk shall receive and keep on file the original of the
"Drug Free School Zone Map dated May 16, 1988" and to provide at a
§ 3-17.2 § 3-17.3
1:102
§ 3-17.4. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 0.3.91 § 4]
The terms and provisions of this section shall be enforced by the Deptford
Township Police Department. The following additional matters are hereby
declared recited and stated as follows:
reasonable cost a true copy thereof to any person, agency or court
which may from time to time request such a copy, along with
certification that such copy is a true copy of the "Map" approved and
adopted herein and kept on file. It is hereby further directed that
the Township Clerk shall provide the County Clerk and the Gloucester
County Prosecutor a true copy of the map and this section without cost,
as well as future amendments.
a. It is understood that the map approved an adopted pursuant to
subsection 3-17.2 was prepared and is intended to be used as evidence
in prosecutions arising under the criminal laws of the State of New
Jersey, and pursuant to State Law, such map shall constitute prima facie
evidence of the following:
1. The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
Township of Deptford;
2. The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to
such schools or a school board;
3. That such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes; and
4. The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000
feet of such school property.
b. All of the property depicted on the map approved and adopted herein as
school property was owned by or leased to a school or school board and
was being used for school purposes as of June 28, 1988, that being the
effective date of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.
c. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7, a Prosecutor is not
precluded from introducing or relying upon any other evidence or
testimony to establish a violation of the offense defined in that Statute,
including use of a map or diagram other than the one approved and
adopted pursuant to subsection 3-17.1. The failure of the map approved
herein to depict the location and boundaries of any property which is, in
fact, used for school purposes and which is owned by or leased to any
elementary or secondary school or school board, whether the absence
of such depiction is the result of inadvertent omission or the result of
any changes in the location and boundaries of such property which have
not yet been incorporated into a revised, approved map, shall not be
deemed to be an official finding and record that such property is not
owned by or leased to a school or school board, or that such property is
not used for school purposes.
§ 3-17.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-17.4
1:103
§ 3-17.5. Penalties. [Ord. No. 0.3.91 § 5]
Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to the
penalties set forth by N.J.S.A. 2C:35-10 of the Laws of the State of New
Jersey.
§ 3-18. REGULATING SALE AND ADVERTISING OF TOBACCO
PRODUCTS.
§ 3-18.1. Findings. [Ord. No. 0.12.97 Findings]
The State of New Jersey has banned the sale or furnishing of cigarettes
or tobacco in any form to minors under N.J.S.A. 2A: 170-51; and medical
and scientific evidence indicates that tobacco use is a leading cause of
preventable death in the United States, medical and scientific evidence
demonstrates that tobacco usage is addictive and causes serious health
problems.
The Director of the National Institute on Drug Abuse has concluded that
the majority of the 390,000 Americans who die each year from cigarette
smoking became addicted to nicotine as adolescents, and a significant
number of children under the legal age to purchase tobacco are still able
to do so under either directly or through vending machines. The Deptford
Township Council is authorized to enact ordinances not contrary to the laws
of this State or of the United States as it may deem necessary and proper
for the protection of persons and for the preservation of the public health,
safety, welfare of the Township of Deptford and its inhabitants.
§ 3-18.2. General interpretation and definitions. [Ord. No. 0.12.97
§ 1]
d. All of the requirements set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7, concerning the
preparation, approval and adoption of a Drug-Free School Zone map
have been complied with.
a. Interpretation. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in
the present tense include the future, words used in the singular number
include the plural number, and words used in the plural number shall
include the singular. The word "shall" is mandatory, and mot merely
discretionary. Words, terms of expression not defined herein shall be
interpreted in the manner of their commonly accepted meaning.
b. Definitions.
BAR — Any place licensed by the State of New Jersey to primarily sell
at retail beer, wine mixed spirit drinks and spirits for consumption the
premises.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any person employed by the
Township in the capacity of enforcing the laws of the State of New
Jersey and the ordinances of the Township of Deptford. This would
§ 3-17.4 § 3-18.2
1:104
§ 3-18.3. Prohibition of tobacco sales to minors; limitation of
location of vending machines. [Ord. No. 0.12.97 § 3; Ord. No.
0.3.02]
§ 3-18.4. Prohibition of self-service racks of tobacco products. [Ord.
No. 0.12.97 § 4]
Self-service cigarette or tobacco product displays are prohibited, and it
shall be unlawful to offer for sale or to sell cigarettes or tobacco products
include but not be limited to all sworn members of the Deptford
Township Police Department.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, cooperative, association,
corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee or any
other legal entity.
RESTAURANT — Place licensed by the Township of Deptford to dell
food at retail.
SELF-SERVICE CIGARETTE OR TOBACCO PRODUCT DISPLAY —
Shelving or storing of cigarettes in any area of the establishment to
which customers have access and/or in a location where a customer
could reach the cigarettes or tobacco products and take same without
the assistance of an employee of the establishment.
TAVERN — Any place licensed by the State of New Jersey to primarily
sell at retail, beer, wine, mixed spirit drinks and spirits for consumption
on the premises.
TOBACCO — Any product made from the tobacco plant for the purpose
of smoking, chewing, inhaling and other personal use including cigars,
chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff and cigarettes in any form.
TOBACCO RETAILER — Any person or entity that operates a store,
stand, booth, concession or place at which sales of tobacco are made to
purchasers for consumption or use. Tobacco retailer shall also mean a
person or entity that owns, operates or uses a vending machine and/or
a vending machine location.
VENDING MACHINE — Automated, self-service device which, upon
insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment, dispenses
cigarettes or other tobacco products.
VENDING MACHINE LOCATION — The room enclosure, space or area
where a tobacco vending machine is installed and operated.
a. Prohibition of tobacco sales to minors. It shall be unlawful for tobacco
retailers to sell tobacco to a person under 18 years of age.
b. Identification required. It shall be unlawful for a tobacco retailer to sell
or permit to be sold tobacco to any individual without requesting and
examining identification from the purchaser positively establishing the
purchaser's age of 18 years.
§ 3-18.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-18.4
1:105
from a self-service display of cigarettes or tobacco products in Deptford
Township.
§ 3-18.5. Prohibition of tobacco advertising at child-eye level. [Ord.
No. 0.12.97 § 5]
With the exception of permitted vending machines, it shall be unlawful for
tobacco retailers to display, advertise, or offer for sale, tobacco products in
any location in which minors are permitted at a height at less than four feet
or adjacent to candy or items specifically intended for sale to or for children.
§ 3-18.6. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 0.12.97 § 6]
§ 3-18.7. Other laws and regulations. [Ord. No. 0.12.97 § 7]
a. Complaint. Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer, or his designee,
reasonably believes that there exists a violation of this section, he/she
may issue a summons and complaint not later than 90 days after
discovery of the alleged violation. The complaint shall be written and
shall state with reasonable particularity the nature of the violation,
including reference to the subsection of this section alleged to have
been violated. The complaint shall be delivered or sent by certified mail
to the alleged violator.
b. Right of entry and inspection.
1. The Code Enforcement Officer, or his designee, or any other person
charged with the enforcement of this section, after giving proper
identification, may inspect any matter, thing, premise, place,
record, vehicle, incident or event as necessary.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to molest, willfully oppose,
verbally abuse or otherwise obstruct the Code Enforcement Officer,
or his designee, or any other person charged with enforcement of
this section during the routine performance of his or her duties.
3. The Code Enforcement Officer, or his designee, may request the
assistance of the Deptford Township Police Department, or other
Police Agency or Peace Officer when necessary to execute his or
her official duty in a manner prescribed by law.
a. This section shall supplement the ordinances of Deptford Township and
all other Statutes duly enacted by the State of New Jersey and the
County of Gloucester relating to public health and safety. Where the
provisions of any other State law, local ordinance or regulation, or
administrative rules apply, or the laws or regulations of the United
States, the more restrictive of any or all laws, ordinances, regulations
or rules shall prevail.
b. This section shall be liberally construed for the protection of the health,
safety, and welfare of the people of Deptford Township.
§ 3-18.4 § 3-18.8
1:106
§ 3-18.8. Power to establish policy and guidelines. [Ord. No. 0.12.97
§ 8]
The Code Enforcement Officer, or his designee, is hereby granted the
authority to establish policies and guidelines, not in conflict with the
purpose and intent of this section, for the purpose of carrying out the
responsibilities herein delegated to the Code Enforcement Officer by law.
These policies and procedures are subject to review by the Township
Manager.
§ 3-18.9. Penalties. [Ord. No. 0.12.97 § 9]
§ 3-18.10. Reservation of rights. [Ord. No. 0.12.97 § 10]
§ 3-18.11. Tobacco vending machines prohibited. [Ord. No. 0.3.02
§§ 1-5]
a. Unless otherwise provided by Law, Statute, or ordinance, any person
violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction
thereof, pay a penalty of not less than $50 nor more than $500 for each
offense. Complaint shall be made in the Municipal Court of Deptford
Township or before such other judicial officer having authority under
the laws of the State of New Jersey.
b. Each sale of tobacco to a minor shall constitute separate violation.
a. Deptford Township specifically reserves and retains the right to pursue
all other legal and equitable remedies in order to fully enforce the
provisions of this section as they pertain to the health, safety and
welfare of the people of Deptford Township.
b. If any chapter, section, subsection or paragraph of this ordinance is
declared to be unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative, in whole or in
part by a court of competent jurisdiction, such chapter, section,
subsection or paragraph shall, to the extent that it is not
unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative, remain in full force and effect,
and such determination shall not be deemed to invalidate the remaining
chapters, sections, subsections or paragraphs of this section.
a. Definitions.
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any sworn officer of the Deptford
Township Police Department or a Code Enforcement Officer.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, cooperative, association,
corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any
other legal entity.
TOBACCO — Any product made from the tobacco plant for the purpose
of smoking, chewing, inhaling, and other personal use including cigars,
chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff and cigarettes in any form.
§ 3-18.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-18.11
1:107
Chapter 4
GENERAL LICENSING
§ 4-1. PERMITS AND LICENSES.16
§ 4-1.1. Title. [Ord. No. 0-9-74; 1967 Code § 47A-1]
This section shall be referred to as the "Regulation for Issuing Permits and
Licenses."
VENDING MACHINE — Any automated, self-service device which, upon
insertion of money, tokens, or any other form of payment, dispenses
cigarettes or other tobacco products.
b. Prohibition of tobacco vending machines and tobacco vending machine
sales. It shall be unlawful to offer for sale or to sell tobacco through a
tobacco vending machine in the Township of Deptford.
c. Removal of tobacco vending machines. All tobacco vending machines
made unlawful by the terms of this subsection shall be removed within
30 days from the effective date of this subsection.15
d. Enforcement.
1. Whenever a Law Enforcement Officer reasonably believes there
exists a violation of this subsection, such officer may issue a
summons and complaint not later than 60 days after discovery of
the alleged violation. This complaint shall be written and shall state
with reasonable particularity the nature of the violation, including
reference to the article and section of this chapter alleged to have
been violated. The complaint shall be delivered or sent by certified
mail to the alleged violator.
2. A Law Enforcement Officer charged with enforcement of this
chapter, after giving proper identification, and if no other warrant
is required by law, may inspect any matter, thing, premises, place,
person, record vehicle, incident, or event as necessary to enforce
the provisions of this subsection.
3. Citizens may bring complaints against violators of this subsection.
e. Penalties, court costs. Unless otherwise provided by law, statute, or
ordinance, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a penalty of not less than $100 or
more than $300 for a first violation and $1,000 for each subsequent
offense for each day a machine is determined to be in violation of this
subsection.
15.Editor's Note: This subsection was adopted February 4, 2002 by Ordinance No. 0.3.02.
16.Editor's Note: See Chapter 2, Section 2-72, "Payment of Taxes Required in Advance of
Issuing Municipal Licenses or Permits."
§ 3-18.11 § 4-1.2
1:108
§ 4-1.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 0-9-74; 1967 Code § 47A-2]
As used in this section:
ISSUING AUTHORITY — The Township Manager, Township Council, any
Municipal official or any Municipal official, body, board, commission or
agency authorized by any ordinance of the Township heretofore or hereafter
adopted, empowered to issue any permit or license.
LICENSE OR PERMIT — Any license or permit authorized to be issued
pursuant to any section of the Township heretofore or hereafter adopted.
§ 4-1.3. Procedure for issuance of conditional permits and licenses.
[Ord. No. 0-9-74; 1967 Code § 47A-3]
a. Whenever any issuing authority of the Township issues any permit and/
or license hereunder which is made subject to the applicant's and/or
licensee's faithful performance of any term(s) and/or condition(s) to be
effected at or after the issuance of that license or permit, before such
permit and/or license shall issue, the applicant and/or licensee shall be
required to post with the Township Manager such sum in cash or by a
bond issued by a reputable surety company or such other form of
guaranty in such amount as recommended by the issuing authority to
assure faithful compliance with the conditional approval of such permit
and/or license. All surety bonds or other forms of guaranty, other than
cash, shall be approved in form and substance by the Township Solicitor
prior to the issuance of the permit and/or license.
b. All terms and conditions requiring the posting of surety, in accordance
with paragraph a. hereof, shall be clearly set forth or attached to such
license.
c. If the sum to be posted by the applicant or licensee is $1,000 or less, the
Township Manager, in his discretion, may request that such sum be
posted in cash only. All sums of cash duly posted with the Township
Manager shall be deposited in escrow in an interest bearing account.
d. Before any license and/or permit shall issue hereunder, the applicant or
licensee and his surety and/or guarantor shall be required to post with
the Township Manager the name and address of that person and/or
persons upon whom service of process and notice is required pursuant
to the provisions of this section as may be made within the State of New
Jersey.
e. Whenever the issuance of any permit or license is made subject to this
section, the applicant and/or licensee, and where applicable, his surety
and/or guarantor shall be required to acknowledge in writing that he
and/or they are aware that such permit or license is being issued in
accordance with the terms and provisions of this section and of his and/
or their consent to be bound thereby, and further acknowledge the
provisions of subsection 4-1.6, paragraph e. in reference to chargeable
attorney's fees and costs.
§ 4-1.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-1.4
1:109
§ 4-1.4. Default or breach of terms or conditions; request for
hearing. [Ord. No. 0-9-74; 1967 Code § 47A-4]
§ 4-1.5. Hearing; findings; order to comply. [Ord. No. 0-9-74; 1967
Code § 47A-5]
a. Default or breach.
1. Upon the applicant or licensee's default or breach of any term and/
or condition hereunder the Township Manager may serve written
notice upon the licensee or applicant of his intent to perform and/or
effect performance of that term and/or condition hereunder. The
Township Manager may serve written notice upon the licensee or
applicant of his intent to perform and/or effect performance of that
term and/or condition breached or in default, and to assess such
costs against the cash, performance bond or other security posted.
2. Service of the Township Manager's written notice may be made
either personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested. The
Township Manager shall also serve such written notice upon any
surety and/or guarantor of record.
b. Request for hearing.
1. The applicant and/or licensee and, if applicable, any surety and/or
guarantor so served may request a hearing before the Township
Manager. Such request must be made in writing and served either
personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, on the
Township Manager within five days after receipt of the written
notice.
2. Failure to request such a hearing within the designated time shall
constitute an authorization to the Township Manager to perform
and/or effect the terms and/or conditions breached or in default,
and to assess such costs against the cash and/or surety posted as
may be required to correct such breach or cure such default.
3. Where the interest of justice so requires, the Township Manager
may waive the strict enforcement of any of the above provisions.
a. Whenever a hearing is requested in accordance with the provisions of
subsection 4-1.4, paragraph b., the Township Manager shall fix a time
and place no less than three nor more than 14 days after the request is
made (such time limited may be abbreviated or extended by mutual
consent). All parties in interest shall be given a right to appear in
person, or otherwise (such as by filing of affidavits, written responses,
etc.), and give testimony. The rules of evidence prevailing in the courts
shall not be controlling in hearings before the Township Manager, or
such person as he may designate to hold this hearing.
b. Findings; order to comply; authority to remedy.
§ 4-1.4 § 4-1.5
1:110
§ 4-1.6. Assessment of costs. [Ord. No. 0-9-74; 1967 Code § 47A-6]
1. If, after such notice and hearing, the Township Manager or his
designee determines that the applicant or licensee has breached
and/or is in default of any term(s) and condition(s) as specified in
his permit and/or license, he shall so state in writing his findings of
fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to
be served upon the applicant or licensee, and any party in interest,
an order:
(a) Requiring the correction of the breach or the curing of the
default within such time period as he deems reasonable; and
(b) Where the applicant or licensee, or any party in interest fails to
comply with the above order, the Township Manager or his
designee may cause to be performed or effected the correction
or curing of the conditions and terms breached and/or in
default, and to make the appropriate assessment of costs
against such surety as posted.
2. The determination and order of the Township Manager shall be
construed as a final administrative action. Any person aggrieved by
any such order, may within 45 days after the service of such order,
bring an action for injunctive relief to restrain the Township
Manager or his designee from carrying out the provisions of the
order or for any other appropriate relief.
a. When required, by reason of the failure of any applicant or licensee to
correct or cure any breach and/or default in accordance with the terms
and conditions of the permit and/or license, the Township Manager or
his designee has expended any sum to correct or cure such breach and/
or default, the Township Manager shall then prepare a certified
statement of such costs expended. The original statement shall be filed
in the office of the Department of Community Development and a copy
served on all parties in interest, including the issuing authority.
b. Where a cash surety has been posted, the Township Manager, after
service of the certified statement of costs is effected, shall authorize the
Comptroller to issue a check and/or draft for reimbursement of such
costs to be made payable to the Township.
c. Where a surety bond, or other form of guaranty or surety other than
cash has been posted, the Township Manager shall, in addition to the
certified statement of costs, serve a written demand for payment within
30 days of such costs upon the surety, or guarantor or such other party
in interest responsible for payment. A copy of the certified statement of
costs and demand for payment shall also be served upon the applicant
or licensee.
d. Where the assessed cost is in excess of the surety posted, the Township
Manager shall so specify in his written notice; and he shall make a
§ 4-1.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-1.6
1:111
§ 4-1.7. Release of security. [Ord. No. 0-9-74; 1967 Code § 47A-7]
request for such additional amount from the applicant or licensee in
the same manner as provided in paragraph c. hereof. Failure of the
applicant or licensee to make the payment within 30 days from receipt
of notice of an additional amount due shall, in the event legal process is
necessary to collect such sum, be liable for reasonable attorney's fees
and court costs as enumerated in paragraph e. hereof.
e. Where the Township Manager is required to institute legal process
because of the failure of any applicant, licensee, surety, guarantor and
any other party in interest to make payment of costs determined to be
lawfully due hereunder, the applicant, licensee, surety, guarantor or
other party in interest shall, in addition to such assessed costs,
reimburse the Township for reasonable attorney's fees and court costs,
notwithstanding that such attorney's fees and court costs may be in
excess of the principal amount of the surety posted.
a. Upon compliance with the terms and conditions set forth in the permit
and/or license, the applicant and/or licensee shall serve written notice
of such compliance upon the Township Manager, requesting return or
cancellation of the security posted. The Township Manager, within 14
days, after receipt of notice, shall cause a review of the permit and/or
license:
1. If the Township Manager determines that full compliance has been
made, he shall refund or cause the security posted to be canceled.
2. If the Township Manager determines that there is only partial
compliance, he shall refund or authorize cancellation of that
portion of the security posted, which shall leave an amount
sufficient to assure correction and/or completion of those terms
and conditions remaining to be met.
3. If the Township Manager determines that there has not been
compliance as represented, he shall not refund or cancel any of the
security posted.
4. All determinations required to be made by the Township Manager
pursuant to paragraph a,2. and a,3. hereof shall be made in writing
and served on the applicant or licensee. In the event that the
Township Manager shall fail to post for mailing his written
determination by the 14th day as required hereunder (or in the
alternative to effect personal service within that period of time) the
security posted shall be refunded and/or canceled.
b. Notwithstanding any of the above provisions, the Township Manager
may at any time, in his discretion and without notice, refund and/or
cancel all or part of any security posted, where in his judgment total
and/or partial compliance with the terms and conditions of the permit
and/or license have been met.
§ 4-1.6 § 4-1.7
1:112
§ 4-1.8. Notices. [Ord. No. 0-9-74; 1967 Code § 47A-8]
All notices required to be given hereunder, unless otherwise specifically
stated to the contrary, shall be in writing and shall be served by certified
mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service.
§ 4-1.9. Purpose and intent; scope. [Ord. No. 0-9-74; 1967 Code
§ 47A-9]
§ 4-2. PEDDLERS, HAWKERS, VENDORS AND SEASONAL SALES
VENDORS.17
§ 4-2.1. License and compliance required. [Ord. No. 4-13-59; 1967
Code § 47-1; Ord. No. 0.20.97 § 1]
c. The Township Manager's written communication shall constitute the
final administrative determination, appeal from which shall be taken by
any applicant and/or licensee within 45 days from the date of receipt
and/or service of the Township Manager's decision.
a. The purpose of this section is to establish proceedings and remedies
supplemental to existing ordinances and ordinances to be adopted by
the Township concerning the issuance of permits and licenses within
the Township in order to create a reasonable enforcement procedure to
assure compliance with those conditions and terms set by the Township
required to be met by any applicant or licensee at and/or after issuance
of the permit or license.
b. The terms and provisions of this section shall not be interpreted to limit,
amend, bar, abrogate or repeal any right, remedy, procedure, duty and/
or responsibility established in any other ordinance presently or
hereafter adopted concerning the issuance of licenses and permits
within the Township; nor are the terms and provisions of this section
intended to bar or limit any issuing authority of the Township to
institute proceedings, or to take such other action as may be permitted
for the revocation or suspension of any license or permit predicated
upon the failure of any applicant or licensee to comply with any of the
terms and conditions of his permit and/or license.
c. Likewise, the terms and provisions of this section shall not be
interpreted to limit, bar, substitute or foreclose to any applicant or
licensee any other statutory or Municipal right or appeal permitted.
17.Editor's Note: Section 3 of Ordinance No. 0.4.91 states: The purpose and intent of this
section is to establish regulations relative to seasonal sales of goods and merchandise
during specific "Seasonal" time periods defined as Christmas, Valentine's Day, Easter and
Mother's Day, and to prohibit Seasonal Sales in all residential zoned classifications as set
forth in the Zoning Code of the Township of Deptford by Ordinance 0.1.89 adopted May
11, 1989. In addition, this ordinance prohibits stationary vendors from selling
merchandise outdoors without receiving required planning/zoning approvals and clarifies
the application/approval process.
§ 4-1.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-2.1
1:113
§ 4-2.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 4-13-59; 1967 Code § 47-2; Ord. No.
0.4.91 §§ 4, 5; Ord. No. 0.6.92 § 2]
As used in this section:
ITINERANT MERCHANTS, TRANSIENT VENDORS AND SALESMEN —
And be defined in the category of peddler, hawker, vendor, solicitor or
canvasser, as set forth in this subsection.
MERCHANDISE (PEDDLER, HAWKER, VENDOR, SOLICITOR OR
CANVASSER) — And include all goods, wares, foods, fruits, vegetables,
farm products, books, magazines, periodicals, arts, crafts and all kinds of
articles of personal property for domestic use.
MERCHANDISE (SEASONAL SALES) — Includes Christmas trees,
Christmas wreaths, Christmas grave blankets, Christmas arts and crafts,
Valentine's Day flowers, Easter flowers, Easter baskets, Mother's Day
flowers, Mother's Day baskets and other articles of arts and crafts related
to the seasonal sales activity.
NONPROFIT SEASONAL SALES VENDOR — Any nonprofit religious,
charitable, educational, civic or veteran organization, society, association,
service, club, volunteer first aid organization or fire company which is
located within and services the Township; and sells goods and merchandise
at a specific location either owned by the nonprofit organization or at
a location not owned by the nonprofit organization, having the written
consent of the owners of property to conduct seasonal sales activities within
the Township.
PEDDLER, HAWKER AND VENDOR — And include any person, whether
a resident of the Township or not, traveling either by foot, vehicle or any
other type of conveyance, who goes from house to house, from place to
place, or from street to street, conveying or transporting goods, wares or
a. It shall be unlawful for any peddler, hawker, vendor, canvasser, seasonal
sales vendor or solicitor as hereinafter defined to engage in such
activity within the Township without first obtaining a license therefor in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
b. It shall be unlawful for any peddler, hawker, vendor, canvasser, seasonal
sales vendor or solicitor as hereinafter defined to operate from any
particular location, unless such location complies with all the
requirements of the Uniform Development Ordinances and all
necessary approvals have been granted for such location by the
Planning Board and/or Zoning Board of Adjustment.
c. Compliance with the requirements of the Uniform Development
Ordinance and approval from the Planning Board and/or Zoning Board
of Adjustment shall not be required of any bona fide charitable or
religious nonprofit organization located within the Township of
Deptford which sells products under this section for fund-raising for its
own use, and conducts such sales on property it owns in the Township
of Deptford which already has parking, lighting and sanitary facilities.
§ 4-2.1 § 4-2.2
1:114
merchandise and offering or exposing the same for sale, or making sales
and delivering articles to purchasers.
PERSON — And include any partnerships, partner, corporation or
corporations, or persons, except as defined in subsection 4-2.11, paragraph
c. hereinafter.
SEASONAL SALES TIME PERIOD — A specific time period to sell goods
and/or merchandise as follows:
§ 4-2.3. Application for peddler, hawker, vendor, solicitor and
canvasser's license. [Ord. No. 4-13-59; 1967 Code § 47-3; Ord. No.
0.4.91 §§ 7, 8]
a. CHRISTMAS — A time period not to exceed 30 days, including
Christmas Day and 29 days preceding Christmas Day.
b. EASTER — A time period not to exceed five days, including Easter and
the four days preceding Easter.
c. MOTHER'S DAY — A time period not to exceed five days, including
Mother's Day and the four days preceding Mother's Day.
d. VALENTINE'S DAY — A time period not to exceed five days, including
Valentine's Day, and the four days preceding Valentine's Day.
SEASONAL SALES VENDOR — A person who sells goods and/or
merchandise for a specified, limited purpose and period of time at a
location owned by and/or leased by the applicant.
SOLICITOR OR CANVASSER — And include any person, whether a
resident of the Township or not, who goes from house to house, from
place to place or from street to street, soliciting or taking or attempting
to take orders for the sale of services, goods, wares or merchandise, or
personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery or for
services to be performed in the future, whether or not such individual
has, carries, or exposes for sale a sample of the subject for such order,
and whether or not he is collecting advance payments on such orders.
a. Applicants for a license under this section shall file with the
Department of Community Development and Inspection a sworn
application to be made in writing on a format to be furnished by the
Department which shall provide the following:
1. Name, address and telephone number of the organization (profit or
nonprofit) and/or business applying for a license under the
provisions of this section.
2. Name, address, telephone number and description of those
individuals to be employed by and engaged in peddling, hawking,
soliciting or canvassing.
3. The place or places of residence of the organization (profit or
nonprofit) and/or business applying for a license, as well as those
§ 4-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-2.3
1:115
individuals engaged by the organization and/or business in
conducting peddling, hawking, vending, soliciting and canvassing
activities.
4. Social security numbers and driver's license numbers of individuals
of the organization (profit or nonprofit) and/or business, engaged in
the activities of peddling, hawking, vending, soliciting and
canvassing.
5. Social security numbers and driver's license numbers of those
individuals engaged in peddling, hawking, vending, soliciting and
canvassing for the organization (profit or nonprofit) and/or
business applying for a license to conduct these activities.
6. A brief description of the nature of the business, the goods to be
sold and the name and address of the principal office of their
manufacturer as well as the name and address of the agent
designated to receive service of process in the State of New Jersey
of the organization (profit or nonprofit) and/or business applying
for a license under this section.
7. The length of time for which the right to do business is desired by
the organization (profit or nonprofit) and/or business applying for
the license.
8. A photograph of the individuals employed by the organization
(profit or nonprofit) and/or the business applying for a license,
taken within 60 days immediately prior to the filing of the
application.
9. The individuals employed by the organization (profit or nonprofit)
and/or business applying for a license shall be fingerprinted at the
request of the Chief of Police.
10. A statement as to whether or not the individuals employed by the
organization (profit or nonprofit) and/or business applying for a
license indicating whether or not those individuals have been
convicted of any crime, disorderly persons offense or violation of
any municipal ordinance, as well as describing the nature of the
events and the punishment or penalty assessed therefore.
11. Whether or not orders are to be solicited or taken for future
delivery of goods or performance of services by the organization
(profit or nonprofit) and/or business applying for a license.
12. The applicant being the organization (profit or nonprofit) and/or
business applying for a license shall list previous licenses issued by
the Township of Deptford as well as other municipalities wherein
licenses have been applied for and issued by those municipalities.
13. The time of soliciting, peddling, hawking, vending and canvassing
shall be between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
§ 4-2.3 § 4-2.4
1:116
§ 4-2.4. Application for seasonal sales vendor's license. [Ord. No.
0.4.91 § 9; Ord. No. 0.20.97 § III]
a. Applicants for a license under this subsection shall file a sworn
application with the Department of Community Development on a form
to be provided. Complete applications for seasonal sales license must
be submitted to the Department of Community Development 30 days
prior to the actual specified time period for conducting a seasonal sales
activity. An application determined to be incomplete upon review by the
Department of Community Development shall be returned to the
applicant. In addition, the following information shall be required:
1. Name, address and telephone number of the organization (profit or
nonprofit) and/or business applying for a license under the
provisions of this section.
2. Name, address, telephone number and description of those
individuals to be employed by and engaged in a seasonal sales
activity.
3. The block and lot location of the property to be utilized in
conducting a seasonal sales activity.
4. Social security numbers and driver's license numbers of individuals
of the organization (profit or nonprofit) and/or business, engaged in
the seasonal sales.
5. Social security numbers and driver's license numbers of individuals
engaged in seasonal sales for the organization (profit or nonprofit)
and/or business applying for a license to conduct the activities.
6. The length of time for which the right to do business is desired by
the organization (profit or nonprofit) and/or business applying for
the license as per subsection 4-2.2, which defines the seasonal
sales period.
7. A photograph of the individuals employed by the organization
(profit or nonprofit) and/or the business applying for a license,
taken within 60 days immediately prior to the filing of the
application.
8. The individuals employed by the organization (profit or nonprofit)
and/or business applying for a license shall be fingerprinted at the
request of the Chief of Police.
9. A statement as to whether or not the individuals employed by the
organization (profit or nonprofit) and/or business applying for a
license indicating whether or not those individuals have been
convicted of any crime, disorderly persons offense or violation of
any municipal ordinance, as well as describing the nature of the
events and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor.
§ 4-2.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-2.4
1:117
10. The applicant being the organization (profit or nonprofit) and/or
business applying for a license shall list previous licenses issued by
the Township of Deptford as well as other municipalities wherein
licenses have been applied for and issued by those municipalities.
11. The time of seasonal sales shall be between the hours of 9:00 a.m.
and 9:00 p.m.
12. A property survey of the lot(s) to be prepared by a New Jersey
licensed professional engineer or surveyor. A hand-drawn sketch
plat may be substituted in lieu of a survey plat as determined by the
Department of Community Development. The purpose of the survey
plat and/or sketch plat is to determine if the proposed use of the
property location is sufficient for the intended purpose of
conducting seasonal sales. The following information shall be set
forth on the survey and/or sketch plan submitted:
(a) Location of and quantities of merchandise to be stored and
displayed on the lot(s).
(b) Location of on site parking, as well as off site parking
associated with the site location.
13. Location of curb cut access to indicate proper ingress and egress to
the site to evaluate and prevent traffic hazards, congestion or
excessive interference with normal traffic movements on adjacent
public streets.
14. Location of temporary signs in accordance with regulations set
forth in the Zoning Code of the Township of Deptford.
15. No temporary signs advertising the seasonal sales activity shall be
placed on any tree, telegraph, electric light or public utility pole or
upon rocks or other natural features located within the public rightof-
way. All temporary signs shall be located on the site.
16. No more than four temporary signs shall be erected. Temporary
signs shall not exceed six square feet in area nor exceed four feet in
height.
17. Temporary signs may not be erected prior to 48 hours of the
designated seasonal sales activity and must be removed within 48
hours after the time period stated and licensed for conducting a
seasonal sales activity.
18. No sign shall be erected that is of such character, form, shape or
color that it imitates or resembles any official traffic sign, signal or
device, or that has any characteristics which are likely to confuse
or dangerously distract the attention of the operator of a motor
vehicle on a public street.
19. Temporary signs shall be kept in a proper state of repair, in
accordance with the requirements of the Township's Building Code,
§ 4-2.4 § 4-2.4
1:118
§ 4-2.5. Investigation.
§ 4-2.6. Grounds for denial of a peddlers, hawkers, vendors,
solicitors, canvassers and seasonal sales vendors license. [Ord. No.
0.4.91]
Property Maintenance Code, and other pertinent regulations. Signs
which fall into such a state of disrepair as to become unsightly or
to pose a threat to public safety may be removed by the Township
at the owner's expense upon proper notification by the Township.
20. No temporary sign shall be erected within or project over the rightof-
way of any public street or sidewalk. No temporary signs placed
on the site shall be located in such a fashion which would affect the
site visibility of the motoring public as determined by the Chief of
Police or his designee.
21. The applicant shall submit with his application a statement as to
how the site shall be maintained during the designated time period,
as well as a statement indicating how trash, refuse and other
materials will be disposed of other than through normal solid waste
collection services provided by the Township of Deptford. All
debris, materials, trash, etc., shall be removed from the site within
48 hours following the expiration of the seasonal license issued by
the Township of Deptford.
22. A certification from the Deptford Township Tax Collector that all
taxes have been paid and are current.
23. A certification from the Zoning Officer stating that all requirements
of the Uniform Development Ordinance have been complied with
for the subject location and that all necessary approvals have been
granted for such location by the Planning Board and/or Zoning
Board of Adjustment.
b. Any nonprofit organization is required under this subsection to comply
with the application provisions as set forth in processing a license and
registration of those individuals employed by the organization to
conduct seasonal sales activities.
a. Upon receipt of such application, the original shall be referred to the
Chief of Police who shall cause to be made such investigation of the
applicant's business and moral character as he deems necessary for the
protection of the public welfare.
b. If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character or
business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the Chief of Police
shall endorse on such application his disapproval and his reasons for
the same and return the application to the Department of Community
Development, who shall notify the applicant that his application is
disapproved.
§ 4-2.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-2.6
1:119
§ 4-2.7. Issuance of license. [Ord. No. 4-13-59; 1967 Code § 47-4]
If, as a result of such investigation, the character and business
responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the Chief of
Police shall endorse his approval on the application, returning the
application to the Department of Community Development who shall, upon
payment of the prescribed license fee, execute and deliver to the applicant
his license. The Department of Community Development shall keep a record
of all licenses issued and of all complaints received, if any, concerning each
license.
§ 4-2.8. Fee. [Ord. No. 4-13-59; 1967 Code § 47-5; Ord. No. 0-7-80;
Ord. No. 0.4.91 § 11]
a. Failure to comply with application procedures and requirements as set
forth in subsection 4-2.3 and subsection 4-2.4 shall constitute a basis
for denial of a license.
b. Revocation and/or denial of a license for good cause by any municipality
shall constitute a basis for denial of a license.
c. Violation of any grounds set forth in subsection 4-2.11, "Revocation."
d. Disapproval by the Chief of Police pursuant to subsection 4-2.5 after his
review as to matters relating to the health, safety and welfare of the
Township of Deptford.
a. Registration fee. Any application for a peddler, hawker, vendor,
solicitor, canvasser and seasonal sales vendor shall be required to pay a
fee of $25 to the Department of Community Development to cover the
cost of processing the application and investigation of the facts stated
herein for a license, as well as each individual to be registered and
employed by the organization (profit or nonprofit) and/or business.
b. License fee. The Department of Community Development fee for the
issuance of a license hereunder shall be as follows:
1. Peddlers, hawkers, vendors, solicitors and canvassers license:
$100.
2. Seasonal sales vendor license: $300.
c. No registration or license fee shall be required from any charitable or
religious nonprofit organization which services the Township and which
are exempt from the payment of taxes under the regulations of the
Internal Revenue Service.
d. Any nonprofit organization must demonstrate that it has been a
nonprofit organization for a period of at least two continuous years as a
condition of being exempt from payment of registration and licensing
fees.
§ 4-2.6 § 4-2.9
1:120
§ 4-2.9. Exhibition of license. [Ord. No. 4-13-59; 1967 Code § 47-6]
All licenses issued must be worn in such a manner as to be readily visible
when engaged in the activities regulated herein.
§ 4-2.10. Duration of license. [Ord. No. 4-13-59; 1967 Code § 47-7;
Ord. No. 0.4.91 § 12]
§ 4-2.11. Revocation. [Ord. No. 4-13-59; 1967 Code § 47-8; Ord. No.
0.4.91 § 14]
Licenses issued under this section may be revoked by the Chief of Police
or his designee after reasonable notice and hearing for any of the following
causes:
a. Peddlers, hawkers, vendors, solicitors and canvassers. All licenses
issued under this section shall expire at the end of the calendar year in
which they are issued. Licenses shall not be transferable and shall be
surrendered after expiration before a renewal license can be issued,
subject to paragraph b. below.
b. Seasonal sales. A seasonal sales license issued shall be for a period of
time as set forth in subsection 4-2.2, "Definitions." A separate license
shall be applied for each seasonal sales activity, as well as applications
for registration of those individuals to be employed by an organization
(profit or nonprofit) and/or business. Licenses shall not be transferable
and shall be surrendered after expiration before a new license and/or
registration can be issued for each seasonal sales activity. Any activities
involving the sales of merchandise as defined under "Merchandise"
(seasonal sales) in this section shall be required to obtain a seasonal
sales license notwithstanding the issuance of a vendor's license prior to
the adoption of this section.
a. Misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for
the license and registration of individuals engaged by the organization
(profit or nonprofit) and/or business.
b. Misrepresentation or false statement made in the cause of carrying on
activities regulated herein.
c. Conviction of any crime or disorderly persons offense involving moral
turpitude.
d. Conducting the business of soliciting, canvassing, vending, hawking or
seasonal sales activities in an unlawful manner and in violation of any
provision of this section or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of
the peace or to constitute a menace to health, safety or general welfare
of the public.
e. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be cause for
immediate revocation of a license issued by the Township and the
revocation of a license shall be grounds for nonissuance of a license for
§ 4-2.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-2.11
1:121
§ 4-2.12. Appeal. [Ord. No. 4-13-59; 1967 Code § 47-9; Ord. No.
0.4.91 § 17]
Any person, organization (profit or nonprofit) and/or person aggrieved by
the actions of the Chief of Police and/or the Department of Community
Development in the denial of an application for a license as provided in this
section, or in the decision with reference to the revocation of a license as
provided in this section, shall have the right to appeal as set forth in the
Section 4-1 entitled "Permits and Licenses."
§ 4-2.13. Inspection of equipment. [Ord. No. 4-13-59; 1967 Code
§ 47-10]
The equipment used or employed by peddlers, hawkers and vendors of ice
cream, foods, beverages, confections and other related commodities shall
be maintained in a clean and sanitary manner and be subject to inspection
by the Board of Health and fully comply with the laws of the State of New
Jersey, the rules and regulations of the State Department of Health, the
ordinances of the Township and the rules and regulations of the Board of
Health.
§ 4-2.14. Exception. [Ord. No. 4-13-59; 1967 Code § 47-11]
a period not to exceed two years. Notice of hearing for revocation
of a license shall be given in writing setting forth the grounds of
complaint and the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be
served personally upon the licensee by means of a summons, or by mail,
postage pre-paid, to the licensee at the address given by the licensee in
making application at least five days prior to the date set for a hearing
in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-1.
a. This section shall not be construed to include the selling of any article
at wholesale to dealers in such articles, or the delivery of milk, eggs,
bread, newspapers or other such necessary and perishable articles of
food or merchandise of a type commonly delivered on a house-to-house
basis at intervals of less than one week.
b. Any veteran who holds a special license issued under the laws of the
State of New Jersey shall be exempt from securing a license or paying
the fee as provided herein, but shall be required to comply with all
other applicable parts of this section, and shall be required to register
with the Department of Community Development and obtain a permit
which will be issued by the Department of Community Development
upon proper identification and exhibition of such State license.
c. Nonprofit and other charitable organizations.
1. Any nonprofit religious, charitable, educational, civic or veterans'
organization, society, association, service or club, volunteer firstaid
or fire company, etc., desiring to solicit or have solicited in its
name money, donations of money or property, or financial
§ 4-2.11 § 4-2.14
1:122
§ 4-2.15. Prohibition of fixed location sales. [Ord. No. 0.4.91 § 6;
Ord. No. 0.6.92 § 3]
assistance of any kind or desiring to sell or distribute any item of
literature or merchandise for which a fee is charged or solicited at
any place or places within the Township for a charitable, religious,
patriotic or philanthropic purpose may file with the Department
of Community Development a request for exemption from the
provisions of subsections 4-2.3, 4-2.4, 4-2.5 and 4-2.8 of this
chapter.
2. A request for exemption shall be a sworn application filed on a form
provided by the Department of Community Development and shall
require the following information:
(a) Name and purpose of the cause for which the permit is sought.
(b) Name and address of organization.
(c) Period during which solicitation is to be carried on.
(d) Name and address of each agent or representative who will
conduct solicitations and the length of time that the agent or
representative has been employed or affiliated with such
organization, society, association or corporation.
(e) A statement that such organization, association, society,
corporation, etc., shall furnish, for all its members, agents or
representatives conducting solicitation, credentials in writing
stating the name of the organization, name of the agent and
duration and purpose of solicitation.
3. The Department of Community Development shall forward any
request for exemption to the Director of Public Safety who may, in
his discretion, exempt the applicant from the provisions of
subsections 4-2.3, 4-2.4, 4-2.5 and 4-2.8 of this chapter when, in his
opinion, such exemption does not adversely affect the health,
welfare and safety of the community.
4. Where the Director of Public Safety grants a request for exemption,
the Department of Community Development shall issue a permit
without charge to the organization, association or corporation to
solicit in the Township. Where the Director of Public Safety denies
a request for exemption, the organization, association or
corporation may proceed to apply for a license in accordance with
the provisions of subsections 4-2.3, 4-2.4, 4-2.3, 4-2.5 and 4-2.8.
5. Any nonprofit religious, charitable, educational, civic or veterans'
organization, society, association, service or club, volunteer firstaid
or fire company, etc., which is located in the Township is hereby
exempt from the provisions of this section.
§ 4-2.14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-2.15
1:123
§ 4-2.16. Penalty. [Ord. No. 4-13-59; 1967 Code § 47-12; Ord. No.
0.4.91 § 18]
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction, be liable to the penalty established in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
Each day that a violation shall exist shall be construed as a separate
violation.
§ 4-2.17. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 0.4.91 § 15]
It shall be the duty of any Police Officer of the Township to enforce the
provisions of this section and to require any persons seen peddling,
hawking, soliciting, canvassing or conducting seasonal sales, and who are
a. No peddler, hawker, canvasser, solicitor or vendor shall sell or offer for
sale to the general public any goods or merchandise, beverages or food
products from a fixed location utilizing a public cartway. In addition,
sale of merchandise from a fixed location is prohibited with the
exception of seasonal sales licensed under this section. A person shall
be deemed to be selling from a fixed location if such vendor remains at
a fixed location for a period of time of 15 minutes or longer, unless
extended as provided below.
b. The 15 minute time limitation is extended beyond 15 minutes for such
periods of time that customers or prospective customers are being
serviced by the vender wherein the customers or prospective customers
are:
1. Examining, viewing, handling, testing, pricing or returning, etc.,
the merchandise, and/or
2. Seeking information from the vendor, and/or
3. Making purchase or sale, and/or
4. Waiting to be attended by the vender.
5. The 15 minute time limitation is further extended for such time
following a sale or purchase that the vendor may need to replace or
replenish merchandise, to perform that which is necessary to clean,
straighten up the cart or its merchandise, etc., to secure the
proceeds of the sale; to file copies of receipts, and/or other such
acts that occur following a sale of such merchandise. However, the
total time allotted for acts following a sale under this paragraph
shall not exceed 10 minutes.
6. At the expiration of the 15 minutes plus the extended period as
provided above, the vendor shall move from such location to a
location at least 25 feet away. Such vendor cannot return to within
25 feet of such location for a period of at least one hour. No vendor
has a right to any particular location on the public right-of-way and
sidewalks.
§ 4-2.15 § 4-2.17
1:124
not known by such officer to be duly licensed, to produce his license as
required by this section.
§ 4-3. AMUSEMENT GAMES.
§ 4-3.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 4-13-70; Ord. No. 0-3-83; 1967 Code
§ 5-1; Ord. No. 0.8.90 § I]
As used in this section:
ARCADE — Any establishment which provides for five or more mechanical
amusement games.
BILLIARD PARLOR — Any establishment that contains five or more
commercial pool tables.
COMMERCIAL POOL TABLE — Any pool table, coin operated or not, which
may be operated by the public for entertainment or amusement for which a
charge is imposed for the use of the table.
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT GAME — Any machine which may be
operated by the public for entertainment or amusement, whether the
machine is coin operated or not, and whether or not it registers, scores or
tallies. Examples of "Mechanical Amusement Games" are pinball machines,
bowling machines, mechanical grab machines, Skee-ball machines,
pokerino machines, commercial pool tables, electronic, computer or other
similar games and devices, jukeboxes, etc. This enumeration is in-tended to
be typical and shall not be construed as exclusive.
PERSON — Any person, firm or corporation.
§ 4-3.2. License required; types of licenses. [Ord. No. 4-13-70; Ord.
No. 0-2-81; Ord. No. 0-3-83; Ord. No. 0-10-83; Ord. No. 0-20-83;
1967 Code § 5-2; Ord. No. 0.8.90 §§ 2-4; Ord. No. 0.8.93]
a. No person shall maintain, operate or possess in any store, building or
other place where the public is invited or where the public may enter, or
any building or other place where any club or organization meetings
are held, in the Township, any mechanical amusement games without
first obtaining a license therefor.
b. There shall be four types of licenses issued under the terms of this
section: a mechanical amusement game license; a commercial pool
table license; an arcade license; and a billiard parlor license.
1. The maximum number of arcade licenses to be issued within the
Township shall be nine. Each location shall be separately licensed.
2. Any combination of mechanical amusement games and commercial
pool tables which totals five or more shall require an arcade license
and/or a billiard parlor license. The label for such a license shall be
determined by the greater number of mechanical amusement
games/commercial pool tables, i.e.; two mechanical amusement
§ 4-2.17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-3.2
1:125
§ 4-3.3. License fees. [Ord. No. 0.8.90 § V]
The annual license fee shall be as follows:
games and three commercial pool tables would be classified as a
billiard parlor. Equal number of mechanical amusement games and
commercial pool tables shall be classified as an arcade.
3. There shall be no limit on mechanical amusement game licenses. A
"mechanical amusement game license" shall be defined as a license
for any business establishment which provides four or less
mechanical amusement games on or within the premises. A
separate license shall be required for each location.
c. Each license hereunder shall be considered an annual license issued for
a one-year period commencing April 1 and terminating on the last day
of March of the succeeding year. Any initial license or approval of
transfer shall be issued for the balance of the one-year period only. All
terms, conditions, restrictions and/or regulations imposed upon the
initial license shall be deemed to continue upon renewal unless
specially repealed, deleted or waived by the Township Council.
d. No license issued under this chapter shall be transferable without prior
approval of Township Council.
e. The Township Council's action in denying or withholding the issuance of
any license of an applicant seeking an initial license shall be deemed
final; provided however, that the applicant may petition the Township
Council for a hearing to reconsider the denial.
a. The annual fee for a mechanical amusement license and commercial
pool table license shall be $25.
b. The annual fee for an arcade license and a billiard parlor license shall
be $500.
c. In addition to the license fees set forth above, there shall be a machine
license fee as follows:
1. Each mechanical amusement game and commercial pool table
license not covered by the arcade license or billiard parlor license
shall be $75.
2. Mechanical amusement games and commercial pool tables covered
by the arcade license and billiard parlor license shall be as follows:
§ 4-3.2 § 4-3.3
1:126
§ 4-3.4. Application information; execution of consent to enter
form. [Ord. No. 4-13-70; Ord. No. 0-3-83; Ord. No. 0-20-83; 1967
Code § 5-4; Ord. No. 0.8.90 § VI]
Number of Games Fee
From the 1st to the 25th
mechanical amusement game
and/or commercial pool table,
each
$30
From the 26th to the 50th
mechanical amusement game
and/or commercial pool table,
each
$20
From 51st and over mechanical
amusement game and/or
commercial pooltable, each
$15
d. The annual license fee for such coin music, commonly called a
"jukebox" shall be $125.
e. All license fees required hereunder shall be payable in advance for the
calendar year in which the license is issued.
a. The Licensing Officer shall cause to be prepared the necessary forms of
application for license to maintain such mechanical amusement games,
which application shall state the name and address of the applicant; the
exact location for which the license is sought and where the mechanical
amusement game is to be installed, the kind or type and description of
each mechanical amusement game for which the license is sought; and
the name and address of the person owning each mechanical
amusement game. The applicant shall state on the application form
whether or not the applicant has been convicted of a crime or violation
of any Federal, State or local law. The applicant shall provide such other
information as the Township Council shall deem necessary and proper,
such as a description of the premises, the maximum number of persons
intended to be permitted within the premises, the manner of
supervision and such other conditions as may be related to the public's
health and safety.
b. A separate application shall be required for each store, building or
other place wherein the public is invited or may enter and where
mechanical amusement games are maintained, operated or possessed.
c. The license fee shall accompany each application filed, and, if the
application is denied, the license fee shall be returned to the applicant.
d. Consent to enter form. A consent to enter form shall be required to be
signed by the applicant, which shall permit the Police Department or
other duly authorized Township official to enter and inspect the
§ 4-3.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-3.4
1:127
§ 4-3.5. Application procedure; investigation. [Ord. No. 4-13-70;
Ord. No. 0-3-83; 1967 Code § 5-5]
§ 4-3.6. Revocation of license; hearings. [Ord. No. 4-13-70; Ord. No.
0-3-83; 1967 Code § 5-6]
premises to assure compliance with this section and the conditions of
the license.
e. Electrical inspection form. The applicant shall be required to complete
and sign an electrical inspection form. This form shall include the type
of electrical outlets, wiring, apparatus and equipment which the
applicant has installed or intends to install on the premises in order to
assure safe operation of all mechanical amusement games for which a
license is requested to be issued. The consent to enter form signed by
the applicant in accordance with paragraph b. hereof shall be deemed
permission by the applicant to the Township electrical or other subcode
officials to enter and inspect the premises to assure that the applicant
has complied with the appropriate electrical wiring and installation
necessary to assure the safe operation of the premises and of the
patrons using these mechanical amusement games.
a. The proprietor of the premises where the mechanical amusement game
is to be installed shall be the applicant for the license herein required.
The application must be signed by the applicant. Upon receipt of the
application, the Licensing Officer shall refer the same to the Chief of
Police. The Chief of Police or his designee shall make an investigation of
the premises and of the applicant to determine the truth of the facts set
forth in the application. The Licensing Officer, together with the
Electrical Subcode Official and such other officials of the Township that
he shall deem necessary, shall inspect the premises to determine
whether the premises comply with the existing fire and electrical code
regulations of the Township. The Chief of Police and the Licensing
Officer, upon completion of their inspection, shall attach to the
application their reports thereon in writing.
b. Upon receipt of the application and inspection reports, the Township
Council shall proceed with their consideration as to whether or not the
application shall be approved or disapproved. In the process of its
deliberation, the Township Council may, in its discretion, request
supplemental information, consistent with the terms and provisions of
this section, from the Chief of Police, Licensing Officer, the applicant or
any other official of the Township who may be needed to provide
information for the appropriate view of the application.
c. If the application is approved, the Township Council shall authorize the
Licensing Officer to issue the necessary license; provided, however,
that no application shall be considered for approval or license issued
unless proof of receipt and payment of a license fee or fees as herein
provided.
§ 4-3.4 § 4-3.6
1:128
§ 4-3.7. Substitution of games. [Ord. No. 4-13-70; Ord. No. 0-3-83;
1967 Code § 5-7]
Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the holder of the license
herein provided for from substituting a mechanical amusement game at
the location set forth in such license, provided that the holder give written
notice to the Licensing Officer setting forth the description of the game
removed and the description of the game substituted therefor.
§ 4-3.8. Transferability of license. [Ord. No. 4-13-70; Ord. No.
0-3-83; 1967 Code § 5-8]
Every license issued pursuant to the terms of this section shall apply only
to the person to whom it was granted and for the premises stated in the
application and on the license; the license shall not be transferable from
place to place, but, upon the approval of the Township Council of such
license transfer in writing, the license may be transferred from person to
person from the premises stated in the original application and license of
the transferor.
§ 4-3.9. Redemption games. [Ord. No. 0.8.90 § VII]
There shall be permitted in any arcade duly licensed herein for the use
of mechanical amusement games that, upon payment of a fee, permit a
patron to attempt to obtain a prize or tickets or tokens redeemable for a
prize, or such games that permit a patron to attempt to obtain a score or
result upon the basis of which a prize, ticket or token is awarded. These
type of games shall additionally be regulated by the New Jersey Division of
Alcoholic Beverage Control pursuant to N.J.A.C. 13:3-1 and shall be subject
to an additional application required by the Division.
a. Any time after the granting of a temporary or annual license, the
Township Council may exercise its discretion to revoke or suspend this
license for any willful false statement in the application. The license
may be revoked or suspended as well as in the event that the licensee
shall be convicted of any violation of this section or shall, individually or
through the licensee's servants, agents and/or employees, violate any
term or condition of operation.
b. Except as hereafter provided in paragraph c., prior to any suspension or
revocation of license, the Township Council shall serve the applicant
notice of its intent to suspend or revoke. Thereafter, the applicant shall
be afforded the right to a hearing pursuant to Section 4-1, Permits and
Licenses, of this chapter.
c. Suspensions without hearing. Notwithstanding the right to a hearing as
provided in paragraph b., the Township Manager may, if, in his opinion,
an immediate or substantial threat to the health or safety exists,
suspend the right of an applicant to operate. Thereafter, applicants
shall be permitted a hearing as provided in paragraph b.
§ 4-3.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-3.10
1:129
§ 4-3.10. Regulations and restrictions. [Ord. No. 4-13-70; Ord. No.
0-3-83; Ord. No. 0-20-83; Ord. No. 0.8.90 §§ VIII, IX, X]
a. Curfew. No person holding a license under the provisions of this section
shall knowingly permit any minor under the age of 18 years
unaccompanied or not within the custody and control of a parent or
guardian to remain on the premises after 11:00 p.m., prevailing time,
unless the minor is waiting for a person over the age of 18 years to
transport that minor from the premises.
b. Hours. The operation or playing of mechanical amusement games shall
not be permitted between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.,
prevailing time.
c. Other regulations and restrictions for arcades licensed under this
section:
1. There shall be no consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages
in, on, or around the licensed premises.
2. There shall be no smoking in the licensed premises. "NO
SMOKING" signs shall be posted within the premises in prominent
places.
3. No license shall be issued prior to an inspection by the Fire
Marshal and the Fire Marshal shall, prior to the operation of the
premises, certify that all relevant fire code provisions have been
satisfied.
4. The maximum number of persons permitted to occupy the licensed
premises shall be prominently posted and the applicant shall be
required to enforce compliance with this requirement.
5. Applicant and applicant's employees shall be required to maintain
and operate the premises in accordance with the Township
Ordinances and Codes, State and County Laws and Regulations.
6. Applicant shall be required to maintain and operate the premises in
such a manner so as the license premises and operation thereof
does not constitute a danger or threat to the public health, safety or
welfare, nor constitute a nuisance to the adjacent neighbors or the
public as defined in the Township Code or Title 26 of the Revised
Statutes of the State of New Jersey.
7. Applicant shall be required, as a condition of the license, to comply
with the conditions imposed by the Deptford Township Site Plan
Review Board.
8. All machines and games shall be located in such a position as to
provide adequate aisle space and avoid overcrowding.
9. The licensed premises shall be regularly cleaned and maintained.
§ 4-3.10 § 4-3.10
1:130
§ 4-3.11. Posting and display of license. [Ord. No. 4-13-70; Ord. No.
0-3-83; 1967 Code § 5-11]
A license granted pursuant to this section shall:
§ 4-3.12. Gambling prohibited; display of obscene materials. [Ord.
No. 4-13-70; Ord. No. 0-3-83; 1967 Code § 5-12; New]
10. The premises shall be supervised by an adult of at least 21 years of
age at all times. The employees designated by the applicant to
supervise shall be of good moral character and shall not have been
convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude. Applicant shall
submit to the Township Manager the name and addresses of all of
their employees, including such additional information concerning
the employees as to permit the Township to verify that these
employees qualify for employment pursuant to the terms of this
provision.
11. Township officials shall have the right of access at reasonable hours
to conduct inspection and investigations as may be necessary to
assure compliance with the conditions of the license. Applicant and
applicant's employees shall be required to cooperate with all
Township Officials charged with enforcing the conditions of the
license.
d. All of the conditions set for the arcade licenses in paragraph c. above
are equally applicable to billiard parlor licenses for the following
exception:
1. Smoking is permitted in the billiard parlor under this section
provided that no one under the legal age may smoke in the
premises. Signs prohibiting such use shall be prominently posted
and enforced by the applicant.
e. The Township Council may impose additional regulations and
restrictions on the conditions of license issuance and the operation of
premises which it deems necessary for the health, safety and welfare of
the community; provided, however, that no restriction may be imposed
prohibiting the sale and/or distribution of alcoholic beverages in a
facility which has been issued a valid plenary retail consumption license
and/or plenary retail distribution license.
a. Be posted in a conspicuous place at the location for which the license
was granted.
b. Show the name and post office address of the licensee.
c. State a description of each (type and kind) and every mechanical
amusement game for which the license was issued.
d. State that only those mechanical amusement games enumerated on the
face of the license are licensed by the Township.
§ 4-3.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-3.12
1:131
§ 4-3.13. Expiration and renewal of license. [Ord. No. 4-13-70; Ord.
No. 0-3-83; 1967 Code § 5-13]
a. No licensee shall permit any mechanical amusement game such as a
"blackjack" or other such gambling amusement device to be operated
on the premises, except as otherwise provided by law; likewise any
person who shall use or permit to be used this type of machine or any of
the other mechanical amusement games license hereunder for the
purpose of gambling shall be guilty of a violation of this section and
shall be penalized therefor as provided herein. The Township Council
may in its discretion revoke the license or licenses for any violation of
this subsection permitted on the premises.
b. Amusement devices or games displaying obscene subject matter or
materials are prohibited. Since there is no minimum age for entry into a
licensed premises, and since the public policy of this State as set forth
in N.J.S.A. 2C:34-3 is to prohibit the display or distribution of materials
considered "obscene" as defined by statute, therefor, no licensee shall
permit any mechanical amusement game or other such amusement
device to be operated on the premises which game or device display
subject matter or material that would be defined pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2C:34-3 as "obscene material" or the display of materials or matter
depicting or constituting actions of obscenity. Likewise, any person who
shall use or permit to be used this type of game or device in violation of
this paragraph shall be guilty of a violation of this section and shall be
penalized therefore as provided herein. The Township Council may, in
its discretion, revoke the license of a licensee for any violation of this
subsection permitted on the premises.
a. Upon the enactment of this section, all new license or license renewal
shall be for the amusement game year. The amusement game year shall
be deemed to commence on the first day of April of each year and
terminate on midnight on the last day of March of the succeeding year.
b. All persons, firms, associations, partnership or corporations desiring to
make application for renewal of their current license or application for
a new license shall submit such application no sooner than January 1, of
the preceding year or not later than February 15, preceding the April 1
commencement date of the amusement game year; provided, however,
that the Township Council may accept applications filed subsequent to
February 15, upon the applicant's demonstrating good cause as to why
the application was not submitted between January 1 and February 15.
c. License renewals. All applicants for renewal of licenses shall pay the
application license fees pursuant to the current application fee
schedule.
d. Any license issued subsequent to March 1 of any amusement game year
shall likewise expire at 12:00 midnight of the last day of February next
succeeding, and the application and license fees shall be in like amount
as that charged for the full amusement game year.
§ 4-3.12 § 4-3.13
1:132
§ 4-3.14. License and other requirements of nonprofit, charitable,
religious and other such organizations.
§ 4-3.15. Purpose. [Ord. No. 4-13-70; Ord. No. 0-3-83; 1967 Code
§ 5-15]
The purpose of this section is to license those mechanical amusement
games which are operated for the purpose of making a profit and for their
regulation and control.
§ 4-3.16. Violations and penalties. [New]
Every person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this section,
shall be subject to the General Penalty established in Section 1-5 of this
Code.
§ 4-4. TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES.
§ 4-4.1. Title. [Ord. No. 8-10-70; Ord. No. 0-2-73; Ord. No. 0-1-74;
Ord. No. 0-32-74; 1967 Code § 71-1; Ord. No. 0.17.89 § 1]
This section is created pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:16-1 et seq. and shall be
known as the Deptford Township Taxicab and Limousine Regulations.
§ 4-4.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 8-10-70; Ord. No. 0-2-73; Ord. No.
0-1-74; Ord. No. 0-32-74; 1967 Code § 71-2; Ord. No. 0.7.90 § 1]
As used in this section:
CRUISING — The practice of driving about the streets of the Township
within a taxicab so as to solicit passengers or to bring the presence of the
taxicab to the attention of prospective passengers. A taxicab driving along
the streets of this Township for any purpose other than while transporting
a passenger, going to a definite designation by the most direct route in
e. The Township Council may withhold issuance or renewal of any license
for the violation of any of the terms of this section. Prior to withholding
of license for any applicant seeking renewal, the Township Council shall
serve that applicant notice of its intent not to renew which notice shall
include the reasons therefor. Thereafter, the applicant for renewal shall
be afforded the right to a hearing pursuant to Section 4-1, Permits and
Licenses, of this chapter.
a. Nonprofit, charitable or religious organizations or other such
organizations who seek a license other than for an arcade shall not be
required to pay any application or license fee for any amusement game
year. However, all such organizations shall be required to comply with
all other terms and conditions of this section, including the obligation to
submit the appropriate application information and comply with the
application procedure. There shall be no more than four such machines
permitted in any one building or location.
§ 4-3.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-4.2
1:133
response to a call for a taxicab by a prospective passenger, or returning by
the most direct route to the taxicab's home terminus after discharging a
passenger, or going to or from the terminus to the driver's home by the most
direct route, shall be prima facie evidence of "cruising."
DRIVER — Any person who drives a taxicab or limousine within this
Township.
LICENSED — Licensed in accordance with the appropriate subsections of
this section.
LIMOUSINE — Any automobile or motorcar engaged in the business of
carrying passengers for hire which is held out, announced or advertised
to operate or run or which is operated or run over any of the streets
or public highways of this State, and which is hired by charter or for
a particular contract, or by the day or hour or other fixed period, or
to transport passengers to a specified place or places, or which charges
a fare or price agreed upon in advance between the operator and the
passenger, provided that the term "limousine" shall not include taxicabs,
hotel buses or buses employed solely in transporting schoolchildren or
teachers or autobuses which are subject to preemptive jurisdiction of the
New Jersey Department of Transportation and/or Board of Public Utilities
and/or engage in interstate commerce in which Federal or State law
preempts municipal regulation.
OPERATION OF THE TAXICAB — Consist of transporting in such taxicab
one or more persons for hire along any of the streets in this Township,
accepting a passenger to be transported for hire within this Township or
from a point within the Township to a point outside of the Township limits,
or discharging a passenger transported for hire from a point outside of the
Township limits to a point within the Township limits, and shall be deemed
to be the operation of a taxicab within the meaning thereof. The operation
of a taxicab in any of the above-described manners by one other than the
owner shall be deemed operation by the owner thereof as well as by the
person actually driving. The transportation of any person other than the
owner or driver in any motor vehicle bearing a sign therein or thereon
using the words "taxi," "taxicab" or "cab" shall be prima facie evidence of
operation.
OWNER — Any person, corporation or association whose name or title to
any taxicab or limousine is registered within the New Jersey Department
of Motor Vehicles or which appears in such records to be the conditional
vendee or lessee thereof.
STREET — Any street, avenue, park, parkway, highway or other public
roadway.
TAXICAB — Any automobile or motorcar, commonly called "taxi," engaged
in the business of carrying passengers for hire, which is held out,
announced or advertised to operate or run, or which is operated or run, over
any of the streets within the Township, and which accepts passengers for
transportation from points or places to points or places within or without
the Township, provided that the term "taxicab" shall not include limousines,
§ 4-4.2 § 4-4.2
1:134
autobuses, public deliveries, jitneys and other such vehicles which are hired
by charter or for a particular contract agreed upon in advance, or such
public conveyance as are by law subject to State and/or Federal regulation
exclusively.
§ 4-4.3. License required. [Ord. No. 8-10-70; Ord. 0-2-73; Ord. No.
0-1-74; Ord. No. 0-32-74; 1967 Code § 71-3]
From and after the effective date of this section, no person shall pick up for
hire any person for any taxicab or limousine in the Township unless both the
vehicle and driver thereof are licensed pursuant to the terms of this section
and conform to all provisions thereof.
§ 4-4.4. Classes of licenses. [Ord. No. 8-10-70; Ord. No. 0-2-73; Ord.
No. 0-1-74; Ord. No. 0-32-74; 1967 Code § 71-4]
§ 4-4.5. Owner's license. [Ord. No. 8-10-70; Ord. No. 0-2-73; Ord.
No. 0-1-74; Ord. No. 0-32-74; 1967 Code § 71-5; Ord. No. 0.7.90 § 2]
A taxicab or limousine owner's license shall entitle the vehicle therein
described to be operated in this Township by a driver duly licensed
hereunder until the license either expires or is surrendered, suspended
or revoked and the license shall not be transferable. Renewals of these
licenses shall be issued in a manner prescribed in Subsection 4-4.8.
§ 4-4.6. Driver's license. [Ord. No. 8-10-70; Ord. No. 0-2-73; Ord.
No. 0-1-74; Ord. No. 0-32-74; 1967 Code § 71-6; Ord. No. 0.7.90 § 2]
A taxicab or limousine driver's license shall entitle the person named
therein to operate within this Township any taxicab or limousine duly
licensed hereunder until the license either expires or is surrendered,
suspended or revoked and the license shall not be transferable. Renewals of
these licenses shall be issued in a manner prescribed in Section 4-4.8.
§ 4-4.7. Application for owner's license. [Ord. No. 8-10-70; Ord. No.
0-2-73; Ord. No. 0-1-74; Ord. No. 0-32-74; 1967 Code § 71-7; Ord.
No. 0.17.89 § 2; Ord. No. 0.7.90 § 3]
a. There are hereby established two classes of taxicab licenses, to be
known as "taxicab driver's licenses" and "taxicab owner's licenses"
respectively.
b. There are hereby established two classes of limousine licenses, to be
known as "limousine driver's licenses" and "limousine owner's licenses"
respectively.
a. Taxicab and limousine owners licenses shall be issued only to the
following who have satisfied all the requirements of this section and
have submitted an application containing the following information:
§ 4-4.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-4.7
1:135
1. Name, business address, home address, business telephone
number, residence telephone number, and age, of an individual
owner or of all partners, and if a corporation, the State of
Incorporation, name, business address, business telephone,
officers, directors, manager, and stockholders, owning more than
10% of the stock of the corporation.
2. For each vehicle to be licensed, the name, address and telephone
number of the insurance agent and the insurance company that will
provide the required insurance coverage.
3. For each vehicle to be licensed, the name of the manufacturer, body
type, year, serial number, color, bill of sale number, State
registration number, and license number, if any.
4. For each individual owner or partner, and in cases where a
corporation is the applicant, its president, manager, and each
stockholder holding 10% or more of the capital stock of such
corporation, a statement whether or not such persons have been
convicted of a crime and, if so, the nature of the offense, where
convicted and the date of each such conviction.
5. Each application shall be accompanied by a certificate of insurance
from a company licensed to do business in the State of New Jersey,
showing evidence of insurance for each vehicle to be licensed in the
amount and type coverage required by this section. It shall refer to
the vehicle to be insured by make, year and serial number.
6. The names and addresses of two responsible property owners of
the Township as references.
b. All applications for taxicab owner's licenses shall be filed with the
Office of Licensing and Inspection, who shall submit the applications to
the Township Council for their consideration. The Township Council
shall take action on the applications submitted by the Office of
Licensing and Inspection within 30 days of their receipt of the
applications from the Office of Licensing and Inspection. Township
Council may take up to an additional 30 days provided such additional
time does not result in a license expiring in advance of the
consideration of the new license.
c. All applications for limousine owner's licenses shall be filed with the
Office of Licensing and Inspection. The applications shall be in a form
set forth above in paragraph a. The Office of Licensing and Inspection
shall issue such license after the applicant has satisfactorily completed
the application and has also satisfactorily complied with the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 48:16-13 to 48:16-22. The certificate for license shall recite
the name of the insurance company, the policy number, and date of
expiration of the policy or bond, a description of every autocab,
limousine, or delivery service insured thereunder and the registration
number of same. The duplicate certificate shall be filed with the
Division of Motor Vehicles before any such car is registered as an
§ 4-4.7 § 4-4.7
1:136
§ 4-4.8. Issuance and expiration of licenses. [Ord. No. 8-10-70; Ord.
No. 0-2-73; Ord. No. 0-1-74; Ord. No. 0-32-74; 1967 Code § 71-8;
Ord. No. 0.7.90 § 4]
All licenses to be issued under the provisions of this section shall be issued
in the name of the Township and under the Office of Licensing and
Inspection, and all licenses issued hereunder shall expire January 1 next
succeeding the date thereof unless sooner suspended or revoked.
All applications under this section shall be submitted no later than 30 days
in advance of January 1st to be considered by Township Council.
§ 4-4.9. Number of licenses. [1967 Code § 71-9; Ord. No. 0-17-89
§ 3; Ord. No. 0.7.90 § 5]
Provided that the applications submitted are compliant with the Township
regulations, there shall be no limit to the number of limousine or taxicab
licenses issued by the Township.
§ 4-4.10. Insurance required. [Ord. No. 8-10-70; Ord. No. 0-2-73;
Ord. No. 0-1-74; Ord. No. 0-32-74; 1967 Code § 71-10; Ord. 0.17.89
§ 4]
§ 4-4.11. Power of Attorney. [Ord. No. 8-10-70; Ord. No. 0-2-73; Ord.
No. 0-1-74; Ord. No. 0-32-74; 1967 Code § 71-11; Ord. No. 0.7.90
§ 6]
No taxicab or limousine license shall be issued until the applicant therefor
shall have delivered to the Office of Licensing and Inspection, concurrently
with the filing of the insurance policy referred to in subsection 4-4.10
hereof, a power of attorney executed by the applicant wherein and whereby
the applicant shall appoint the Chief Financial Officer his, her or its true
and lawful attorney for the purpose of acknowledging service of any process
out of a court of competent jurisdiction to be served against the insured by
virtue of the indemnity granted under the insurance policy filed. Any license
for a taxicab or limousine issued upon any such application shall continue
autocab, limousine, or delivery service. The original certificate shall be
posted in a conspicuous place within the autocab, limousine, or delivery
service.
a. No taxicab shall be licensed until an insurance policy or certificate in
lieu thereof has been filed with the Office of Licensing and Inspection as
provided for taxicabs and autocabs pursuant to the provisions N.J.S.A.
40:16-1 to 40:16-22 inclusive, together with any amendments or
supplements adopted or hereafter adopted relative thereto.
b. No applicant for a limousine owner's license shall be licensed until an
insurance policy or certificate in lieu thereof required by N.J.S.A.
48:16-14 covering the limousine to be licensed is filed with the Office of
Licensing and Inspection.
§ 4-4.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-4.11
1:137
effective and the operation of any taxicab or limousine thereunder shall be
permitted only so long as the power of attorney shall remain in effect and
unrevoked.
§ 4-4.12. Qualifications for driver's license; application
requirements. [Ord. No. 8-10-70; Ord. No. 0-2-73; Ord. No. 0-1-74;
Ord. No. 0-32-74; 1967 Code § 71-12; Ord. No. 0-17-89 § 5; Ord. No.
0.7.90 § 7]
a. Every taxicab driver or limousine driver's license so issued shall be
revoked upon the conviction of two moving violations within the last
two years. In addition, no license shall be issued to a person convicted
within the past five years of reckless driving, leaving the scene of an
accident, operating a motor vehicle under the influence of alcohol or
drugs, refusal to take a breathylizer test or speeding in excess of 25
miles of the lawful speed limit.
b. Each applicant for a taxicab or limousine driver's license shall submit a
certificate from a licensed physician of the State of New Jersey, at the
applicant's expense, certifying that the applicant has been examined
within the preceding 30 days and that he has no infirmity of body or
mind which might render him unfit for the safe operation of a taxicab or
limousine.
c. Each applicant for a taxicab or limousine driver's license shall obtain
from the Police Department of the Township an affidavit from an
appropriate officer of the Police Department to the effect that the
applicant is of good moral character and that he has sufficient
knowledge of the traffic regulations and geography of the Township.
d. Each applicant must furnish with the application for such driver's
license a recent photograph of himself, three inches in length and four
inches in height, in duplicate.
e. Each applicant must submit the names and addresses of two
responsible property owners of the Township as references.
f. Every license so issued shall be revoked upon conviction of two
violations of the State Motor Vehicles Statute.
g. All changes of residence on the part of the holder of any taxicab or
limousine driver's license issued under this section shall be reported in
writing to the Township Council through the Office of Licensing and
Inspection and be directed to the Police Department of the Township.
h. No license shall be issued in the event that it is determined that the
applications contain a materially false statement.
i. Failure to meet any of the qualification set forth in subsection shall
result in a denial of the license.
§ 4-4.11 § 4-4.13
1:138
§ 4-4.13. Suspensions and revocations. [Ord. No. 8-10-70; Ord. No.
0-2-73; Ord. No. 0-1-74; Ord. No. 0-32-74; 1967 Code § 71-13; Ord.
No. 0-17-89 § 6]
Any license granted under this section may be revoked or suspended at
any time during the term thereof for cause. Prior to any such revocation
or suspension, the licensee shall be afforded a hearing before the Township
Council. Prior to any suspension or revocation, the licensee shall be
forwarded by certified mail at the address set forth on the application, a
notice of proposed suspension or revocation. In the event that the licensee
does not request, in writing, a hearing within seven days of his receipt of
that notice then they shall be deemed to have waived such hearing.
§ 4-4.14. Violations and penalties. [Ord. No. 0-17-89 § 7]
Every person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this section
shall be liable to the General Penalty established in Section 1-5 of this Code.
§ 4-4.15. License fees. [Ord. No. 8-10-70; Ord. No. 0-2-73; Ord. No.
0-1-74; Ord. No. 0-32-74; 1967 Code § 71-15; Ord. No. 0-17-89 § 8]
a. Taxicabs.
1. The annual taxicab fee shall be $100 and $50 for each additional
taxicab under the license. The license shall be effective for a period
from January 1 to December 31 of the calendar year or part thereof.
2. The annual taxicab driver's license fees shall be $25 and the license
shall be effective for a period from January 1 to December 31 for
each calendar year or part thereof.
b. Limousine.
1. The annual limousine license fee shall be $100 for the first
limousine to be covered by the limousine license and $50 for each
additional limousine under the license. The license shall be
effective for a period from January 1 to December 31 of each
calendar year or part thereof.
2. The annual limousine driver's license fee shall be $25 and the
license shall be effective for a period from January 1 to December
31 of each calendar year or part thereof.
c. The fees herein fixed for issuance of such licenses or imposed for costs
of administration and no license shall be issued according to the
provisions of this chapter until fees prescribed by this chapter are paid.
All licenses are required to be stamped by the Township and a stamped
license shall be prima facie evidence of payment of the fees described
herein.
§ 4-4.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-4.16
1:139
§ 4-4.16. Transfer of license. [Ord. No. 8-10-70; Ord. No. 0-2-73;
Ord. No. 0-1-74; Ord. No. 0-32-74; 1967 Code § 71-16]
No license shall be sold, assigned, mortgaged or otherwise transferred.
§ 4-4.17. Rate of fare. [Ord. No. 8-10-70; Ord. No. 0-2-73; Ord. No.
0-1-74; Ord. No. 0-32-74; Ord. No. 0-19-77; 1967 Code § 71-17; Ord.
No. 0-17-89 § 9]
§ 4-4.18. Identification required; condition of vehicle. [Ord. No.
8-10-70; Ord. No. 0-2-73; Ord. No. 0-1-74; Ord. No. 0-32-74; 1967
Code § 71-18]
§ 4-4.19. Parking restrictions. [Ord. No. 8-10-70; Ord. No. 0-2-73;
Ord. No. 0-1-74; Ord. No. 0-32-74; 1967 Code § 71-19]
No such taxicab shall be permitted to park in the Township except in those
spaces in the Township designated by the Township Council marked "taxi
a. Taxicabs.
1. The rate of fare to be charged within the Township limits of the
Township of Deptford and surrounding limits shall be posted so that
it is conspicuously seen by any passenger in any part of the taxicab.
2. Every driver of such taxicab shall have the right to demand
payment of legal fare in advance and may refuse employment
unless so prepaid, but no driver of such vehicle shall otherwise
refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person or persons upon
request anywhere in the Township unless previously engaged or
unable to do so. No driver of any such taxicab shall carry any other
person other than the first passenger employing him without the
consent of the passenger.
b. Limousines.
1. The Township of Deptford does not set minimum fare rates for
limousines operated within the Township.
a. There shall also be affixed in every taxicab and limousine, in such
manner that the same can be conveniently read by any person therein, a
card at least three inches in height by at least five inches in length,
containing the name of the owner, the license number of the vehicle and
the year of issuance, and also a photograph of the licensed driver with
his license number.
b. Every taxicab so licensed shall have painted on both sides thereof the
word "taxi" or "cab" in letters at least three inches high; or the name of
the operating owner containing the word "taxi" or "cab" or "taxicab."
c. Each limousine so licensed shall be painted a dark somber color and
maintained at all times in a neat fashion.
§ 4-4.16 § 4-4.19
1:140
stand," or at such other places off the public streets as may hereinafter be
approved by resolution of the Township Council.
§ 4-4.20. Solicitation of business. [Ord. No. 8-10-70; Ord. No.
0-2-73; Ord. No. 0-1-74; Ord. No. 0-32-74; 1967 Code § 71-20]
§ 4-4.21. Receipt and discharge of passengers. [Ord. No. 8-10-70;
Ord. No. 0-2-73; Ord. No. 0-1-74; Ord. No. 0-32-74; 1967 Code
§ 71-21]
Drivers of taxicabs or limousines shall not receive or discharge passengers
in the roadway, but shall pull up to the righthand sidewalk as nearly as
possible or, in the absence of a sidewalk, to the extreme right-hand side of
the road and there receive or discharge passengers, except upon one-way
streets where passengers may be discharged on either the right- or lefthand
sidewalk or side of the roadway in the absence of a sidewalk.
§ 4-4.22. Minimum use of vehicles. [Ord. No. 8-10-70; Ord. No.
0-2-73; Ord. No. 0-1-74; Ord. No. 0-32-74; 1967 Code § 71-22]
Any owner licensed to operate any given number of cabs must operate all
cabs for which licenses are issued a minimum number of hours of each day
commencing at 7:00 p.m. through 12:00 midnight, except when withdrawn
from service or for a reasonable period, in the discretion of the Township
Council, for necessary repairs (48 hours for mechanical repairs, 10 days for
accidents).
§ 4-4.23. Substitution of vehicles; transfer fee. [Ord. No. 8-10-70;
Ord. No. 0-2-73; Ord. No. 0-1-74; Ord. No. 0-32-74; 1967 Code
§ 71-23]
Should a taxicab or limousine be withdrawn from service for necessary
repairs, as allowed in subsection 4-4.22, or for replacement, the Office
of Licensing and Inspection shall issue a transfer of license thereof to
substitute another vehicle in place of the one withdrawn, provided that
a. No taxicab or limousine owner or operator shall cruise on the streets of
this Township any taxicab or limousine at any time for the purpose of
soliciting passengers.
b. No such licensed taxicab, while waiting employment by passengers,
shall stand on any public street or place other than at or upon the
designated public taxicab stand; nor shall any driver seeking
employment repeatedly and persistently drive to and fro on a short
space before or otherwise interfere with the proper and ordinary access
to or egress from any railroad station, theater, hotel, restaurant or any
other public place. Employment may be solicited by driving through a
public street or place without stops other than those due to
obstructions or traffic and at a rate of speed that would not interfere
with or impede the traffic.
§ 4-4.19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-4.23
1:141
all parts of this section are complied with in respect to the proposed
substitution. There shall be a fee of $3 for the issuance of the transfer.
§ 4-5. YARD SALES.
§ 4-5.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 0-33-75; 1967 Code § 78A-1]
As used in this section:
PERSON — Includes individuals, partnerships, voluntary associations and
corporations.
YARD SALE — Any sale of used merchandise not conducted as part of
a continuing business venture, or any casual sale of tangible personal
property which is advertised by any means whereby the public at large is or
can be made aware of the sale. The term "yard sale" shall include all sales
entitled "yard sale," "lawn sale," "attic sale," "rummage sale," "garage sale"
or "flea market sale."
§ 4-5.2. Permit required. [Ord. No. 0-33-75; 1967 Code § 78A-2]
§ 4-5.3. Application for permit. [Ord. No. 0-33-75; 1967 Code
§ 78A-3]
The following information must be filed with the Code Enforcement Officer
on a form provided therefor before a yard sale permit may be issued:
a. No person shall conduct a yard sale within the Township without first
filing with the Code Enforcement Officer the information required by
subsection 4-5.3 hereof and obtaining a yard sale permit from the Code
Enforcement Officer.
b. A yard sale permit shall be issued, without fee, to any applicant who
complies with the terms and conditions of this section, except that such
permit shall not be issued to the same applicant or for the same
property more than twice within any calendar year.
c. A yard sale permit shall not be issued for more than three consecutive
calendar days.
d. A yard sale permit must be prominently displayed on the premises upon
which the yard sale is conducted throughout the entire period of the
sale.
a. Name of the person conducting the sale.
b. Written consent of the owner, if the applicant is a tenant in possession
of the property on which the sale is to be conducted.
c. Location at which the sale is to be conducted.
d. Number of days of the sale.
e. Date and nature of any past sale.
§ 4-4.23 § 4-5.3
1:142
§ 4-5.4. Signs. [Ord. No. 0-33-75; 1967 Code § 78A-4]
§ 4-5.5. Nonapplicability of provisions. [Ord. No. 0-33-75; 1967
Code § 78A-5]
The provisions of this section shall not apply to or affect the following
persons or sales:
§ 4-5.6. Waiver of requirements. [Ord. No. 0-33-75; 1967 Code
§ 78A-6]
Upon application by any bona fide charitable, eleemosynary, educational,
cultural or governmental institution or organization, the Township Council
may waive any or all of the requirements of this section; provided, however,
that the burden of establishing eligibility for waiver shall be on the
organization or institution applying for such waiver.
§ 4-5.7. Violations and penalties. [Ord. No. 0-33-75; 1967 Code
§ 78A-7]
Any person conducting a yard sale without first obtaining a permit therefor
or who shall violate any of the other provisions and regulations of this
section shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $20 nor more than
f. Whether applicant is conducting the sale together with, for or on behalf
of any other person, firm, group, organization, association or
corporation and, if so, the name of the person, firm, group,
organization, association or corporation and the date or dates of any
past sale held by same.
g. Whether or not the applicant has been issued any other vendor's license
by any local, State or Federal agency.
h. Sworn statement of affirmation by the person signing that the
information therein given is full and true and known to him to be so.
a. All signs advertising a yard sale shall have a space allotted thereon
upon which shall be placed the name and address of the person to
whom the permit has been issued.
b. All signs advertising a yard sale shall be removed within 24 hours after
the completion of the sale.
a. Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
b. Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials.
c. Any persons selling or advertising for sale an item or items of personal
property which are specifically named or described in the
advertisement and which separate items do not exceed five in number.
§ 4-5.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-5.7
1:143
$250 or be imprisoned for a period not to exceed 10 days for each violation.
Each day that such sale shall continue without a proper permit shall be
considered a separate violation.
§ 4-6. ESTABLISHMENTS FOR THE SALE, RENTAL AND REPAIR OF
MOTOR VEHICLES.
§ 4-6.1. Short title. [Ord. No. 4-13-70; 1967 Code § 76-1]
This section shall be designated and referred to as the "Township Motor
Vehicle Establishments Licensing Regulations."
§ 4-6.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 4-13-70; 1967 Code § 76-2]
As used in this section:
AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment engaged
primarily in the general repair, rebuilding, replacing or reconditioning of
engines, motor vehicles; collision service, including body and fender repair,
and frame straightening; painting or upholstering; and vehicle steam
cleaning and undercoating.
MOTOR VEHICLE — And include all vehicles which are self-propelled
otherwise than by muscular power, and designed for use on land or
roadways, whether new or used, and including, but not by way of limitation,
all passenger cars and vehicles, motorcycles, motorbikes, trucks, trailers
and tractors, and the like.
MOTOR VEHICLE RENTAL AGENCY — Any person engaged in the business
of renting, leasing or holding for hire any motor vehicle.
NEW CAR DEALER — Any person engaged as agent, distributor or
authorized dealer of the manufacturer of the motor vehicle, and who has an
established place of business.
PERSON — And include all natural "persons," firms or copartnerships,
corporations, associations or other artificial bodies, receivers, trustees,
common-law or statutory assignees, executors, administrators, sheriffs,
constables, marshals or other "persons" in a representative or official
capacity, and members, officers, agents, employees or other representatives
of those hereinbefore enumerated.
USED CAR DEALER — Any person engaged in the business of buying,
selling, dealing or trading of used motor vehicles, who has an established
place of business.
§ 4-6.3. Application for license. [Ord. No. 4-13-70; 1967 Code
§ 76-3]
Each applicant for a license under the provisions of this section shall file
with the Office of Licensing and Inspection a written application signed by
the applicant or applicants, which application shall state:
§ 4-5.7 § 4-6.3
1:144
§ 4-6.4. Fees. [Ord. No. 4-13-70; Ord. No. 5-11-70; Ord. No. 0-19-71;
Ord. No. 0-7-80; 1967 Code § 76-4]
a. The name and residence of the applicant, and, if a firm, association,
partnership or corporation, the name and address of the officers and
the registered agent or partners. (If the application is being made on
behalf of someone other than the applicant, then the name and address
of the person for whom the application is being made.)
b. The detailed nature of the business to be conducted.
c. The place where the business is to be located and carried on by metes
and bounds, and also the present zoning classification of the property.
d. If the applicant is not the owner of the site where the business is to be
conducted, the owner's consent to the conduct of the business shall
accompany the application.
e. A plan or survey showing the existing or the proposed entrance or
entrances to the premises where the business is to be conducted and
the names and addresses of all owners of real estate on both sides of the
street or road for the distance of 1,000 feet thereof. (An applicant
seeking to renew licenses pursuant to this section need not comply with
this provision unless changes have been made or are proposed to be
made during the year for which the present license is sought.)
f. If the applicant intends to erect any building or structure in furtherance
of any business licensed hereunder during the calendar year, he shall
submit with this application four site plans prepared by a certified
engineer, architect or individual permitted to prepare the plans in
accordance with the statutes of the State of New Jersey. A copy of the
plan shall be forwarded to the Township Planning Board, the
Construction Code Official and the Fire Commissioners, who shall
review the site plan and make the recommendations and report to the
Township Council within 45 days from receipt thereof.
g. Whether or not the applicant has been convicted of a crime within the
least three years and, if so enumerating the nature of the offense of the
conviction.
h. Such other information as the applicant deems necessary for the
information of the approving agency.
a. Such application shall be accompanied by cash or check payable to the
order of the Township in a sum equaling the whole application and
license fee.
b. There shall be an initial application fee of $100 for an applicant's first
calendar year or for any fractional part of such year for which license
hereunder is applied for the purpose of providing the funds for the cost
of inspection and review of the application, which shall be
§ 4-6.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-6.4
1:145
§ 4-6.5. Township Council to act as approving agency. [Ord. No.
4-13-70; 1967 Code § 76-5; New]
§ 4-6.6. Expiration and renewal of licenses. [Ord. No. 4-13-70; Ord.
No. 0-14-74; 1967 Code § 76-6]
nonrefundable. However, for the subsequent renewal of these licenses,
the application fee shall be $50, which shall also be nonrefundable.
c. If the application is approved, there shall be, for the purpose of
providing funds for the licensing, regulation and supervision of the
business hereunder, a license fee in the amount specified hereafter, per
calendar year or for any fractional part of such year, for which license
hereunder shall be issued as follows:
1. New car dealer: $150.
2. Used car dealer: $150.
3. Automotive repair establishment: $150.
4. Motor vehicle rental agency: $150.
d. If the application for license is denied, the license fee shall be returned
to the applicant.
a. Each application filed with the Department of Community
Development, as herein provided, shall be presented by the Department
of Community Development to the Township Council at its next regular
meeting following the filing of such application, and the Township
Council may act upon any applications so presented at such meeting,
unless otherwise specified herein, or at any subsequent meeting to
which it shall defer action thereon. No license shall be issued by the
Department of Community Development until the issuance thereof has
been duly approved by resolution adopted by the Township Council.
b. The Township Council may refer the application for study and report to
the Township Planning Board, Construction Code Official, Board of
Health, Fire Commissioners or other Municipal agency whose opinion
may be required, who shall report their findings and recommendations
to the Township Council no later than 30 days from receipt thereof.
Notwithstanding, the Township Council shall act upon any application
so presented to it by the Department of Community Development within
60 days from the meeting.
a. All licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this section shall expire
at 12:00 midnight on March 15 next succeeding the date of the issuance
thereof. All persons, firms, associations, partnerships or corporations
desiring to continue in such business after the expiration of any license
granted hereunder shall make application before January 5 for a new
license for the ensuing year and shall pay the application and license
§ 4-6.4 § 4-6.6
1:146
§ 4-6.7. Separate license for each location required; transferability
of license. [Ord. No. 4-13-70; 1967 Code § 76-7; New]
A separate license shall be obtained for each separate location at which the
business of the licensee or some part thereof is proposed to be conducted,
and the license shall authorize the licensee to conduct the business only
at the place specified in the license. The license shall be transferable to
another location or another person only with the consent of the Township
Council. Any transfer to another location or person shall be endorsed upon
the original license by the Office of Licensing and Inspection after the
adoption of a resolution by the Township Council approving such transfer,
and the payment to the Department of Community Development of a
transfer fee of $50.
§ 4-6.8. Operation of business to conform as condition of licensing.
[Ord. No. 4-13-70; 1967 Code § 76-8]
No license shall be issued until the applicant shall have established that the
proposed business can be operated in accordance with the requirements of
this section.
§ 4-6.9. Other standards to be met. [Ord. No. 4-13-70; 1967 Code
§ 76-9]
fees in like manner and amount as for the review and issuance of the
original license.
b. The Township Council may withhold the issuance or renewal of any
license for the violation of any of the terms of this section or any
violation established pursuant to subsection 4-6.18. However, no
issuance or renewal shall be withheld unless five days' notice in writing
is given the licensee, and a hearing of the charges presented is held.
a. No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business permitted
herein if the premises and building to be used for the purpose do not
fully comply with any requirements, standards or conditions
established by the Township Council as a prerequisite for the issuance
of any license. Unless otherwise specifically stated, approval by the
Township Council of the request for renewal of the application shall be
deemed to incorporate the prior standards, lot and building
descriptions, and other conditions, etc., required.
b. No such license shall be issued for the conduct of any business or
performance of any act which would involve a violation of the Zoning
Ordinance of the Township.
c. No business permitted hereunder, licensed or not, shall be so
conducted as to amount to a nuisance as defined in Chapter BH:13 of
the Board of Health Code.
§ 4-6.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-6.9
1:147
§ 4-6.10. Fire protection. [Ord. No. 4-13-70; 1967 Code § 76-10]
Every applicant shall have on the premises, and in good working order,
a fire extinguisher with a capacity of 2 1/2 gallons, or such additional
fire protection equipment that may be necessary in order to protect the
premises. At the time application is made, the applicant shall be required to
set forth what apparatus or devices he has secured for his premises.
§ 4-6.11. Minimum size of lots. [Ord. No. 4-13-70; 1967 Code
§ 76-11]
§ 4-6.12. Conduct of business; maintenance of premises. [Ord. No.
4-13-70; 1967 Code § 76-12]
d. Inspections. Any authorized agent or designate of and by the Township
Council shall have the right at any and all reasonable times to inspect
any or all parts of the licensed premises as may be reasonably
necessary to secure compliance with this section, or to detect violations
thereof. It shall be the duty of the licensee, or the person in charge of
the premises to be inspected, to admit thereto for the purpose of
making the inspection the designated representative of the Township
who is authorized or directed to make such inspection at any
reasonable time that admission is requested.
e. It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business
pursuant to this section to keep his license posted in a prominent place
on the premises used for such business at all times.
a. No license shall be issued to any applicant hereunder to carry on or
conduct the business on any open lot, building or combination thereof,
which contains less than:
1. New car dealer: one-hundred-fifty-foot frontage to 20,000 square
feet.
2. Used car dealer: one-hundred-fifty-foot frontage to 20,000 square
feet.
3. Automotive repair establishment: one-hundred-fifty-foot frontage
to 20,000 square feet.
4. Motor vehicle rental agency: one-hundred-fifty-foot frontage to
20,000 square feet.
b. Square feet shall be calculated on the basis of the first floor only of any
building.
a. Every such open lot, building or place of business so used by a licensee
under this section shall have maintained on the premises where such
business is conducted or in conjunction therewith, within a reasonable
distance thereof, a rest room with toilet accommodations in accordance
with the Health Code and Sanitary Regulations of the Township.18
§ 4-6.9 § 4-6.12
1:148
§ 4-6.13. Applicant to secure other necessary permits. [Ord. No.
4-13-70; 1967 Code § 76-13]
As a condition precedent to the issuance of a license, as provided for by this
section, the applicant shall secure all other necessary permits as may be
required by the ordinances of the Township and shall pay the fee established
for the permits.
§ 4-6.14. Responsibility for employees' acts. [Ord. No. 4-13-70; 1967
Code § 76-14]
In the construction and enforcement of this section, the act or omission
of any agent or any other employee employed by any person under this
section, committed within the apparent scope of his employment, shall
presumably be an act or omission of such person holding such license, as
well as the act of omission of that agent or employee.
§ 4-6.15. Handling of questionable items; immediate report. [Ord.
No. 4-13-70; 1967 Code § 76-15]
No person shall knowingly buy, sell, receive, dispose of, conceal or have
in his possession any motor vehicle, part or accessory from which the
manufacturer's serial number or any other number or identification mark
has been removed, defaced, covered, altered or destroyed, for the purpose
of concealing or misrepresenting the identity of such vehicle, part or
accessory. Every person to whom is offered for sale or storage any motor
vehicle, part or accessory from which has been removed, defaced, covered,
altered or destroyed the manufacturer's serial number, or any other number
or identification mark, shall immediately notify the Chief of Police of such
offer.
§ 4-6.16. Compliance with rules and regulations. [Ord. No. 4-13-70;
1967 Code § 76-16]
Every licensee shall comply at all times, with the rules and regulations
promulgated and prescribed by the Director of Public Safety concerning the
conduct of the businesses licensed hereunder.
b. Every office building or rest room constructed on the open lot or
premises shall be constructed only after the plans for such office
building or rest room shall have been submitted to and approved by the
Township Council in accordance with the State Uniform Construction
Code.19
18.Editor's Note: See Chapter BH:8, Sanitary Code.
19.Editor's Note: See Chapter 10, Building and Housing.
§ 4-6.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-6.17
1:149
§ 4-6.17. Periodic inspections. [Ord. No. 4-13-70; 1967 Code
§ 76-17]
It shall be the duty of the Construction Code Official to make periodic
inspections of all licensed premises to ensure compliance with this section.
§ 4-6.18. Revocation of license. [Ord. No. 4-13-70; 1967 Code
§ 76-18]
§ 4-6.19. New car dealers. [Ord. No. 4-13-70; 1967 Code § 76-19]
§ 4-6.20. Regulations for used car dealers. [Ord. No. 4-13-70; 1967
Code § 76-20]
In addition to requirements hereinbefore enumerated, the following
provisions shall apply to all used car dealers:
a. Any license issued hereunder may be revoked for the violation of any of
the terms of this section, by the Township Council, but such revocation
shall not relieve the licensee from the penalties hereinafter provided.
b. Likewise, any violation of any other municipal ordinance, State or
Federal statute, or any falsification or misrepresentation in applying for
this license, shall be deemed grounds for revocation.
c. The license may be revoked after five days' notice, in writing, and upon
a hearing of the charges presented.
a. Any new car dealer engaging in the sale of used cars shall comply with
the provisions of subsection 4-6.20.
b. Notwithstanding the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, the offering
for sale of new cars shall be permitted only in the RC-Retail Commercial
and GC-General Commercial-Highway Districts.
a. Every used car lot or premises shall be adequately lighted at night
while the lot is open for business. Every such lot shall also be kept free
of paper, boxes and other debris, and any flammable matter which is
likely to cause injury to health or to cause damage by fire or which is
unsightly.
b. Wherever artificial lighting is used on the licensed premises or lot, the
lighting shall be so installed and maintained that no disturbing glare
may be visible on adjacent properties or to motorists using the public
streets. The use of colored lights which may be mistaken for traffic
lights or signals and artificial lights that change in intensity or produce
a flashing or moving effect are hereby prohibited.
c. All openings for entrance or exit to or from the used car lot or premises
along the street lines, or lines on which the same abut, shall be located
in accordance with the ordinances of the Township, and only at such
locations where the street curb has been lowered, and in such a manner
§ 4-6.17 § 4-6.20
1:150
§ 4-6.21. Automotive repair establishments: additional provisions.
[Ord. No. 4-13-70; 1967 Code § 76-22]
In addition to requirements hereinbefore enumerated, the following
provisions shall apply to all automotive repair establishments.
as may be approved by the Township Engineer and Chief of Police
regarding safety to pedestrians and vehicular traffic.
d. No person shall conduct, operate or carry on the business of selling or
trading of motor vehicles between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m., prevailing time, of the following day.
e. No motor vehicle shall be stored for sale or trade under the license
issued hereunder within 40 feet of any adjoining residential property
line.
f. No motor vehicle shall be exhibited, stored, parked, kept or located
under the license issued hereunder on or within 25 feet of any street,
public right-of-way, sidewalk, or part thereof, except where customers',
officers' or employees' parking is provided adjacent to any building,
then 10 feet.
g. Notwithstanding the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance of the
Township, the business of buying, selling, dealing or trading of used
motor vehicles shall only be allowed in the RC-Retail Commercial and
GC-General Commercial-Highway Districts.
h. No used car dealer who is carrying on the business in the Township on
the first day of May 1970 shall be required to comply with the
provisions of subsection 4-6.2.
i. Each licensee shall furnish to the Chief of Police on the 10th day of each
month a written report of all motor vehicles purchased from it during
the preceding month, containing a description of such vehicle, its
license number and serial number, and names and addresses of the
sellers and purchasers. This shall apply to retail sales only.
a. All yards or places where such businesses are or shall be conducted, or
where such motor vehicle parts are to be stored or kept, shall be kept
from public view by a cyclone-type fence, or equal type, not less than
seven feet high. In the event the fence is not made of a solid material,
then the licensee shall restrict the view by the installation of a solid
material on the fence, or, in the alternative, the licensee shall plant
suitable plant or tree coverage, which tree plantings shall be at no
greater than six-foot intervals. In the event tree plantings are installed,
the tree plantings shall restrict motor vehicles and motor vehicles parts
from view within one year of the date of the planting. All plantings of
trees, shrubs or other plants and fence installation shall be approved by
the Construction Code Official prior to installation or planting.
§ 4-6.20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-6.21
1:151
b. Fire lanes shall be maintained on the licensed premises at all times
pursuant to the regulations of the Fire Commission or other authorized
employees of the Township, including therein all Fire Marshals.
c. All goods, articles, merchandise or motor vehicles must be stored and
kept within the enclosed fence above described and not upon the
sidewalk, street or any part thereof, and no material shall be piled or
placed so as to be visible from any adjoining street.
d. It shall be unlawful to affix or display, or permit to be affixed or
displayed, upon any such enclosing fence, any picture, sign, bill, notice
or other thing for the purpose of advertising. Such fence shall be kept
painted in a uniform color if made of a solid material. Any openings in
such fence shall be fitted with gates which shall be kept closed when
not used for ingress or egress to or from the premises.
e. Every automotive repair establishment shall be adequately lighted at
night while the lot is open for business. Every such lot shall also be kept
free of paper, boxes or other debris, and any flammable matter which is
likely to cause injury to health or to cause damage by fire, or which is
unsightly.
f. Wherever artificial lighting is used on the licensed premises, or lot, the
lighting shall be so installed and maintained that no disturbing glare
may be visible on adjacent properties or to motorists using the public
streets. The use of colored lights which may be mistaken for traffic
lights or signals and artificial lights that change in intensity or produce
a flashing or moving effect are hereby prohibited.
g. All openings for entrance to or exit from the automotive repair
establishment along the street lines, or lines on which the same abuts,
shall be located in accordance with the ordinances of the Township, and
only at such locations where the street curb has been lowered, and in
such a manner as may be approved by the Township Engineer and Chief
of Police regarding safety to pedestrians and vehicular traffic.
h. No person shall conduct, operate or carry on the business of automotive
repair between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., prevailing time,
of the following day.
i. No motor vehicle shall be repaired or stored for repair under the
license issued hereunder within 40 feet of any adjoining residential
property line.
j. No motor vehicle shall be repaired, stored for repair, parked, kept or
located under the license issued hereunder on or within 25 feet of any
street, public right-of-way, sidewalk or part thereof, except where
customers', officers' or employees' parking is provided adjacent to any
building; then 10 feet.
§ 4-6.21 § 4-6.22
1:152
§ 4-6.22. Motor vehicle rental agency: additional provisions. [Ord.
No. 4-13-70; 1967 Code § 76-24]
In addition to regulations hereinbefore enumerated, the following
provisions shall apply to all motor vehicle rental agencies:
§ 4-6.23. Numbering of licenses; number of licenses to be issued.
[Ord. No. 4-13-70; 1967 Code § 76-25]
§ 4-6.24. Grounds for denial. [Ord. No. 4-13-70; 1967 Code § 76-26]
No license as herein provided shall be granted to any person who shall have
been convicted within three years of the date of application of a violation of
this section or any felony, or knowingly receives stolen goods; and, where
applicable, cannot comply with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:10-19.
§ 4-6.25. Operational restrictions. [Ord. No. 4-13-70; 1967 Code
§ 76-27]
No person shall carry on the business at or from any other place in the
Township than the one designated in the license therefor; and no other
person shall henceforth engage in or carry on any of the businesses so
licensed, in whole or in part, without first complying with the provisions of
this section.
a. Any motor vehicle rental agency engaged in the sale of used cars shall
comply with the provisions of subsection 4-6.20.
a. All licenses shall be numbered consecutively and the Office of Licensing
and Inspection shall furnish each licensee a card setting forth his name
and the number of such license. In addition thereto, the Office of
Licensing and Inspection shall be required to maintain a register for the
posting and keeping of all licenses issued pursuant to this section.
b. Because the general health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the
Township would not be best served by the unlimited licensing of the
following businesses, the number of licenses to be issued shall be as
permitted by the governing body.
c. Any person maintaining and operating any of the businesses to be
licensed on the effective day of this section shall be entitled to a license,
as provided herein, provided they file their application for the license
within 60 days from the effective date of this section, pay the required
application and licensing fee therefor, and comply in all respects with
the provisions of this section; after the period of 60 days from the
effective date of this section, no new license shall be issued unless and
until the number of such licenses outstanding is fewer than the number
provided above.
d. The license fee for the calendar year 1970 shall be prorated per month
or part thereof.
§ 4-6.22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-6.26
1:153
§ 4-6.26. Violations and penalties. [Ord. No. 4-13-70; 1967 Code
§ 76-28; New]
Every person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this subsection,
or who fails to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with
any order or regulation made thereunder shall be subject to the General
Penalty established in Section 1-5 of this Code. The application of the above
penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited
conditions or in any way to prohibit the revocation of the license pursuant
to subsection 4-6.18.
§ 4-7. SERVICE STATIONS.
§ 4-7.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 0-9-80; 1967 Code § 31A-1]
As used in this section:
GASOLINE SELLING AND SERVICE STATION — Any establishment, other
than a public garage, supplying or selling motor fuel from a pump or pumps
and oil from a container or containers direct to motor vehicles.
§ 4-7.2. License required; application. [Ord. No. 0-9-80; 1967 Code
§ 31A-2]
a. Every person permitted or approved to operate a gasoline selling or
service station, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 20, shall
be required to secure an annual license from the Township.
b. Each applicant for a license under the provisions of this section shall
file with the Office of Licensing and Inspection a written application
signed by the applicant or applicants, which application shall state:
1. The name and residence of the applicant and, if a firm, association,
partnership or corporation, the name and address of the officers
and the registered agent or partners (if the application is being
completed on behalf of someone other than the applicant, then the
name and address of the person for whom the application is being
made).
2. The detailed nature of the business to be conducted.
3. The place where the business is located and carried on, including
street and mailing address, and also the present zoning
classification of the property.
4. If the applicant is not the owner of the site where the business is
being conducted, the owner's consent to the conduct of the
business shall accompany the application.
5. Whether or not the applicant has been convicted of a crime within
the last three years and, if so, enumerating the nature of the
offense.
§ 4-6.26 § 4-7.2
1:154
§ 4-7.3. Fees. [Ord. No. 0-9-80; 1967 Code § 31A-3]
§ 4-7.4. Township Council to act as approving agency. [Ord. No.
0-9-80; 1967 Code § 31A-4]
§ 4-7.5. Expiration and renewal of licenses. [Ord. No. 0-9-80; 1967
Code § 31A-5]
6. Such other information as the applicant deems necessary for the
information of the approving agency.
a. For the purpose of providing funds for the licensing, regulation and
supervision of the businesses hereunder, an annual license fee in the
amount of $100 per license year or for any fractional part thereof for
which the license hereunder shall be charged. This fee shall be in
addition to any other fee required to be paid pursuant to Chapter 20.
b. If the application for annual license renewal is denied, 50% of the
license fee shall be returned to the applicant, the balance thereof to be
retained by the Township to cover the costs of providing inspection and
review of the application.
a. Each annual renewal application shall be filed with the Department of
Community Development, who shall refer it to the Township Council at
its next regular meeting following the filing of such application. The
Township Council may act upon any application so presented at such
meeting, unless otherwise specified herein, or any subsequent meeting
to which it shall defer action thereon. No license shall be issued by the
Department of Community Development until the issuance thereof has
been duly approved by motion or resolution adopted by the Township
Council.
b. The Township Council may refer the application for study and report to
the Township Code Officer, its Planning Board, Construction Code
Officer, Board of Health, Fire Commissioner or any other Municipal
agency whose opinion may be required, who shall then report their
findings and recommendations to the Township Council no later than 30
days from receipt thereof. Notwithstanding, the Township Council shall
act upon any application so presented to it by the Department of
Community Development within 60 days from the meeting.
a. All licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this section shall expire
at 12:00 midnight on July 1 next succeeding the date of the issuance
thereof. All persons, firms, associations, partnerships or corporations
desiring to continue in such business after the expiration of any license
granted hereunder shall make application before May 1 for a new
license for the ensuing year and shall pay the annual licensing fee at the
time the application for renewal is made.
b. The Township Council may withhold the issuance of any license for the
violation of any of the terms of this section or any violation established
§ 4-7.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-7.5
1:155
§ 4-7.6. Separate license required for each location; transferability.
[Ord. No. 0-9-80; 1967 Code § 31A-6]
A separate license shall be obtained for each separate location at which the
business of the licensee or some part thereof is proposed to be conducted,
and the license shall authorize the licensee to conduct the business only
at the place specified in the license. The license shall not be transferable
to another location unless the procedure for a new application is made as
required in Chapter 20. Person to person transfers shall be with the consent
of the Township Council. Any transfer to another location or person shall be
endorsed upon the original license by the Office of Licensing and Inspection
after the adoption of a resolution by the Township Council or the Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, and the payment to the Office of Licensing
and Inspection of the transfer fee of $50.
§ 4-7.7. Conformance with provisions required for licensing. [Ord.
No. 0-9-80; 1967 Code § 31A-7]
No license shall be issued until the applicant shall have established that the
proposed business can be operated in accordance with the requirements of
Chapter 20 and of this section.
§ 4-7.8. Additional standards. [Ord. No. 0-9-80; 1967 Code § 31A-8]
pursuant to Chapter 20 or for any violation of any other Municipal
ordinance, State or Federal statute or any falsification or
misrepresentation in applying for this license. However, no issuance or
renewal shall be withheld unless five days' notice, in writing, is given
the licensee and a hearing of the charges is held in accordance with the
terms of Section 4-1, Permits and Licenses of this chapter.
a. No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business permitted
herein if the premises and building to be used for the purpose do not
fully comply with any requirements, standards or conditions
established by the Township Council, County of Gloucester and/or State
of New Jersey as a prerequisite for the issuance of continued operation
of any license. Unless otherwise specifically stated, approval by the
Township Council of the request for renewal of the application shall be
deemed to incorporate the prior standards, lot and building
descriptions and other conditions, etc., required.
b. No such license shall be issued for the conduct of any business or
performance of any act which would involve a violation of any Zoning
Ordinance of the Township.
c. No business permitted hereunder, licensed or not, shall be so
conducted as to amount to a nuisance as defined in Chapter BH:13 of
the Board of Health Code.
d. Inspections. Any authorized agent or designee of and by the Township
Council shall have the right at any and all reasonable times to inspect
§ 4-7.5 § 4-7.8
1:156
§ 4-7.9. Fire protection. [Ord. No. 0-9-80; 1967 Code § 31A-9; Ord.
No. 0-4-82]
Every applicant shall have on the premises, and in good working order
a fire extinguisher with a capacity of 30 pounds, with such additional
fire-protection equipment that may be necessary in order to protect the
premises. At the time application is made, the applicant shall be required to
set forth what apparatus or devices he has secured for this purpose.
§ 4-7.10. Restrictions. [Ord. No. 0-9-80; 1967 Code § 31A-10]
No persons shall carry on the business at or from any other place in the
Township than the one designated in the license therefor, and no other
person shall henceforth engage in or carry on any of the businesses so
licensed, in whole or in part, without first complying with the provisions of
this section.
§ 4-7.11. Violations and penalties. [Ord. No. 0-9-80; 1967 Code
§ 31A-11; New]
Every person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this section or
who fails to comply therewith or who shall violate or fail to comply with
any order or regulation made thereunder shall be subject to the General
Penalty established in Section 1-5 of this Code. The application of the above
penalties shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited
conditions or in any way to prohibit the revocation or nonrenewal of any
license issued pursuant to the terms and conditions of this section.
§ 4-8. LICENSING OF JUNKYARDS.
§ 4-8.1. License required. [Ord. No. 5-9-66; 1967 Code § 36-1]
No person shall establish, operate or maintain a motor vehicle junkyard or
business, or any other junkyard or junk business, nor store, purchase, sell
or deal in junk, unless he shall first obtain a license for such yard, business
or storage from the Township Council.
any and all parts of a licensed premises as may be reasonably necessary
to secure compliance with this section or to detect violations thereof.
It shall be the duty of the licensee or the person in charge of the
premises to be inspected to admit thereto for the purpose of making
the inspection the designated representative of the Township, who is
authorized and directed to make such inspection at any reasonable time
that admission is requested.
e. It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business
pursuant to this section to keep his license posted in a prominent place
on the premises used for such business at all times.
§ 4-7.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-8.2
1:157
§ 4-8.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 5-9-66; 1967 Code § 36-2]
As used in this section:
JUNK — Any old, discarded or unused waste iron or other metal, or
substance, glass, paper, used lumber, rags, machine parts, accessories,
discarded machinery or discarded machines in whole or in part,
unregistered motor vehicles which are unfit for reconditioning or for sale
for highway transportation, used parts of motor vehicles and any material
commonly known and generally referred to as junk in the ordinary meaning
of the word.
JUNKYARD — Any lot of land within the Township on which junk is placed,
collected, stored or kept.
§ 4-8.3. Application for license. [Ord. No. 5-9-66; 1967 Code § 36-3]
Every applicant for a license under the provisions of this section shall
file with the Department of Community Development a written application
signed by the applicant or applicants, which application shall state:
§ 4-8.4. Application to be accompanied by fee. [Ord. No. 5-9-66;
1967 Code § 36-4]
Such application shall be accompanied by cash or certified check payable
to the order of the Township in a sum equaling the whole license fee, which
shall be returned in the event that the license is refused.
a. The name and residence of the applicant and, if a firm, association,
partnership or corporation, the name and address of the officers and
the registered agent or partners.
b. The detailed nature of the business to be conducted and the classes of
material which it is proposed to store therein.
c. The place where the business is to be located and carried on, by metes
and bounds, and also the present zoning class of the property.
d. A plan or survey showing the existing or proposed entrance or
entrances to the premises where the business is to be conducted and
the names and addresses of all owners of real estate on both sides of the
street or road for a distance of 1,000 feet on each side thereof.
e. If the applicant is not the owner of the site where the business is to be
conducted, the owner's consent to the conduct of the business shall
accompany the application.
f. Type of fence to be constructed around premises.
§ 4-8.2 § 4-8.5
1:158
§ 4-8.5. Approval of application by Township Council. [Ord. No.
5-9-66; 1967 Code § 36-5]
Each application filed with the Department of Community Development,
as herein provided, shall be presented by the Department of Community
Development to the Township Council at its next regular meeting following
the filing of such application, and the Township Council may act upon any
application so presented at such meeting or at any subsequent meeting to
which it shall defer action thereon, and no license shall be issued by the
Department of Community Development until the issuance thereof has been
duly approved by resolution adopted by the Township Council.
§ 4-8.6. Expiration and renewal of licenses. [Ord. No. 5-9-66; 1967
Code § 36-6]
All licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this section shall expire
at 12:00 midnight on January 31 next succeeding the date of the issuance
thereof, and all persons, firms, associations, partnerships or corporations
desiring to continue in such business after the expiration of any license
granted hereunder shall make application before January 5 for a new
license for the ensuing year and shall pay the license fee in like manner and
amount as for the issuance of the original license. No notice or hearing shall
be necessary for such renewal.
§ 4-8.7. Separate license for each location; transferability. [Ord. No.
5-9-66; Ord. No. 3-13-67; Ord. No. 0-7-80; 1967 Code § 36-7]
A separate license shall be obtained for each separate location at which the
business of the licensee or some part thereof is proposed to be conducted,
and the license shall authorize the licensee to conduct the business only
at the place specified in the license and shall be transferable to another
location only with the consent of the Township Council. Any transference
to another location shall be endorsed upon the original license by the
Department of Community Development, after the adoption of a resolution
by the Township Council approving such transfer and the payment to the
Department of Community Development of a transfer fee of $150.
§ 4-8.8. License fee. [Ord. No. 5-9-66; Ord. No. 3-13-67; Ord. No.
0-7-80; 1967 Code § 36-8]
The annual license fee shall be $400.
§ 4-8.9. Issuance requirement. [Ord. No. 5-9-66; 1967 Code § 36-9]
No license shall be issued until the applicant shall have established that the
proposed business can be operated in accordance with the requirements of
this section.
§ 4-8.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-8.10
1:159
§ 4-8.10. Operation of junkyards. [Ord. No. 5-9-66; Ord. No.
9-26-66; 1967 Code § 36-10]
Junkyards shall be operated as follows:
§ 4-8.11. Public view; fire lanes. [Ord. No. 5-9-66; Ord. No. 9-26-66;
1967 Code § 36-11; New]
§ 4-8.12. Hammering and pounding. [Ord. No. 5-9-66; 1967 Code
§ 36-12]
It shall be unlawful to hammer or pound any metals or other materials on
the premises between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays or
at any time on Sundays.
a. No motor vehicle or junk shall be stored or dismantled within 40 feet of
any dwelling house, except such dwelling house as may be situated on
the licensed premises.
b. No junk or refuse material shall be burned.
c. Precaution shall be taken by each licensee hereunder to safeguard all
flammable, combustible or explosive materials from fire, and no
licensee shall stack, pile or place junk upon the licensed premises in
such manner as to create a fire hazard or to create a place for the
harboring or breeding of rats, mice or vermin.
d. No junk shall be stacked, piled, placed or stored nearer than 40 feet
from the edge of the right-of-way adjacent to the main entrance of the
licensed premises, and no junk shall be stacked, piled, placed or stored
nearer than 10 feet to the edge of the right-of-way of any other public
road.
a. All yards or places where such businesses are or shall be conducted or
where such materials are to be stored or kept shall be kept from public
view by a cyclone-type fence or equal type not less than six feet high. In
the event the fence is not made of a solid material, then the licensee
shall restrict the view by the installation of solid material on the fence
or, in the alternative, the licensee may plant suitable plant or tree
coverage, which tree plantings shall be at not greater than six feet
intervals. In the event tree plantings are installed, the tree plantings
shall restrict the junkyard from view within one year of the date of the
planting. All plantings of trees, shrubs or other plants and fence
installations shall be approved by the Construction Code Official prior
to installation or planting.
b. Fire lanes shall be maintained on the licensed premises at all times
pursuant to the regulations of the Fire Commission or other authorized
employees of the Township, including therein all Fire Marshals.
§ 4-8.10 § 4-8.13
1:160
§ 4-8.13. Storage within enclosure. [Ord. No. 5-9-66; 1967 Code
§ 36-13]
All goods, articles, merchandise or motor vehicles must be stored and kept
within the enclosed fence above described, and not upon the sidewalk,
street or any part thereof; and no material shall be piled or placed so as to
be visible from any adjoining street.
§ 4-8.14. Right to inspect. [Ord. No. 5-9-66; 1967 Code § 36-14]
Any member of the Township Council, Board of Health, the Health Officer,
the Chief of Police or any authorized agent of the Township shall have the
right at any and all reasonable times to inspect any or all parts of the
licensed premises.
§ 4-8.15. Deposit of junk; permission required. [Ord. No. 5-9-66;
1967 Code § 36-15]
It shall be unlawful for persons to deposit or leave any abandoned or
unlicensed automobile, truck or other automotive equipment or any part
thereof, or any other junk, in open fields or upon other unfenced private
property without first obtaining the permission of the Township Council.
§ 4-8.16. Storage of automobiles; permission required. [Ord. No.
5-9-66; 1967 Code § 36-16]
It shall be unlawful for persons to store, keep or place two or more
unlicensed automobiles or two or more automobiles which are unfit for
reconditioning for sale for highway transportation upon any property within
the Township without first obtaining a junkyard license.
§ 4-8.17. Licenses subject to rules of Township Council. [Ord. No.
5-9-66; 1967 Code § 36-17]
All licenses under this section shall at all times be subject to such
reasonable rules as may be made by the Township Council for the proper
operation and regulation of the place of business named in such license.
§ 4-8.18. Revocation of license. [Ord. No. 5-9-66; 1967 Code
§ 36-18; Ord. No. 0-10-74]
a. Any license issued hereunder may be revoked by the Township Council
for the violation of any of the terms of this section, but such revocation
shall not relieve the licensee from the penalties hereinafter provided.
b. Likewise, any violation of any other Municipal ordinance, any State or
Federal statute or any falsification or misrepresentation in applying for
this license shall be deemed grounds for revocation.
c. The license may be revoked after five days' notice in writing, and upon a
hearing of the charges presented.
§ 4-8.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-8.19
1:161
§ 4-8.19. Restrictions on issuance. [Ord. No. 5-9-66; Ord. No.
3-13-67; 1967 Code § 36-19]
Any person, firm or corporation keeping, maintaining and operating a
junkyard in the proper zone class on the effective day of this section shall
be entitled to a license as provided herein, provided he files his application
for the license within 60 days from the effective date of this section, pays
the required license fee therefor and complies in all respects with the
provisions of this section. After the period of 60 days from the effective
date of this section, no new license shall be issued unless and until the
number of such licenses outstanding is fewer than five; provided, however,
that this limitation shall not prevent renewals or person-to-person transfers
of junkyard owners' licenses issued and outstanding.
§ 4-8.20. License renewal. [Ord. No. 5-9-66; Ord. No. 3-13-67; 1967
Code § 36-20]
§ 4-8.21. Violations and penalties. [Ord. No. 5-9-66; 1967 Code
§ 36-21; New]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate a provision of this section,
or fail to comply therewith or who shall violate or fail to comply with
any order or regulation made thereunder, shall severally for each and
every such violation and noncompliance, be subject to the General Penalty
a. Any junkyard license for a new license term, which is issued to replace a
license which expired on the last day of the license term which
immediately preceded the commencement of the new license term or
which is issued to replace a license which expired on the last day of the
license term shall be deemed to be a renewal of the expired or expiring
license; provided that the license is for the same owner as the expired
or expiring license, covers the same junkyard and is issued to the holder
of the expired or expiring license and is issued pursuant to an
application therefor which shall have been filed with the Department of
Community Development prior to the commencement of the new
license term. Excepting person-to-person transfers of a junkyard
license any junkyard licenses issued otherwise than above herein
provided shall be deemed to be new licenses.
b. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the person-to-person transfer at
the location for which it was issued, of licenses granted by the
Municipality under this section from person to person, corporation to
corporation, person to corporation or corporation to person. Persons or
corporations that are licensees under this section shall have a property
right in such licenses and may assign, sell or transfer such licenses, and
the right to such license shall be inheritable and transferable to the
heirs, executors or administrators of such licensees, subject to the
provisions of this section.
c. In the event any licensee discontinues operation for 120 days for any
reason including death, the license shall lapse and not be transferable.
§ 4-8.19 § 4-8.21
1:162
established in Section 1-5 of this Code. The imposition of a penalty for
a violation of this section shall not excuse the violation or permit it to
continue; such violation shall be remedied within 10 days of the imposition
of the penalty; thereafter each additional 10 days that such violation is
permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. The application of
the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of
prohibited conditions.
§ 4-9. RIDING ACADEMIES.
§ 4-9.1. License required. [Ord. No. 4-11-49; 1967 Code § 57-1]
It shall not be lawful for any person or persons to own, operate or use any
building or other property within the Township for the use of what may
be known as a riding academy or a livery stable where horses or other
domestic animals may be kept and maintained either for the purpose of
hire of such horses or animals or for the purpose of boarding such horses
or animals for the owners thereof within the Township without first having
obtained a license from the Department of Community Development so to
do.
§ 4-9.2. Application. [Ord. No. 4-11-49; 1967 Code § 57-2]
Each and every person or persons operating the riding academy or livery
stable in buildings or property within the Township for hire or boarding
of horses or other animals, as herein set forth, shall make an application
to the Department of Community Development, which application shall
particularly set forth the place of business of the applicant, the number of
horses or other animals and the names and addresses of the owners thereof.
§ 4-9.3. Approval; issuance; fee. [Ord. No. 4-11-49; 1967 Code
§ 57-3]
The application shall be referred to the Township Council for approval,
and, upon approval, the Department of Community Development is hereby
authorized to issue a license to the applicant upon the payment of a fee
which shall be determined as follows: for horses and animals not exceeding
10 in number, $100; for each horse or animal over 10, $25, but in no event
shall the annual fee exceed $200.
§ 4-9.4. Duration of license. [Ord. No. 4-11-49; 1967 Code § 57-4]
Every license so issued shall remain in force for one year from the date
issued and shall apply only to the person or persons to whom granted and
shall not be transferable.
§ 4-9.5. Exhibition of license. [Ord. No. 4-11-49; 1967 Code § 57-5]
Any person or persons to whom such license is granted, as herein provided,
shall be required to exhibit such license whenever called upon so to do by
an officer of the law.
§ 4-8.21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-9.6
1:163
§ 4-9.6. License fees. [Ord. No. 4-11-49; 1967 Code § 57-6]
The license fee under this section shall be as follows:
§ 4-9.7. Violations and penalties. [New]
Any person or persons who shall neglect or violate any of the provisions of
this section shall be subject to the General Penalty established in Section
1-5 of this Code.
§ 4-10. DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS; LICENSING OF PISTOL OR
RIFLE RANGE.
§ 4-10.1. Discharging firearms; restrictions. [Ord. No. 11-12-56;
Ord. No. 9-14-70; 1967 Code § 25-1; New]
It shall be unlawful for any person to fire or discharge any shotgun, rifle,
pistol, or any other kind of firearm whereby any shot, bullet or missile is
shot or scattered within the confines of the Township, except as follows:
§ 4-10.2. Other provisions. [Ord. No. 11-12-56; Ord. No. 9-28-70;
1967 Code § 25-2; New]
a. For all riding academies and livery stables, as herein set forth, a
minimum fee of $5 where five horses or other animals may be kept, or
maintained for hire, or boarded for other persons with an additional $1
for each and every horse or other animal over and above the minimum
number of five.
b. The fee for issuing the license shall be $1 payable to the Department of
Community Development at the time the application is filed.
c. The license fee for the riding academy or livery stable shall also be paid
at the time of the filing of the application.
a. During the regular hunting season, hunting for game will be permitted;
provided, however, that no person while hunting shall discharge any
kind of firearms within 500 feet of any building or dwelling or within
500 feet of any street or thoroughfare which is opened to or used by the
public.
b. Where, prior to the operation of a pistol or rifle range, turkey shoot,
firearms demonstration, shooting match or any other event or events
wherein the discharge of firearms occurs, the person, persons, group,
organization or association operating the above-mentioned event or
events shall have first obtained from the Police Department approval
allowing the discharge of firearms at the time and place stated in the
written permit submitted by the applicant. The applicant shall be
required to submit separate permits for each event.
a. Licensing of operation of a pistol or rifle range.
§ 4-9.6 § 4-10.2
1:164
§ 4-10.3. Application. [Ord. No. 11-12-56; Ord. No. 9-14-70; Ord.
No. 9-28-70; Ord. No. 0-7-80; 1967 Code § 25-3; New]
1. Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this section, a duly
certified gun, pistol or other club organized for the operation of
firearms may obtain, upon compliance with the requirements of
subsection 4-10.4. All applications for renewal shall be submitted
to the Police Department.
2. Duties of applicant.
(a) Each applicant for an annual license shall provide a full
description of the range or target area to be used and the name
of the owner, if other than the applicant, together with the
owner's certification granting the applicant the right to use the
premises for the designated purpose.
(b) The applicant shall further provide a layout of the range or
target area, the manner and hours in which same is intended to
be operated and supervised, all provisions for safety to be
taken, the type of weapon or weapons to be permitted to be
used and the names of all members of the applicant duly
authorized to use the facilities of the applicant.
3. A copy of the membership list shall be filed in the office of the
Police Department and Chief of Police and may be supplemented,
but in no event shall the range or target area be used by others not
listed, subject to the exceptions hereinafter provided.
4. Firearms demonstration, shooting match or other events.
(a) In the event that the applicant desires to sponsor a match or
contest, invitation to which will be extended to nonmembers,
the applicant shall so notify the Police Department at least 30
days prior to the event.
(b) The Police Department shall then cause to be made an
investigation and submit to the Township Council a written
report of his findings in accordance with the standards
established in subsection 4-10.4 for the issuance of permits.
a. Applications for permits are to be made on forms provided by the
Department of Community Development. A fee shall be charged for the
issuance of each permit, the amount to be as follows:
Permit Fee
Pistol charge $2
I.D. Card $5
Processing fee $5
§ 4-10.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-10.3
1:165
§ 4-10.4. Issuance of permit. [Ord. No. 11-12-56; Ord. No. 9-14-70;
1967 Code § 25-4; New]
The Township Council shall not issue any permit where it shall appear
that the discharge of firearms by the applicant or under the applicant's
direction at the time and place stated in the application for a permit will
become or constitute a menace to the safety, health or general welfare
of the inhabitants of the Township. The Township Council shall have the
right to revoke any permit issued where it appears that a menace exists or
will exist to the safety, health or general welfare of the inhabitants of the
Township.
§ 4-10.5. Violations and penalties. [Ord. No. 11-12-56; 1967 Code
§ 25-5]
Any person, persons, group, organization or association violating any of the
provisions of this section shall be subject to the General Penalty established
in Section 1-5 of this Code.
Chapter 5
RESERVED
Chapter 6
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL
§ 6-1. PURPOSE. [New]
This chapter is enacted to regulate the sale and transportation of alcoholic
beverages in the Township of Deptford in accordance with the provisions of
an act of Legislature of the State of New Jersey entitled An Act Concerning
Alcoholic Beverages, comprising Chapter 436 of the Laws of 1933, its
supplements and amendments, and also comprising N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.,
b. Upon completion of the application for permit, the Department of
Community Development shall then submit same to the Township
Council for review and approval.
c. Upon completion of the application, the Township Council shall forward
a copy of the application to the Chief of Police, who shall then cause to
be made an investigation and submit to the Township Council a written
report of his findings in accordance with the standards established in
subsection 4-10.4 for the issuance of permits.
d. No permits for any event, events or annual permits shall be approved
prior to the posting of evidence of insurance, which shall afford
minimum personal injury coverage as follows: $100,000/$300,00 for
each accident or mishap.
§ 4-10.3 § 6-1
1:166
and in accordance with the rules and regulations of the State Director of
Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 6-2. DEFINITIONS. [New]
For the purpose of this chapter, words and phrases herein shall have the
same meaning as in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq., and the rules and regulations of
the Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 6-3. LICENSES.
§ 6-3.1. Laws applicable. [New]
All applications for licenses, all licenses issued and all proceedings under
this chapter shall be in accordance with the act, rules and regulations
referred to in Section 6-1, and all other applicable laws of the State of New
Jersey or the United States.
§ 6-3.2. Issuing authority. [New]
All licenses required by this chapter shall be issued and approved by the
Mayor and Township Council, which shall also administer the provisions of
this chapter.
§ 6-3.3. License required. [New]
No person shall sell or distribute alcoholic beverages within the Township
without obtaining a license in accordance with the Act referred to in Section
6-1 and the provisions of this chapter.
§ 6-3.4. License fees; maximum number. [Ord. No. 12-27-57; Ord.
No. 12-9-63; Ord. No. 5-8-67; Ord. No. 3-11-68; Ord. No. 0-3-72;
Ord. No. 0-19-73; Ord. No. 0-16-74; Ord. No. 0-26-74; Ord. No.
0-2-75; Ord. No. 0-28-77; Ord. No. 0-2-80; Ord. No. 0-9-85, § 1; Ord.
No. 0-8-86, § 1; 1967 Code §§ 4-1 and 4-2; New; Ord. No. 0.11.94]
The annual fees and maximum number of licenses for the sale or
distribution of alcoholic beverages in the Township shall be as follows:
Class of License
Annual License
Fee Number of Licenses
Plenary Retail
Consumption License
$1,425 18
Plenary Retail Distribution
License
$595 3
Club License $50 6
§ 6-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-3.4
1:167
No seasonal retail consumption or limited retail distribution license shall
be issued in the Township at the same time.
The provisions of this subsection with respect to the limitation on the
number of licenses shall not apply to the renewal or transfer of licenses
presently issued.
§ 6-4. REGULATIONS OF LICENSES.
§ 6-4.1. Hours of sale. [Ord. No. 12-27-57; Ord. No. 0-14-76; Ord.
No. 0-1-80; Ord. No. 0-7-81; 1967 Code § 4-3; New]
No licensee shall sell, service, deliver or allow, permit or suffer the sale,
service or delivery of an alcoholic beverage on any day between the hours
of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. except Sundays, Christmas Day and New Year's
Day each year as hereinafter provided.
§ 6-4.2. Saturdays. [Ord. No. 12-27-57; Ord. No. 0-14-76; Ord. No.
0-1-80; Ord. No. 0-7-81; 1967 Code § 40-3; New]
Provisions of subsections 6-4.1 shall not apply on Saturdays. On Saturdays,
no licensee shall sell, serve, deliver or allow, permit or suffer the sale,
service or delivery of an alcoholic beverage between the hours of 3:00 a.m.
and 11:00 a.m. with the exception of New Year's Day.
§ 6-4.3. Sundays. [Ord. No. 12-27-57; Ord. No. 0-14-76; Ord. No.
00-1-80; Ord. No. 0-7-81; 1967 Code § 4-3; New]
Provisions of subsection 6-4.1 shall not apply on Sundays. On Sundays, no
licensee shall sell, serve, deliver or allow, permit or suffer the sale, service
or delivery of an alcoholic beverage between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and
11:00 a.m. with the exception of New Year's Day.
§ 6-4.4. Christmas Day. [Ord. No. 12-27-57; 1967 Code § 4-3B; New]
Provisions of subsection 6-4.1 shall not apply on December 25th. On that
day, no licensee shall sell, serve, deliver or allow, permit or suffer the sale,
service or delivery of an alcoholic beverage between the hours of 3:00 a.m.
and 7:00 a.m. when it falls on a weekday. When December 25th falls on a
Sunday, no licensee shall sell, serve, deliver or allow, permit or suffer the
sale, service or delivery of an alcoholic beverage between the hours of 3:00
a.m. and 11:00 a.m.
§ 6-4.5. New Year's Day. [Ord. No. 12-27-57; 1967 Code § 4-3B; New]
Provisions of subsection 6-4.1 shall not apply on January 1st. On that day no
licensee shall sell, serve, delivery or allow, permit or suffer the sale, service
or delivery of any alcoholic beverage in the licensed premises between the
hours of 5:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. when it falls on a weekday. When January
1 falls on a Sunday, no alcoholic beverages may be sold, served, delivered
or consumed between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m.
§ 6-3.4 § 6-4.6
1:168
§ 6-4.6. Election Day. [Ord. No. 12-27-57; Ord. No. 0-3-72; Ord. No.
0-7-72; 1967 Code § 4-3C]
The licensee shall be permitted to sell, serve, deliver or allow and permit the
sale, service or delivery of alcoholic beverages on the date of any election,
subject to the restrictions enumerated in subsection 6-4.1.
§ 6-4.7. Sales to certain persons. [Ord. No. 12-27-57; Ord. No.
0-2-80; 1967 Code § 4-9]
No licensee shall serve, deliver or allow, permit or suffer the sale, service
or delivery of any alcoholic beverage, directly or indirectly, to any person
under the legal age for the consumption of alcoholic beverages established
by the State of New Jersey for consumption or to any person actually or
apparently intoxicated or allow, permit or suffer the consumption of any
alcoholic beverage by any such person in or upon the licensed premises.
§ 6-4.8. Closing provisions. [Ord. No. 12-27-57; Ord. No. 0-5-78;
1967 Code 4-3D; New]
§ 6-5. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
§ 6-5.1. Revocation of license. [New]
Any license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked for
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any provision of any
applicable statute or any of the rules or regulations of the State Director of
Alcoholic Beverage Control.
Proceedings for suspension or revocation shall be in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 33:1-31 by service of a five-day notice of charges
preferred against the licensee and affording a reasonable opportunity for
hearing.
Suspension or revocation of a license shall be in addition to any other
penalty which may be imposed for a violation of this chapter.
a. During the hours that the sale of alcoholic beverages are prohibited, the
entire licensed premises shall be closed with the exception as provided
in paragraph b, and no person shall be admitted or permitted to remain
thereon except the licensee or bona fide employees of the licensee, but
this closing requirement shall not apply to hotels or to restaurants as
defined in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1t.
b. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections 6-4.1 through 6-4.6, no
licensee shall permit any patron, customer, or any other person not
employed or engaged in performing services on behalf of any licensee
to remain within any premises in which alcoholic beverages shall be
sold or otherwise dispensed later than 1/2 hour after the designated
closing hour(s) aforesaid.
§ 6-4.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-5.2
1:169
§ 6-5.2. Penalty. [Ord. No. 12-27-57; Ord. No. 0-13-80; 1967 Code
§ 4-11; New]
§ 6-6. PERSONS UNDER THE LEGAL AGE.
§ 6-6.1. Purchasing or serving persons under the legal age
prohibited. [New]
No licensee shall sell or serve alcoholic beverages to persons under the
legal age.
§ 6-6.2. Purchasing for or serving to prohibited. [Ord. No. 12-27-57;
Ord. No. 0-2-80; 1967 Code § 4-7]
It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase for or serve to any person
who is under the legal age for the consumption of alcoholic beverages
established by the State of New Jersey any alcoholic beverage for
consumption on licensed premises.
§ 6-6.3. Unlawful acts by persons under legal age for purchase of
alcoholic beverages; disorderly persons. [N.J.S.A. 33:1-81; New]
It shall be unlawful for:
a. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, upon
conviction, shall be subject to the General Penalty established in
Section 1-5 of this Code.
b. When the Municipal Court suspends the imposition of a defendant's
sentence, or a portion thereof, or sentences him to be placed on
probation, the Municipal Court may attach such reasonable conditions
authorized by N.J.S.A. 2C:45-1, including the performance of
community related services, and the imposition of conditions
reasonably related to the rehabilitation of the defendant, including but
not limited to alcoholic rehabilitation programs or other such programs
related to alcoholic education or rehabilitation.
a. A person under the legal age for purchasing alcoholic beverages to
enter any premises licensed for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for
the purpose or purchasing, or having served or delivered to him or her,
any alcoholic beverage; or
b. A person under the legal age for purchasing alcoholic beverages to
consume any alcoholic beverage on premises licensed for the retail sale
of alcoholic beverages, or to purchase, attempt to purchase or have
another purchase for him any alcoholic beverage; or,
c. Any person to enter any premises licensed for the retail sale of alcoholic
beverages for the purpose of purchasing, or to purchase alcoholic
beverages, for another person who does not because of his age have the
right to purchase and consume alcoholic beverages.
§ 6-5.2 § 6-6.3
1:170
Chapter 7
TRAFFIC
§ 7-1. DEFINITIONS.
§ 7-1.1. Words and phrases. [Ord. No. 18-90 AA 75-1]
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meaning
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases
used herein.
§ 7-1.2. Official time standard. [Ord. No. 18-90 AA 75-2]
Whenever certain hours are named in this Chapter, they shall mean either
Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Daylight Savings Time as may be in
current use.
§ 7-2. AUTHORIZATION FOR THE CLOSING OF ANY STREET. [Ord.
No. 18-90 AA 75-3]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall
be deemed and adjudged to be a disorderly person, and upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.
In addition, the court shall suspend the person's license to operate a
motor vehicle for six months or prohibit the person from obtaining a
license to operate a motor vehicle in this State for six months
beginning on the date he becomes eligible to obtain a license or on
the date of conviction, whichever is later. In addition, to the general
penalty prescribed for an offense, the court may require any person
under the legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages who violates this
act to participate in an alcohol education or treatment program
authorized by the Department of Health for a period not to exceed the
maximum period of confinement prescribed by law for the offense for
which the individual has been convicted.
a. The Chief of Police or, in his/her absence, disability or inability to act,
the Township Manager is hereby authorized to provide by regulation for
the closing of any street or portion thereof to motor vehicle traffic on
any day or days during specified hours on any day or days whenever he/
she finds that such closing is necessary for the preservation of the
public safety, health or welfare.
b. Any regulations promulgated by the Chief of Police and in accordance
with paragraph a. above, shall provide for the posting of proper
warning signs of such closing on any street or portion thereof during
the time the same is closed in pursuance thereof.
§ 6-6.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-2
1:171
§ 7-3. TOW-AWAY. [Ord. No. 18-90 AA 75-4]
Any vehicle parked in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a nuisance
and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic, and any Police
Officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle. The owner shall bear
the reasonable costs of removal and storage which may result from such
removal before regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ 7-4. PENALTIES. [Ord. No. 18-90 AA 75-7]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, every
person convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $50 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days or both and a $1 Automated
Traffic System surcharge.
§ 7-5. EFFECT OF CHAPTER. [Ord. No. 18-90 AA 75-6]
If any part or parts of this Chapter are, for any reason, held to be invalid,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter.
§ 7-6. REPEAL. [Ord. No. 18-90 AA 75-7]
All former traffic ordinances of the Township of Deptford are hereby
repealed, and all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with or
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed, except
that this repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment
of any person for any act done or committed in violation of any ordinance
hereby repealed prior to the taking effect of this chapter.
§ 7-7. PARKING.
§ 7-7.1. Regulations not exclusive. [Ord. No. 18-90 AA 75-8]
The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other, more restrictive, provisions
prohibiting or limiting the stopping or standing or parking of vehicles as set
forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any other New Jersey Statute or as hereinafter
provided.
§ 7-7.2. Parking prohibited during state of emergency. [Ord. No.
18-90 AA 75-9; New]
c. Any violation of this regulator, promulgated thereunder shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $50.
d. Any regulation adopted that mandates the closing of any street for a
period greater than 48 consecutive hours shall not become effective
unless and until it has been submitted to and approved by the
Commissioner of the Department of Transportation.
§ 7-2 § 7-7.2
1:172
§ 7-7.3. Temporary parking for snow plowing and removal. [Ord. No.
0.1.01 AA 1;Ord. No. 18-90 AA 75-10; Ord. No. 0.22.94]
a. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
any streets or sections of streets where temporary EMERGENCY NO
PARKING signs are displayed. The Chief of Police or, in his/her absence,
the ranking Police Officer is authorized to declare any emergency and
to direct the posting of EMERGENCY NO PARKING signs when weather
conditions, accidents, road construction, fire or public celebration
dictate or require avoidance of hazards or other conditions which
interfere with the free flow of traffic. Notification that EMERGENCY
NO PARKING signs are being or will be posted shall be given to the
operator or owner of any vehicle which has been parked prior to the
posting of the signs.
b. Upon the declaration of any road construction or public celebration,
there shall be no parking upon any streets or sections of streets where
temporary EMERGENCY NO PARKING signs are displayed.
c. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this section
shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper
regulation of traffic and any Police Officer may provide for the removal
of such vehicle. The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of removal
and storage before regaining possession of the vehicle. The
effectiveness of this subsection is contingent upon the signs being
erected as required by law.
a. With the exception of those roads listed on Schedule A listed below,
parking of any vehicle, trailer or other type obstruction on any portion
of a public road, street or highway in the Township is prohibited
whenever snow has fallen the accumulation of snow is such that it
covers the public road, street or highway.
b. The parking prohibition shall remain in effect after the snow has ceased
and until the streets, roads or highways have been plowed sufficiently
and to the extent that parking will not interfere with the normal flow of
traffic.
c. Any unoccupied vehicle or standing in violation of this section shall be
deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of
traffic within the Township and any Police Officer may provide for the
removal of such vehicle. The owner shall pay reasonable costs of
storage and towing which may result from such removal.
d. Penalty. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey
Statute, every person convicted of a violation of a provision of this
section shall be liable to a penalty of no more than $50 or imprisonment
for a term not to exceed 15 days or both. For the purposes of this
section, each calendar day in which the violation continues to exist shall
be deemed a new and separate violation.
§ 7-7.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-7.3
1:173
§ 7-8. CONSTRUCTION ZONE: TRAFFIC CONTROLS FOR STREET
AND HIGHWAY CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OPERATION
AND ADOPTION OF MANUAL ON UNIFORM TRAFFIC CONTROL
DEVICES FOR STREETS AND HIGHWAYS.
(Municipal Roads Only)
§ 7-8.1. Controls established for construction zone. [New]
The governing body hereby finds and declares that problems of traffic
control occur and traffic must be moved through or around street
construction, maintenance operations, and utility work, above and below
ground which requires blocking the roadway and obstructing the normal
flow of traffic; and that such obstructions are or can become dangerous
when not properly controlled. In order to better promote the public health,
safety, peace and welfare, it is necessary to establish controls and
regulations directed to the safety and expeditious movement of traffic
through construction and maintenance zones and to provide safety for the
work force performing these operations.
The Township of Deptford, in the County of Gloucester, State of New Jersey,
does hereby adopt the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
hereafter known as M.U.T.C.D., except as hereby supplemented and
amended, as it controls and regulates whenever construction maintenance
operations of utility work obstructs the normal flow of traffic. Any person,
contractor, or utility, who fails to comply with the provisions of M.U.T.C.D.
while performing such work is in violation of this section.
Schedule A
All Streets Within County Club Estates (Deptford Township)
including:
Street Location
Hemlock Terrace Entire Street (one side)
Griscom Drive Entire Street (one side)
Penn Boulevard Entire Street (one side)
Elm Avenue Entire Street (one side)
Hesters Avenue Entire Street (one side)
Woodbury Lake Road West from Egg Harbor Road to Griscom
Drive (one side)
Division Street South side of street from Egg Harbor Road
to Hesters Avenue (one side)
Morgan Avenue Entire Street (one side)
Central Avenue Egg Harbor Road to Hesters Avenue (one
side)
§ 7-7.3 § 7-8.2
1:174
§ 7-8.2. Pre-construction meetings. [New]
It shall be the responsibility of the person, contractor, or in the case of
a public utility agreement, wishing to conduct work on, under or above
the roadway to contact the Police Department in order to arrange a preconstruction
meeting in order to submit plans for the safe movement of
traffic during such period of construction work. Any person, contractor or
utility who fails to comply with this section prior to the start of such work
or whose plans are not approved by the Police Department is in violation of
this section.
§ 7-8.3. Hazardous conditions. [New]
The person, contractor, or utility shall provide the Police Department with
at least two emergency contact phone numbers to be called in case of
emergency problems at the construction or maintenance site prior to the
start of any work. If for any reason emergency contact cannot be reached,
or if the emergency contact person does not respond to the call from
the Police Department to correct a hazardous condition, the Township
may respond to correct such hazardous condition. The reasonable fees for
such emergency service by the Borough shall be charged to the person,
contractor, or utility for such condition.
§ 7-8.4. Hours. [New]
There shall be no construction, maintenance operations, or utility work on
any roadway in the Township before the hour of 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00
p.m. This time limit may be adjusted to permit work prior to 9:00 a.m. or
after 4:00 p.m. by the Township Manager. If it is determined by the Officer
in charge that the construction or maintenance operations prior to 9:00
a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. would substantially delay traffic or cause a safety or
health hazard, the work shall then be permitted only between 9:00 a.m. and
4:00 p.m.
§ 7-8.5. Road closing and detours. [New]
Road closing and/or traffic detours shall not be permitted unless approved
by the Police Department.
§ 7-8.6. Traffic directors. [New]
Traffic directors shall be posted at all construction or maintenance sites
when determined by the Police Department that same is necessary to
provide for the safety and expeditious movement of traffic.
§ 7-8.7. Stop work. [New]
The Police Department shall have the authority to stop work, including
the removal of equipment and vehicles, stored material within the street
right-of-way, back filling of open excavations and/or other related work, in
§ 7-8.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-8.7
1:175
order to abate any nuisance and/or safety hazard or for any violation of this
section.
§ 7-8.8. Site preparation. [New]
It is to be expressly understood that no materials, vehicle or equipment
are to be placed in the roadway or sidewalk or until all construction, signs,
lights, devices and pavement markings are installed.
§ 7-8.9. Violations and penalties. [New]
Any person, contractor or utility who commits a violation of this section
shall, upon conviction thereof for a first offense, pay a fine of not less than
$100 nor more than $500 and/or be imprisoned in the county jail for a
term not exceeding 90 days. For a second offense, the person, contractor or
utility shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a fine of not less than $250 and/or
be imprisoned in the County Jail for a term not exceeding 90 days.
A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 7-8.10. Inconsistent regulations. [New]
All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent with the
provisions of this section are hereby repealed to the extent of any such
inconsistency.
§ 7-8.11. Approval by commissioner of transportation. [New]
This section shall take effect after approval by the Commissioner of
Transportation 20 days after passage and publication as prescribed by law.
§ 7-9. (Reserved)
§ 7-10. STOPPING OR STANDING PROHIBITED DURING CERTAIN
HOURS ON CERTAIN STREETS. [Ord. No. 18-90 AAA 75-13, 75-14;
Ord. No. 0.7.98; Ord. No. 0.17.98 AA 1; Ord. No. 0.1.00 AA 1; Ord.
No. 0.11.00 AA 1; Ord. No. 0.9.01 AA 1]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle between the hours specified on any
day (except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the streets or parts of
streets described.
§ 7-8.7 § 7-10
1:176
Name of
Street Zone Sides Hours Location
Cedar Avenue 1 Both All From the westerly
curbline of Route 47 to a
point 125 feet westerly
therefrom
College
Boulevard
1 School All From Westminister Road
to University Boulevard
Good Intent
Road (County
Route 534)
1 Both All Beginning at the corner of
Hamp-shire Drive and
extending easterly for a
distance of 453 feet to the
end of school property and
25 feet into B 233 L10
Good Intent
Road
East All Deceleration lane at
Hampshire Drive
intersection
Point Pleasant 1 South All From a point beginning at
State Highway Route 41,
Block 284, Lot 8 to the end
of Block 284, Lot 7, a
distance of 191.78 feet
Summit Avenue 1 Both All From the easterly curbline
of Route 47 to a point 125
feet easterly therefrom
Tanyard Road
Egg Harbor
Road (County
Route 663)
4 Both All From Barnsboro
Blockwood Road (County
Route 603) to Banks
Avenue
University
Boulevard
1 School
side
All From College Boulevard to
Westminister Road
§ 7-11. PARKING TIME LIMITED ON CERTAIN STREETS. [Ord. No.
18-90 AAA 75-13, 75-15]
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown on any
day (except Sundays and holidays) upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described.
§ 7-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-11
1:177
Name of
Street Zone Sides
Time
Limit Hours Location
Ladner Avenue 1 Both 15 Min. From the westerly
curbline of State
Highway Route 47
(Delsea Drive) along
the westerly side of
Ladner Avenue 120
feet
Summit Avenue 1 Both 15 Min. From the easterly
curbline of Route 47
(Delsea Drive) to a
point 125 feet
easterly therefrom
All known
residential
Township
Streets
All Both All Entire
§ 7-12. PARKING PROHIBITED FOR STREET CLEANING.
No person shall cause or permit to be parked any motor vehicle upon street
between the specified hours and days described.
Name of Street Side Hours and Days Location
Reserved
§ 7-13. PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES ON CERTAIN
STREETS. [Ord. No. 18-90 AA 75-20; Ord. No. 0-7-92 AA 1; Ord. No.
0.13.94 AA 1; Ord. No. 0.18.94 AA 1; Ord. No. 0.26.94 AA 1; Ord. No.
0.16.96 AA 1; Ord. No. 0.19.98 AA 1; Ord. No. 0.9.01 AA 1; Ord. No.
0.16.01 AA 1; Ord. No. 0.20.01 AA 1; Ord. No. 0.19.02 AA 1]
Name of Street Zone Sides Location
Ayres Lane Both Entire length
Broadway Both From Gilbert Avenue to
Magnolia Avenue
Carnation Drive Both Beginning at the corner of
Good Intent Road (County
Route 534) extending for a
distance of 50 feet
Carteret Avenue 1 North Between Delsea Drive and
Florence Avenue
Caulfield Avenue
(County Route
645)
1 Northerly From the easterly curbline of
Turkey Hill Road at the
Turnpike overpass therefrom
§ 7-11 § 7-13
1:178
Name of Street Zone Sides Location
Central Avenue 4 North All that certain area
designated as the northerly
side of Central Avenue from
Egg Harbor Road westwardly
to Hemlock Terrace 253+ feet;
Hemlock Terrace to Griscom
Drive 251+ feet; Griscom
Drive westwardly to East Penn
Boulevard 183+ feet; Elm
Avenue westwardly to Morgan
Avenue 171+ feet; Morgan
Avenue west-warily to Hesters
Avenue 171+ feet on the west
Cooper Street
(County Route
534)
3 Both From Woodbury City limits to
Almonesson Road (County
Route 621)
County House
Road (County
Route 534)
3 Both From Good Intent Road
(County Route 534) east to
Bull Runn Branch in the
Township of Deptford
Deptford Avenue 1 Southerly From the westerly curbline of
(County Route 646) Route 47
to a point 100 feet westerly
therefrom
Egg Harbor Road Both Beginning at Highland Avenue
and ending at Logan Avenue
Essex Avenue 3 Both Beginning at a point formed
by sides of the intersection of
the street westerly lines of
Essex Avenue and both sides
of the easterly line of Delsea
Drive a.k.a. State Highway
dividing Route 47; thence
eastwardly island along Essex
Avenue with the northerly line
of Somerset Avenue as
extended; and also that
portion of Essex Avenue
between the easterly line of
Delsea Drive (State Route 47)
and the north-easterly line of
Bergen Avenue as extended
Fern Avenue East 50 feet from the intersection
of Good Intent Road
§ 7-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-13
1:179
Name of Street Zone Sides Location
Fisher Street 1 Both Beginning at Grand Avenue in
the west end of Fisher Street
and running east to Pope Lane
Fox Run Road 3 Both From Good Intent Road
(County Route 534) to Delsea
Drive (State Highway Route
47)
Good Intent Road
(County Route
534)
3 Both Beginning at Carnation Drive
and continuing east to the
Township of Deptford
boundary
Good Intent Road East Deceleration lane at
Hampshire Drive
Grace Avenue Both From Peach Street to
Magnolia Avenue
Harris Drive South Entire length
Highland Avenue 4 Both Entire length from Cooper
Street (County Route 534) to
Egg Harbor Road (County
Route 663)
Hillside Avenue South Entire length
Mail Avenue 1 Both 100 feet in each direction in
front of Allen Park playground
Mercer Street South Between Cooper Street and
New Jersey Avenue
Peach Street Both Marion Avenue to Broadway
Peterson
Boulevard
1 East Along the west curbline of
Peterson Boulevard from a
point 100 feet south of Cedar
Avenue southwardly around
the curve for a distance of 170
feet
1 Southeast Along the southeast curbline
of Peterson Boulevard
beginning at a point 1,930 feet
southwardly from Cedar
Avenue and continuing
westwardly and southwardly
300 feet to the end of the
curve
§ 7-13 § 7-13
1:180
Name of Street Zone Sides Location
1 West Along the west curbline of
Peterson Boulevard beginning
at a point 1,070 feet
southwardly from Cedar
Avenue and continuing
southwardly and westwardly
500 feet to the end of the
curve
Pine Avenue 2 Both From Good Intent Road
(County Route 534) to the end
of the playground area
Pope Lane 1 Both Beginning at Park Avenue in
the south end and running
north to the end of Pope Lane
Ryan Lane 1 Both Easterly from Delsea Drive for
the full distance of Ryan
Avenue
South Sussex
Avenue
4 East Beginning at a point formed
by the intersection of Cooper
Street and South Sussex
Avenue south to the
intersection of South Sussex
Avenue and New Jersey
Avenue
Taras Avenue 1 Both Entire length
University 5 North From Swarthmore
Boulevard Road northeast to Ursinus
Street (one block area)
Westville-
Almonesson Road
(County Road
621)
Both Beginning at Turkey Hill Road
and ending at the New Jersey
Turnpike overpass
§ 7-14. PARKING PROHIBITED DURING CERTAIN HOURS ON
CERTAIN STREETS. [Ord. No. 18-90 AA 75-12; Ord. No. 0-18-91 AA
1; Ord. No. 0-2-93 AA 1; Ord. No. 0.16.00 AA 1; Ord. No. 0.17.02 AA
1]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle between the hours specified on any
day (except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the streets or parts of
streets described.
§ 7-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-14
1:181
Name of
Street Zone Sides Days Hours Location
Ambrose
Court
Both Monday to Friday
from 8:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m. when
school is in session
Barlow
Avenue
Both From 8:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m. when
school is in session
From Tanyard
Road to Redrow
Avenue
College
Boulevard
5 South School hours University
Boulevard to
Cornell Avenue
H Road 3 Both 7:30 a.m. to 3:30
p.m.
H Road to Fox
Run Road County
Route 647
Pine Street 1 North School hours Carteret to Shady
Lane
Sickle Lane Both Monday to Friday
from 8:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m. when
school is in session
From Good Intent
Road to Jones
Avenue
University
Boulevard
5 North School hours College
Boulevard to
Fordham Road
§ 7-15. PARKING BY PERMIT DURING CERTAIN HOURS ON
CERTAIN DAYS ON CERTAIN STREETS.
No person shall park a vehicle on streets or parts of streets as described
within the following sections unless an appropriate and current parking
permit as issued by the Township of Deptford is displayed on the vehicle for
those streets or parts of streets as described or listed within the following
sections:
Section Street Location Hours Days
Reserved
§ 7-16. PARKING OF TRUCKS WEIGHING IN EXCESS OF FOUR
TONS REGISTERED GROSS WEIGHT PROHIBITED. [Ord. No. 18-90
AA 75-17]
No person shall park a truck, tractor, trailer, semi-trailer, omnibus or any
vehicle having registered gross weights in excess of four tons upon any
street between the hours specified.
§ 7-14 § 7-16
1:182
Name of Street Location
Any Municipal Street located in the
Township
All streets, entire length
§ 7-16.1. Parking, stopping or standing of vehicles in excess of four
tons registered gross weight. [Ord. No. 0.3.99]
No person shall park, stop or stand a vehicle over four tons registered gross
weight in the following areas:
Name of Street Sides Location
Bellevue Avenue Both Beginning at the corner of Hurffville Road
(State Route 41) to Summit Avenue
§ 7-17. PARKING OF CERTAIN TRUCKS, VEHICLES AND TRAILERS
PROHIBITED.
No person shall park any truck or vehicle over three tons gross vehicle
weight (GVW), a school bus, any other type of bus, recreational vehicle,
camper, boat or trailer between the hours specified upon any of the streets
or parts of streets described.
Name of
Street Sides Hours Location
Reserved
§ 7-18. ANGLE PARKING.
The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby designated for
Angle Parking at an angle so indicated.
Name of
Street Sides Hours Location
Reserved
§ 7-19. ROUTES FOR TRUCKS OVER FOUR TONES. [Ord. No. 18-90
AA 75-18; Ord. No. 0-24-91 AA 1]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:67-16.1, the streets or parts of streets as described
are hereby designated as Routes for Vehicles Over Four Tons. All trucks
having a total combined registered gross weight of vehicle except from
those streets listed, which form a part of the system of truck routes. Vehicles
will be permitted on all streets for the purpose of the pick up and delivery
of materials.
Name of Street Location
Bankridge Road Between State Route 47 and County Route 553
(Woodbury-Glassboro Road)
Deptford Center Road Between State Route 41 and State Route 55
§ 7-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-19
1:183
Name of Street Location
Highland Avenue Between County Route 534 (Cooper Street) and
County Route 663 (Egg Harbor Road)
Salina Road Between County Route 553 (Woodbury-Glassboro
Road) and the Deptford Township-Washington
Township Corp-orate line
Turkey Hill Road Between State Route 47 (Delsea Drive) and County
Route 621 (Almonesson Road)
§ 7-20. VEHICLES WEIGHING IN EXCESS OF FOUR TONS
REGISTERED GROSS WEIGHT PROHIBITED FROM CERTAIN
STREETS. [Ord. No. 18-90 AA 75-16; Ord. No. 0-25-91 AA 1]
No person shall drive a truck, tractor, trailer, semi-trailer or omnibus having
a registered gross weight in excess of four tons upon any street described,
except for the pick-up and delivery of materials on such streets.
Name of Street Location
Carteret Avenue Between State Route 47 and Park Avenue
Highland Avenue Between Park Avenue and Pine Street
§ 7-21. TRUCKS OVER DESIGNATED REGISTERED GROSS WEIGHT
EXCLUDED FROM CERTAIN STREETS. [Ord. No. 0.6.98; Ord. No.
0.3.99; Ord. No. 0.9.99]
Trucks over the permitted registered gross vehicle weight are hereby
excluded from the streets or parts of streets described except for the pick
up and delivery of materials on such streets.
Name of Street Weight Limits
Bellevue Avenue Over 4 tons Beginning 180 feet from the corner of
Hurffville Road to Summit Avenue
Caulfield Avenue Over 4 tons From Turkey Hill Road to Almonesson
Avenue
Sunset Avenue Over 4 tons From Hurffville Road (State Route 41)
to Summit Avenue
Turkey Hill Road Over 4 tons From Route 47 (Delsea Drive) to
Caulfield Avenue
§ 7-22. ONE-WAY STREETS. [Ord. No. 18-90 AA 75-19; New; Ord.
No. 0.15.96 AA 1]
The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as
One-Way Streets in the direction indicated. Parking on these streets will be
permitted on the sides indicated below.
§ 7-19 § 7-22
1:184
Name of
Street Zone Direction
Parking
Permitted Limits
Brookfield
Avenue
4 Easterly Both sides Hammond Avenue
to Lincoln Road
Carver Drive 4 Easterly Both sides Hammond Avenue
to Rose Hill
Avenue
Cordelia
Avenue
1 Easterly Both sides Clearbrook
Avenue and
Broadway
Hunterdon
Road
Easterly Both sides Cooper Street to
Clements Bridge
Road
Katherine
Avenue
1 Westerly Both sides Clearbrook
Avenue to
Broadway
Lincoln Road 4 Northerly Both sides Woodbury/
Glassboro Road to
Carver Drive
Woodland
Avenue
1 Southwesterly
Both sides Carver Drive
Route 47 (Delsea
Drive) and
Florence Avenue
§ 7-23. THROUGH STREETS. [Ord. No. 18-90 AA 75-24; Ord. No.
0.8.95 AA 1; Ord. No. 0.3.96 AA I; Ord. No. 0.10.01 AA 1]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of
streets described are hereby designated Through Streets. Stop signs shall
be installed on the near right side of each street intersecting the Through
Street except where Yield signs are provided for in the designations.
Name of Street Zone Limits
Branchwood Drive Treeline Drive and County House Road
(CR 621)
Bruce Drive 3 Good Intent Road to Cooper Street
Central Avenue 3 West Summit Avenue to East Central
Avenue
College Boulevard 5 Ogden Road to Route 45
Craig Drive 3 Good Intent Road to Cooper Street
Deptford Center
Road
2 Westville Almonesson Road to Route
41
First Avenue 3 County House Road to Good Intent
Road
§ 7-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-23
1:185
Florence Avenue 1 Broadway to West Cedar Avenue
Hampshire Drive
North/West/South
3 Good Intent Road to Good Intent Road
Highland Avenue 4 Cooper Street to Egg Harbor Road
Highland Avenue 3 County House Road to Route 41
Hunterdon Avenue 2 Cooper Street to Clements Bridge
Road
Kohler Avenue 1 Route 47 (Delsea Drive) to Wagner
Avenue
Lake Avenue 4 Hesters Avenue to Egg Harbor Road
Lexington Avenue 1 Route 47 to Caulfield Avenue
Mail Avenue 4 Egg Harbor Road to Wood-bury/
Glassboro Road
Oak Avenue 3 County House Road to Good Intent
Road
Ogden Road From NJ 45 (Mullica Hill-Woodbury
Turnpike) to the Deptford Township
Wenonah Borough Corporate line
Pine Street 1 Broadway to East Cedar Avenue
Ponto Avenue
(formerly Central
Avenue)
3 Between First Avenue and its most
easterly intersection with Tree Line
Drive (formerly Sixth Avenue)
Princeton/University 5 Ogden Road to College Boulevard
Boulevard Salina
Road
4 Between the Wenonah Borough-
Deptford Township Corporate line and
Tanyard Road (CR 663) thence
between Tanyard Road (CR 663) and
the Deptford Township Washington
Township Corporate line.
Tall Pines Drive 4 Between Ramblewood Drive and its
most southerly intersection with Tall
Pines Drive
Washington Avenue 3 County House Road to Good Intent
Road
West Summit
Avenue
3 Cooper Street to Route 41
§ 7-23 § 7-24
1:186
§ 7-24. STOP INTERSECTION. [Ord. No. 18-90 AA 75-25; Ord. No.
0-16-90 AA 2; Ord. No. 0.11.98 AA 1; Ord. No. 0.9.00 AA 1; Ord. No.
0.17.00 AA 1; Ord. No. 0.12.02; Ord. No. 0.21.02 AA 1; New]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:54-140, the intersections described
are hereby designated as Stop Intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
Zone Intersection Stop Sign On
3 Androssen Court and
Hampshire Drive
Androssen Court
5 Albright Street and Muhlenberg
Avenue
Albright Street
5 Albright Street and Villanova
Avenue
Albright Street
4 Alexander Place and Lincoln
Road
Alexander Place
5 Allegheny Road and Rutgers
Avenue
Allegheny Road
5 Alliance Street and Fordham
Road
Alliance Street
5 Amherst Street and Franklin
Road
Amherst Street
5 Amherst Street and Hamilton
Road
Amherst Street
1 Andalora Way (County Rte. 644)
and Cobblestone Lane
Cobblestone Lane
3 Ann Avenue and Oak Avenue Both sides of Ann Avenue
4 Atlantic Avenue and Central
Avenue
Atlantic Avenue
4 Avalon Avenue and New Jersey
Avenue
Avalon Avenue
3 Bayer Avenue and Hunters
Drive
Bayer Avenue
3 Bennett Drive and Warwick
Road
Bennett Drive
3 Bergen Street and Monmouth
Road
Bergen Street
1 Birch Avenue and Marion
Avenue
Birch Avenue
1 Blanchard Drive and
Lakebridge Drive
Blanchard Drive
1 Braun Court and Peterson
Boulevard
Braun Court
§ 7-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-24
1:187
Zone Intersection Stop Sign On
4 Briston Court and Colonial
Drive
Bristol Court
4 Brookfield Avenue and Lincoln
Road
Brookfield Road
3 Bruce Drive and Craig Drive Craig Drive
5 Bucknell Avenue and Dickerson
Road
Bucknell Avenue
4 Burgandy Court and
Brankbridge Road
Burgandy Court
2 Burlington Avenue and
Hunterdon Avenue
Burlington Avenue
3 Burning Tree Road and
Redstone Ridge
Burning Tree Road
3 Burning Tree Road and Shelly
Lane
Burning Tree Road
3 Byrd Drive and Warwick Road Byrd Drive
4 Cape May Avenue and New
Jersey Avenue
Cape May Avenue
3 Carnation Court and Carnation
Drive
Carnation Court
3 Carnation Drive and Carnation
Drive
Carnation Drive
5 Carnegie Avenue and
Muhlenberg Avenue
Carnegie Avenue
1 Carson Avenue and Peterson
Boulevard
Carson Avenue
1 Carson Court and Carson
Avenue
Carson Court
1 Carteret Avenue and Deptford
Avenue
Carteret Avenue
1 Carteret Avenue and Florence
Avenue
Carteret Avenue
1 Carteret Avenue and Park
Avenue
Carteret Avenue
3 Casa Road and Round Top Road Carteret Avenue
4 Cedar Lane and Church Street Cedar Lane
5 Cedarcrest Road and Bucknell
Avenue
Cedarcrest Road
5 Cedarcrest Road and Drexel
Avenue
Cedarcrest Road
§ 7-24 § 7-24
1:188
Zone Intersection Stop Sign On
3 Cherry Avenue and Woodbury
Avenue
Woodbury Avenue
3 Chestnut Avenue and
Pennsylvania Avenue
Chestnut Avenue
1 Clearbrook Avenue and
Florence Avenue
Clearbrook Avenue
1 Clifford Avenue and
Cobblestone Lane
Clifford Avenue
1 Clifford Avenue and Lakeview Clifford Avenue
1 Cobblestone Lane and Moore
Avenue
Cobblestone Lane
1 Clinton Street and Grace
Avenue
Clinton Street
5 Colgate Lane and Vassar Road Both sides of Colgate Lane
3 Crestview Drive and Crestview
Drive
Crestview Drive for westbound
traffic
3 Cumberland Avenue and
Monmouth Road
Both directions on Cumberland
Avenue
5 Curtiss Street and Dickerson
Road
Curtiss Street
5 Curtiss Street and Haverford
Avenue
Curtiss Street
3 Dane Avenue and Warwick Road Dane Avenue
5 Dartmouth Court and
Dartmouth Drive
Dartmouth Court
5 Dartmouth Drive and Purdue
Avenue
Dartmouth Drive
1 Dexter Avenue and Wagner
Avenue
Dexter Avenue
5 Dixon Avenue and Howard
Avenue
Both sides of Dixon Avenue
5 Dixon Avenue and Leslie
Avenue
Dixon Avenue
1 Doman Avenue and Moore
Avenue
Doman Avenue
5 Duff Avenue and Leslie Avenue Duff Avenue
5 Duke Drive and Dartmouth
Drive
Duke Drive
1 Edgewood Avenue and Florence
Avenue
Edgewood Avenue
§ 7-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-24
1:189
Zone Intersection Stop Sign On
1 Edgewood Avenue and Gilbert
Avenue
Edgewood Avenue
1 Edgewood Avenue and Marian
Avenue
Edgewood Avenue
3 Eli Place and Bennett Drive Multi-way stop
3 Eli Place and Byrd Drive Multi-way stop
3 Eli Place and Lindberg Drive Multi-way stop
3 Eli Place and Somerset Road Eli Place
4 Elm Avenue and Andy Snyder
Boulevard
Both sides of Elm Avenue
4 Elm Avenue and Woodbury Lake
Road
Elm Avenue
3 Essex Boulevard and Somerset
Road
Essex Boulevard
1 Evelyn Drive and Jefferson
Avenue
Evelyn Avenue
1 Evelyn Drive and Wagner
Avenue
Wagner Avenue
4 Fairfax Court and Colonial
Drive
Fairfax Court
3 Fern Avenue and Slater Avenue Fern Avenue
4 Fernshire Court and
Bankbridge Road
Fernshire Court
3 First Avenue and Ponto Avenue First Avenue
1 Fisher Avenue and Grace
Avenue
Fisher Avenue
1 Florence Avenue and Marion
Avenue
Marion Avenue
1 Florence Avenue and Whitney
Avenue
Whitney Avenue
3 Fourth Avenue and Ponto
Avenue
Fourth Avenue
1 Fowler Avenue and Central
Avenue
Fowler Avenue
5 Franklin Road and Stanford
Avenue
Franklin Road
5 Geneva Court and Bucknell
Avenue
Geneva Court
5 Georgetown Road and Stanford
Avenue
Georgetown Road
§ 7-24 § 7-24
1:190
Zone Intersection Stop Sign On
5 Georgetown Road and
Westminster Road
Georgetown Road
1 Gilbert Avenue and Marion
Avenue
Gilbert Avenue
1 Grace Avenue (paper) and
Marion Avenue
Grace Avenue
1 Grace Avenue and Park Avenue Grace Avenue
4 Griscom Avenue and Andy
Snyder Boulevard
Both sides of Griscom Avenue
5 Hamilton Road and Cornell
Avenue
Hamilton Road
5 Hamilton Road and Stanford
Avenue
Hamilton Road
4 Hammond Avenue and
Brookfield Avenue
Hammond Avenue
3 Hampshire Court and
Hampshire Drive
Hampshire Court
5 Harvard Avenue and
Muhlenberg Avenue
Harvard Avenue
5 Harvey Avenue and Howard
Avenue
Both sides of Harvey Avenue
5 Harvey Avenue and Leslie
Avenue
Harvey Avenue
1 Hayes Avenue and Cobblestone
Lane
Hayes Avenue
4 Heather Glen Court and
Willowbrook Drive
Heather Glen Court
4 Hemlock Terrace and Andy
Snyder Boulevard
Both sides of Hemlock Terrace
4 Hemlock Terrace and Division
Street
Hemlock Terrace
1 Houston Avenue and
Cobblestone Lane
Houston Avenue
5 Howard Avenue and Duff
Avenue
Howard Avenue
3 Hudson Avenue and Monmouth
Road
Hudson Avenue
3 Hudson Avenue and Passaic
Street
Hudson Avenue
3 Hunter Drive and Bayer Avenue Multi-way stop
§ 7-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-24
1:191
Zone Intersection Stop Sign On
3 Hunter Drive and Valley Road Hunter Drive
3 Indian Trail Avenue and
Woodbury Avenue
Woodbury Avenue
4 Iszard Road and Ward Drive Iszard Road
3 Ivanhoe Avenue and South Side
Avenue
Ivanhoe Avenue
5 Ivy Lane and Glenside Drive Ivy Lane
5 Ivy Lane and Ridge Drive Ivy Lane
1 Katherine Avenue and Marion
Avenue
Katherine Avenue
1 Kelly Drive and Lakebridge
Drive
Kelly Drive
1 Knollwood Drive and Kelly
Drive
Knollwood Drive
1 Kohler Avenue and Wagner
Avenue
Kohler Avenue
1 Lakebridge Drive and
Knollwood Drive
Lakebridge Drive
4 Larkins Street and Malcolm
Avenue
Larkins Street
5 LaSalle Avenue and Yale Street Yale Street
1 Lee Avenue and Evelyn Drive Lee Avenue
1 Lee Avenue and Lexington
Avenue
Lee Avenue
5 Lehigh Road and Rutgers
Avenue
Lehigh Road
5 Lehigh Road and Westminster
Road
Lehigh Road
3 Lehman Road and Warwick
Road
Lehman Road
4 Lincoln Road and Alexander
Place
Lincoln Road
1 Linda Lane and Clearbrook
Avenue
Linda Lane
1 Linda Lane and Whitney Avenue Linda Lane
3 Lindberg Drive and Warwick
Road
Lindberg Drive
Linden Street and Wenonah
Way
Wenonah Way
§ 7-24 § 7-24
1:192
Zone Intersection Stop Sign On
4 Lindsey Street and Church
Street
Lindsey Street
4 Lindsey Road and Boundry
Road
Lindsey Road
1 Lippincott Avenue and Fisher
Street
Lippincott Avenue
1 Lippincott Avenue and Park
Avenue
Lippincott Avenue
1 Longwood Avenue and South
Side Avenue
Longwood Avenue
5 Lycoming Avenue and
Swathmore Road
Both sides of Lycoming Avenue
5 Lycoming Avenue and
Westminster Road
Lycoming Avenue
5 Lynn Avenue and Howard
Avenue
Both sides of Lynn Avenue
5 Lynn Avenue and Leslie Avenue Lynn Avenue
5 Lynn Avenue and Purdue
Avenue
Lynn Avenue
1 Magnolia Street and Grace
Avenue
Magnolia Street
4 Maple Road and Ward Road Maple Road
1 Marion Avenue and Florence
Avenue
Marion Avenue
1 Marion Avenue and Park
Avenue
Marion Avenue
1 Marion Plaza and Marion
Avenue
Marion Plaza
3 Market Avenue and
Pennsylvania Avenue
Market Avenue
4 Maryland Avenue and Pacific
Avenue
Maryland Avenue
3 May Avenue and Pennsylvania
Avenue
May Avenue
1 McMaster Avenue and Hannold
Boulevard
McMaster Avenue
1 McMaster Avenue and Peterson
Boulevard
McMaster Avenue
4 Mercer Avenue and New Jersey
Avenue
Mercer Avenue
§ 7-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-24
1:193
Zone Intersection Stop Sign On
5 Miami Road and Cornell Avenue Miami Road
5 Miami Road and Montclair
Avenue
Miami Road
3 Monmouth Road and Bergan
Street
Bergan Street
5 Montclair Avenue and Cornell
Avenue
Montclair Avenue
5 Montclair Court and Montclair
Avenue
Montclair Court
1 Moore Avenue and Cobblestone
Lane
Moore Avenue
5 Moore Street and Fordham
Avenue
Moore Street
4 Morgan Avenue and Andy
Snyder Boulevard
Both sides of Morgan Avenue
4 Morgan Boulevard and
Woodbury Lake Drive
Morgan Boulevard
3 Morris Street and Salem
Avenue
Morris Street
3 Morris Street and Sussex
Avenue
Morris Street
5 Muhlenberg Avenue and
Rutgers Avenue
Muhlenberg Avenue
5 Muhlenberg Avenue and
Swathmore Road
Muhlenberg Avenue
1 Mullray Court and Kelly Drive Mullray Court
1 Murphy Avenue and
Cobblestone Lane
Murphy Avenue
4 New Jersey Avenue at
Princeton/University Boulevard
New Jersey Avenue
1 Niland Lane and Knollwood
Drive
Both ends of Niland Lane
3 Normandy Avenue and South
Side Avenue
Normandy Avenue
2 Ocean Court and Hunterdon
Avenue
Ocean Court
4 Pacific Avenue and Hesters
Road
Pacific Avenue
4 Pacific Avenue and Maryland
Avenue
Pacific Avenue
§ 7-24 § 7-24
1:194
Zone Intersection Stop Sign On
4 Pacific Avenue and Vermont
Avenue
Pacific Avenue
1 Park Avenue and Carteret
Avenue
Park Avenue
3 Passaic Street and Cumberland
Avenue
Passaic Street
3 Passaic Street and Monmouth
Road
Passaic Street
3 Passaic Street and Sussex
Avenue
Passaic Street
1 Peach Avenue and Central
Avenue
Peach Street
4 Penn Boulevard and Division
Street
Penn Boulevard
4 Penn Boulevard and Andy
Snyder Boulevard
Both sides of Penn Boulevard
1 Pinecrest Drive and Knollwood
Drive
Pinecrest Drive
1 Pinecrest Court and Pinecrest
Drive
Pinecrest Drive
3 Ponto Avenue and Fourth
Avenue
Both sides of Ponto Avenue and
Fourth Avenue
3 Ponto Avenue and Oak Avenue Ponto Avenue
3 Ponto Avenue and Schaeffer
Avenue
Both sides of Ponto Avenue and
Schaeffer Avenue
3 Ponto Avenue and Second
Avenue
Both sides of Ponto Avenue and
Second Avenue
3 Ponto Avenue and Third Avenue Both sides of Ponto Avenue and
Third Avenue
1 Pope Lane and Park Avenue Pope Lane
4 Poplar Street and Malcolm
Street
Poplar Street
4 Prince Avenue and King Avenue Prince Avenue
4 Prince Avenue and Wentz
Avenue
Prince Avenue
5 Purdue Avenue and Dartmouth
Drive
Purdue Avenue
4 Queen Avenue and King Avenue Queen Avenue
4 Queen Avenue and Prince
Avenue
Queen Avenue
§ 7-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-24
1:195
Zone Intersection Stop Sign On
4 Ramblewood Drive and
Willowbrook Drive
Ramblewood Drive
4 Redrow Avenue and Ayers
Avenue
Ayers Avenue
4 Redrow Avenue and Barlow
Avenue
Barlow Avenue
4 Redrow Avenue and Logan
Avenue
Logan Avenue
4 Redrow Avenue and Wills
Avenue
Both locations on Redrow
Avenue facing Wills Avenue
3 Redstone Ridge and Southview
Drive
Redstone Ridge
5 Rice Avenue and Dartmouth
Drive
Rice Avenue
5 Rice Avenue and Duke Drive Rice Avenue
3 Richwood Avenue and South
Side Avenue
Richwood Avenue
5 Ridge Avenue and Cove Road Ridge Avenue
5 Ridge Avenue and Glenside
Avenue
Ridge Avenue
1 Riggins Boulevard and Carson
Avenue
Riggins Boulevard
1 Riggins Boulevard and Peterson
Boulevard
Riggins Boulevard
4 Rosehill Avenue and Lincoln
Road
Rosehill Avenue
4 Rosehill Avenue and Lindsey
Road
Rosehill Avenue
3 Rygate Avenue and Hampshire
Drive
Rygate Avenue
3 Rygate Court and Rygate
Avenue
Rygate Court
3 Salem Avenue and Somerset
Road
Salem Avenue
Salmon Avenue and Lilac Lane Lilac Lane
1 Schollcrest Avenue and Jones
Avenue
Schollcrest Avenue
3 Second Avenue and Ponto
Avenue
Second Avenue
§ 7-24 § 7-24
1:196
Zone Intersection Stop Sign On
3 Selby Avenue and Cunard
Avenue
Selby Avenue
3 Selby Avenue and Kindle
Avenue
Selby Avenue
3 Selby Avenue and Murtaa
Avenue
Selby Avenue
1 Shady Lane and Florence
Avenue
Shady Lane
1 Shady Lane and Peach Street Shady Lane
3 Shelly Lane and Redstone Ridge Shelly Lane
3 Shelly Lane and Southview
Drive
Shelly Lane
3 Sickel Lane and Jones Avenue Sickel Lane
3 Slater Avenue and Washington
Avenue
Slater Avenue
3 St. Albans at Hampshire Drive St. Albans
5 Stanford Avenue and
Georgetown Road
Stanford Avenue
5 Stanford Avenue and Hamilton
Road
Stanford Avenue
2 Steeplechase and Clover Drive Steeplechase
2 Steeplechase and Caulfield
Avenue
Caulfield Avenue
5 Stevens Street and Baylor Road Stevens Street
5 Stevens Street and Vassar Road Stevens Street
1 Stewart Lane and Blanchard
Drive
Stewart Lane
3 Sturbridge Avenue and
Hampshire Drive
Sturbridge Avenue
3 Sturbridge Court at Sturbridge
Avenue
Sturbridge Court
3 Sunset Avenue and
Pennsylvania Avenue
Sunset Avenue
3 Sunset Avenue and Woodbury
Avenue
Woodbury Avenue
3 Sussex Avenue and Monmouth
Road
Sussex Avenue
3 Sussex Avenue and Somerset
Road
Sussex Avenue
§ 7-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-24
1:197
Zone Intersection Stop Sign On
5 Syracuse Avenue and Dixon
Avenue
Syracuse Avenue
4 Tall Pines Drive and
Ramblewood Drive
Tall Pines Drive
1 Taras Avenue and Malen
Avenue
Malen Avenue
4 Tavistock Lane and Whitemarsh
Drive
Tavistock Lane
5 Temple Avenue and
Westminster Road
Temple Avenue
5 Temple Street and Muhlenberg
Avenue
Temple Street
5 Third Avenue and Haverford
Avenue
Third Avenue
3 Third Avenue and Ponto Avenue Third Avenue
1 Trilby Avenue and Andalora
Way
Trilby Avenue
1 Trowbridge Avenue and
Hannold Boulevard
Trowbridge Avenue
5 Tulane Court and Hamilton
Road
Trowbridge Avenue
1 Turkey Hill Road and Caulfield
Avenue
Turkey Hill Road
3 Union Street and Monmouth
Road
Union Street
4 Urian Avenue and Malcolm
Avenue
Urian Avenue
3 Valley Road and Vista Way Valley Road
5 Vassar Road and Cornell Avenue Vassar Road
5 Villanova Road and Swarthmore
Road
Villanova Road
5 Villanova Court and Villanova
Avenue
Villanova Court
4 Virginia Avenue and Pacific
Avenue
Virginia Avenue
1 Walden Way and Blanchard
Drive
Walden Way
1 Walden Way and Lakebridge
Drive
Walden Way
§ 7-24 § 7-24
1:198
Zone Intersection Stop Sign On
3 Walnut Avenue and
Pennsylvania Avenue
Walnut Avenue
3 Warren Court and Cumberland
Avenue
Warren Court
4 Wayne Court and Colonia Drive Wayne Court
4 Wentz Avenue and King Avenue Wentz Avenue
5 Westminster Road and Stanford
Avenue
Westminster Road
4 Weybridge Court and
Woodcreek Road
Weybridge Court
1 Whitney Avenue and Cordelia
Avenue
Whitney Avenue
1 Whitney Avenue and Florence
Avenue
Whitney Avenue
1 Whitney Avenue and Gilbert
Avenue
Whitney Avenue
1 Williams Avenue and Evelyn
Avenue
Williams Avenue
1 Williams Avenue and Lewis
Avenue
Lewis Avenue
Wills Avenue and Lilac Lane Lilac Lane
3 Wilshire Avenue and Hampshire
Drive
Wilshire Avenue
5 Wilson Street and Drexel
Avenue
Wilson Street
5 Wilson Street and Haverford
Avenue
Wilson Street
1 Windsor Lane and Edgewood
Avenue
Windsor Lane
1 Windsor Lane and Katherine
Avenue
Windsor Lane
4 Woodbury Lake Road and Penn
Boulevard
Both sides of streets
5 Woodland Avenue and First
Avenue
Woodland Avenue
4 Woodvale Lane and Bankbridge
Road
Woodvale Lane
4 Woodvale Lane and Woodcreek
Road
Woodvale Lane
§ 7-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-24
1:199
Zone Intersection Stop Sign On
3 Wrexham Court and Hampshire
Drive
Wrexham Court
3 Wycombe Drive and Hampshire
Drive
Wycombe Drive
3 Wycombe Avenue and
Sturbridge Avenue
Wycombe Avenue
3 Wycombe Court and Wycombe
Drive
Wycombe Court
3 Wynnwood Avenue and
Longwood Avenue
Longwood Avenue
5 Yale Street and Muhlenberg
Avenue
Yale Street
3 Yardley Avenue and Redstone
Ridge
Yardley Avenue
3 Yardley Road and Shelly Lane Yardley Road
§ 7-25. MULTI-WAY STOP INTERSECTIONS. [Ord. No. 18-90 AAA
75-25, 75-27; Ord. No. 0-16-90 AA 2]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
are hereby designated as Four-Way Stop Intersections.
Eli Place and Bennett Drive
Eli Place and Byrd Drive
Eli Place at Lindberg Drive
Round Top Road and Bayer Avenue
§ 7-26. YIELD INTERSECTIONS. [Ord. No. 18-90 AA 75-26]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
are hereby designated as Yield Intersections. Yield signs shall be installed
as provided therein.
Name of
Street
Zone Yield Signs On:
Reserved
§ 7-27. TURN PROHIBITIONS. [Ord. No. 18-90 AAA 75-26, 75-21,
75-22, 75-23; Ord. No. 0-14-95 AA 1; Ord. No. 0.7.01 AA 1; Ord. No.
0.14.01 AA 1; Ord. No. 0.05.02 AA 1]
No person shall make a turn at any location listed and only in the manner
described.
§ 7-24 § 7-27
1:200
Intersection
Turn
Prohibited Movement Prohibited
From Clements Bridge Eastbound
Traffic
Left turns
Left turn Road (C.R. 544) into
the ingress nonsignaled
access into the Lowe's Home
Center
On Deptford Center Road into
the easterly access of the
Shopping Center (Block
200.01, Lots 15, 25,26)
From Hidden Oaks Drive Left turn ingress
Left turn onto Westville-
Almonesson egress Road (C.R.
621) From Westville-
Almonesson Road (C.R. 621)
into Hidden Oaks Drive
§ 7-28. NO TURN ON RED. [New]
No person shall make a right turn on the red signal at any location listed:
Reserved
§ 7-29. LOADING ZONES.20 [New]
The locations described are hereby designated as Loading Zones. No person
shall park a vehicle in these locations during the times indicated other than
for the loading or unloading of goods and materials.
Name of
Street Time Side Location
Reserved
§ 7-30. BUS STOPS.21
a. The locations described are hereby designated as Bus Stops on County
Roads.
COUNTY ROADWAY:
Along Clements Bridge Road (Rt. 544), Eastbound, on the southerly
side thereof at:
20.Editor's Note: Minimum length for all Loading Zones is 50 feet. No Loading Zone may be
established in any area where it is prohibited to stop, stand or park by N.J.S.A. 39:4-136.
21.Editor's Note: New Jersey Transit now handles these bus stop regulations. The repealed
clause in this Code eliminates the old bus stop approvals.
§ 7-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-30
1:201
A. Hunterdon Avenue _" (Far side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Hunterdon Avenue and
extending 100 feet easterly therefrom.
B. Caulfield Avenue _" (Near side)
Beginning at the prolongation of the westerly curbline of
Caulfield Avenue and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
C. Greenbriar Court _" (Near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Greenbriar Court and
extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
D. Between Rt. 42 North Exit and Rt. 41 _" (Mid-block)
Beginning 150 feet east of Route 42 and the easterly curbline
and extending 135 feet easterly therefrom.
Along Clements Bridge Road (Rt. 544), Westbound, on the northerly
side thereof at:
A. West Greenbriar Court) (Far side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of West Greenbriar Court
and extending 100 feet westerly therefrom.
B. Caulfield Avenue _" (Near side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Caulfield Avenue and
extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
C. Wagner Avenue _" (Near side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Wagner Avenue and
extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
Along Cooper Street (Rt. 534), Eastbound, on the southerly side
thereof at:
A. Stoneybrook Drive _" (Near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Stoneybrook Drive and
extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
B. Mercer Avenue _" (Near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Mercer Avenue and
extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
C. Delsea Drive (Route 47) _" (Near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Delsea Drive and
extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
D. Burke Avenue _" (Near side)
Beginning at the prolongation of the westerly curbline of
Burke Avenue and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
§ 7-30 § 7-30
1:202
E. Walker Avenue _" (Near side)
Beginning at the prolongation of the westerly curbline of
Walker Avenue and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
Along Cooper Avenue (Rt. 534), Westbound, on the northerly side
thereof at:
A. Walker Avenue _" (Near side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Walker Avenue and
extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
B. Burke Avenue _" (Far side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Burke Avenue and
extending 100 feet westerly therefrom.
C. Delsea Drive (Route 47) _" (Far side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Delsea Drive and
extending 100 feet westerly therefrom.
D. Mercer Avenue _" (Far side)
Beginning at the prolongation of the westerly curbline of
Mercer Avenue and extending 100 feet westerly therefrom.
E. Kelley Drive _" (Far side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Kelley Drive and
extending 100 feet westerly therefrom.
Along Woodbury Glassboro Road (Rt. 553), Northbound, on the
easterly side thereof at:
A. Sammler Street _" (Near side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Sammler Street and
extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
B. Cattell Road _" (Far side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Cattell Road and
extending 100 feet northerly therefrom.
C. Maple Avenue _" (Far side)
Beginning at the prolongation of the northerly curbline of
Maple Avenue and extending 100 feet northerly therefrom.
D. Lincoln Road _" (Near side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Lincoln Road and
extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
E. Hammond Avenue _" (Near side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Hammond Avenue and
extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
§ 7-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-30
1:203
F. Royal Avenue _" (Far side)
Beginning at the prolongation of the northerly curbline of
Royal Avenue and extending 100 feet northerly therefrom.
G. Church Street _" (Near side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Church Street and
extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
Along Woodbury Glassboro Road (Rt. 553), Southbound, on the
westerly side thereof at:
A. King Avenue _" (Near side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of King Avenue and
extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
B. Royal Avenue _" (Near side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Royal Avenue and
extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
b. The locations described below are hereby designated as bus stops on
Township Roads:
TOWNSHIP ROADWAY:
Along Old Broadway Road, Northbound, on the easterly side thereof
at:
A. Summer Avenue _" (Far side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Summer Avenue and
extending 100 feet northerly therefrom.
B. Peach Street North _" (Near side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Peach Street North and
extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
C. Florence Avenue _" (Near side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Florence Avenue and
extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
D. Cordelia Avenue _" (Near side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Cordelia Avenue and
extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
Along Old Broadway Road, Southbound, on the westerly side thereof
at:
A. Cordelia Avenue _" (Far side)
Beginning at the prolongation of the southerly curbline of
Cordelia Avenue and extending 100 feet southerly therefrom.
§ 7-30 § 7-30
1:204
§ 7-31. TAXI STANDS. [Ord. No. 18-90 AA 75-30; New]
The locations described are hereby designated as Taxi Stands. No vehicle
other than a taxi shall be permitted to occupy these locations during the
times indicated.
Street Location Hours
Reserved
Note: Minimum length of taxi stand near intersection is 25 feet. Adding
the sidewalk area of about 10 feet to the area where parking is prohibited
by State Law would make the starting point approximately 35 feet from
the curbline. Other locations should be at least 30 feet for one taxi and an
additional 25 feet for each additional taxi.
No taxi stand may be established in any area where it is prohibited to
stand or park pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-136.
§ 7-32. LANE USE RESERVATIONS.
The lane locations described are designated as Lane Use Reservations and
traffic shall move as indicated.
B. Florence Avenue _" (Near side)
Beginning at the prolongation of the northerly curbline of
Florence Avenue and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
C. Peach Street North _" (Far side)
Beginning at the prolongation of the southerly curbline of
Peach Street North and extending 100 feet southerly
therefrom.
D. Summer Avenue _" (Near side)
Beginning at the prolongation of the northerly curbline of
Summer Avenue and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
Along Deptford Center Road, Eastbound, on the southerly side thereof
at:
A. Between Rt. 41 and Rt. 621 _" (Mid-block)
Beginning 30 feet west of the westerly curbline of Route 41
and extending 135 feet westerly therefrom.
Along Deptford Center Road, Westbound, on the northerly side
thereof at:
A. Route 41 _" (Mid-block)
Beginning 300 feet west of the westerly curbline of Route 41
and extending 135 feet westerly therefrom.
§ 7-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-32
1:205
Intersection Movement Restriction
The left turn lane for
eastbound traffic on Deptford
Center Road at the middle
access driveways of the
Shopping Center (Block
200.01, Lots 15, 25, 26)
Eastbound Reserved for left traffic
only
The left turn lane for
westbound traffic on Deptford
Center Road at the entrance
of the Holiday Health Club
and Spa
Westbound Reserved for left turning
traffic only
§ 7-33. SPEED LIMITS. [Ord. No. 18-90 AA 75-32; Ord. No. 0-18-92
AA 1; Ord. No. 0.21.95 AA 1; Ord. No. 18-90 AA 75-32; Ord. No.
0-18-92 AA 1; Ord. No. 0.21.95 AA 1; Ord. No. 0.1.00; Ord. No.
0.13.01 AAA 1, 2]
a. The speed limit for both directions of traffic along the streets or parts of
streets described below and made a part of this chapter, are hereby
established at the rate of speed indicated.
b. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above designated speed limits.
Name of Street Speed Limit Location
Bankbridge Road
Caulfield Avenue-Turkey
Hill Road
40 m.p.h. Entire length
Zone 1 35 m.p.h. Between Clements Bridge
Road and Lexington Drive
Zone 2 40 m.p.h. Between Lexington Drive
and 530 feet south of
Turkey Hill Road
Zone 3 45 m.p.h. Between 530 feet south of
Turkey Hill Road and
Almonesson Avenue
College Boulevard 25 m.p.h.* Between New Jersey Route
45 (Mullica Hill-Woodbury
Turn-pike and Ogden Road)
* Except for 15 miles per hour while passing through the Oak
Valley Elementary School zone while the "15 Miles Per Hour
When Flashing" signs are operating, during recess or while
children are going to or leaving school, during opening or closing
hours. Oak Valley Elementary School zone shall be defined as the
area between the flashing signs.
§ 7-32 § 7-33
1:206
§ 7-34. MID-BLOCK CROSSWALKS.
The following locations are hereby designated as mid-block crosswalks.
Name of
Street Location
Reserved
§ 7-35. OLDER AND WALKING IMPAIRED PERSONS CROSSWALKS.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-183.1b, the following locations shall be established
as "Crosswalks for the Older and Walking Impaired Persons."
Name of Street Location
Reserved
§ 7-36. NO PASSING ZONES. [Ord. No. 0-11-92 AA 1; New]
The locations described are designated as zones in which passing is
prohibited. These shall be established and maintained by the Township as
authorized by the New Jersey Department of Transportation.
Street Location
Bank Bridge Road Woodbury Glassboro Road (County Road 553) to New
Jersey Route 47.
§ 7-37. through AA 7-39. (Reserved)
§ 7-40. HANDICAPPED PARKING.
§ 7-40.1. Handicapped parking on street.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following on
street locations are designated as handicapped parking spaces. Such spaces
are for use by persons who have been issued special identification cards or
Name of Street
Speed
Limit Location
Clements Bridge Road (C.R.
544)
25 m.p.h. From intersection of
Cooper Street to
intersection of Caulfield
Avenue
From intersection of Caulfield
Avenue to intersection of
Locust Grove Boulevard
35 m.p.h.
Woodcreek Road 35 m.p.h. Between Woodbury/
Glassboro Road and
Colonial Drive
§ 7-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-40.1
1:207
plates or placards by the Division of Motor Vehicles, or a temporary placard
issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to park in
these spaces.
Street
No. of
Spaces Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-40.2. Handicapped parking on street for private residences.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.6, the following onstreet
locations are designated as handicapped parking spaces in front of
private residences occupied by handicapped persons. Such spaces are for
use by persons who have been issued special identification cards or plates
or placards by the Division of Motor Vehicles, or a temporary placard issued
by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to park in these
spaces.
Street Location Permit Number
(Reserved)
§ 7-40.3. Handicapped parking in municipal parking lots and board
of education property.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197 the following off
street parking yards and Board of Education property are designated as
Handicapped Parking areas. Such spaces are for use by persons who have
been issued special identification cards, plates or placards issued by the
Division of Motor Vehicles, or a temporary placard issued by the Chief of
Police. No other person shall be permitted to park in these spaces.
Property
No. of
Spaces Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-40.4. Handicapped parking on private property open to the
public and to which the public is invited (retail business).
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46, the following offstreet
parking spaces are designated as handicapped parking areas. Such
spaces are for use by persons who have been issued special identification
cards, plates or placards by the Division of Motor Vehicles, or a temporary
placard issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to
park in these spaces.
Property No. of Spaces Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-40.1 § 7-40.4
1:208
In any space on public or private property appropriately marked for
vehicles for the physically handicapped pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.5,
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq., or any other applicable law unless the vehicle
is authorized by law to be parked therein and a handicapped person is
either the driver or a passenger in that vehicle. State, county, or municipal
law enforcement officers or parking enforcement officers shall enforce the
parking restrictions on spaces appropriately marked for vehicles for the
physically handicapped on both public and private property.
No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any
such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful.
§ 7-40.5. Handicapped parking on all other private property. [New]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1; the following offstreet
parking locations are designated as handicapped parking. Such
spaces are for use by persons who have been issued special identification
cards, plates or placards by the Division of Motor Vehicles, or a temporary
placard issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to
park in these spaces.22
Property No. of Spaces Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-40.6. Handicapped parking in municipal parks.
In accordance with provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-4, the following off-street
parking locations are designated as handicapped parking. Such spaces are
for use by persons who have been issued special identification cards, plates
or placards by the Division of Motor Vehicles, or a temporary placard issued
by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to park in these
spaces.
Property No. of
Spaces
Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-40.7. Signs, pavement, markings, installation and maintenance.
[New]
The owners of the premises referred to in subsections 7-40.3 and 7-40.4
shall provide and install signs and pavement markings for each parking
space reserved for the use of handicapped persons, which signs and
markings shall be in accordance with the manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices. The cost of procurement and installation of the signs and pavement
markings shall be the responsibility of the owner of said property. The
owner shall subsequent to initial procurement and installation, maintain
such signs and pavement markings in good condition at no cost or expense
22.Editor's Note: All sketches are on file in the office of the Municipal Clerk.
§ 7-40.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-40.7
1:209
to the property owner. The owner shall be responsible for the repair and
restoration or replacement of same.
§ 7-40.8. Penalty for violations. [New]
Pursuant to P.L. 1989, C 201, the penalties for violations of this Section 7-40
must be $100 for a first offense and for a subsequent offense must be a fine
of at least $100 and up to 90 days community service on such terms and
such form as the Court shall deem appropriate, or any combination thereof.
§ 7-40.9. Regulations of handicapped parking areas. [Ord. No.
18-90 AA 75-34; Ord. No. 0.6.95 AAA 1, 2]
a. Parking areas designated. Handicapped parking spaces shall be those
spaces which are identified with a clearly visible sign displaying the
MUTCD sign R7-8, and a designation of the penalty for violation shall
be placed on the sign of parking space.
b. Prohibitions. No person shall park, stop or stand a motor vehicle at any
time in an area designated as reserved for the benefit of physically
handicapped individuals provided at any public or semi-public parking
facility within the Township.
Handicapped person identification cards, registration and wheelchair
symbol license plates. Only handicapped persons may park in
designated area upon registration and issuance of handicapped
person identification card and wheelchair symbol license plates by the
Director of the New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles in concurrence
with the Division of Rehabilitation Services in the New Jersey
Department of Labor (N.J.S.A. 39:4-204 through 2-7.1).
c. Required handicapped spaces. All parking lots containing 10 or more
spaces shall make provisions for Handicapped Parking.
Pursuant to the Zoning Code of the Township of Deptford, Ordinance
No. 0.1.89 adopted 5-11-1989, Article 2200, subsection 22020, every
parking lot containing 10 or more spaces shall provide for the
handicapped parking spaces calculated according to the following
schedule:
Total Parking Spaces Required Handicapped Spaces
10 _" 19 spaces 1 handicapped space
20 _" 49 spaces 1 additional handicapped space
50 _" 249 spaces 2% handicapped spaces
250 or more spaces 1% handicapped spaces
§ 7-40.7 § 7-40.9
1:210
§ 7-41. CONTROL FOR MOVEMENT AND THE PARKING OF
TRAFFIC ON PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY.
§ 7-41.1. Regulation for the movement and the parking of traffic on
municipal property and board of education property. [Ord. No.
18-90 AA 75-33; New]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following
Municipal and Board of Education Property shall have the movement of
traffic controlled by the type of regulation indicated. No person shall
operate or park a vehicle in violation of the regulations indicated.
Handicapped spaces shall be located in close proximity to principal
users and shall be provided with barrier-free access to same. Where
multiple users are to be served by a common parking lot,
handicapped spaces shall be proportionately distributed throughout
the parking lot.
d. Enforcement. The terms and provisions of this section shall be enforced
by the Deptford Township Police Department (or Department of Public
Safety) and such other persons as the Township Manager may
designate.
e. Violations and penalties. Anyone who shall violate any of the provisions
set forth in this section shall be liable for a fine of $100 for the first
offense, a fine of at least $100 and up to 90 days community service or
such terms and in such form as the court shall deem appropriate, or a
combination thereof.
f. Removal of snow and or ice.
1. Required. Handicapped parking spaces established pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-19 et seq. within the jurisdiction of the Township
shall not be blocked or made inaccessible by the plowing or
placement of snow within the perimeters of designated
handicapped parking spaces. To the extent that handicapped
spaces are impeded or blocked as set forth above, the owner of the
property will be cited for violating this section. In addition, the
contractor and/or person(s) responsible for the placement of snow
in a handicapped space and/or the person(s) that directs the
placement of such snow may additionally be cited for violating this
subsection.
2. Penalties. Anyone who shall violate the provisions set forth in this
section shall be liable for a fine of not less than $100 nor more than
$1,000 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days or both.
Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
thereunder.
§ 7-40.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-41.1
1:211
Name of Street
Speed
Limit Location
Municipal Parking Lot
(1011 Cooper Street)
Deptford High School
All vehicles must park in designated
are between painted lines All
vehicles must park in designated
area between painted lines, and all
vehicles must be properly
identified. All vehicles must enter
form the most northerly driveway of
Deptford High School, and proceed
in a counter-clockwise motion. All
vehicles must exit the most
southerly driveway
Deptford Junior High
School
All vehicles must park in the
designated area between painted
lines. All vehicles must enter the
most westerly driveway of Deptford
Junior High School, and proceed in
a counter-clockwise motion. All
vehicles must exit the most easterly
driveway
Property Regulation
Board of Administration
Building (Good Intent Road)
All vehicles must park in designated area
between painted lines
Lake Tract School All vehicles must enter from the most
northerly driveway and exit in the most
southerly driveway
All those Deptford Township
elementary schools listed
All vehicles must park in the designated
area between painted lines
Good Intent School All vehicles must enter the most westerly
driveway and exit the most easterly
driveway
New Sharon Elementary
School
All vehicles must enter the most easterly
driveway and exit the most westerly
driveway
Shady Lane Elementary
School
All vehicles must enter the most easterly
driveway and exit the most westerly
driveway
Central Elementary School All vehicles must park in the designated
area between painted lines
Oak Valley Elementary School All vehicles must park in the designated
area between painted lines
Pine Acres Elementary School All vehicles must park in the designated
area between painted lines
§ 7-41.1 § 7-41.1
1:212
Property Regulation
Gloucester County College All vehicles must park in the designated
area between painted lines
Property Regulation
Gloucester County Vocational All vehicles must park in the designated
area between painted lines
§ 7-41.2. Regulation for the movement and the parking of traffic on
private property open to the public and to which the public is
invited (retail business). [Ord. No. 0-16-91 AAA 1-13;Ord. No.
0-23-91 AA 5;Ord. No. 0-23-91 AAA 1-12]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46, on the following
private property that is open to the public and to which the public is invited,
the movement of traffic shall be controlled by the types of regulations
indicated. No person shall operate or park a vehicle in violation of the
following regulations.
The owners of the premises referred to in this section shall provide and
install signs and pavement markings as required, which signage and
markings shall be in accordance with the current Manual On Uniform
Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD). The cost of signs and installations shall
be the responsibility of the owner of the property. The owner shall,
subsequent to the initial procurement and installation, maintain such signs
and pavement markings in good condition at no cost or expense to the
Township of Deptford.
The penalty for a violation and conviction of this section shall be not less
than $50 nor more than $1,000 and/or imprisonment in the County Jail for
a term not to exceed 90 days, or by a period of community service not to
exceed 90 days.
Property and Regulation.
a. DEPTFORD CROSSING SHOPPING CENTER.
1. Written consent filed. The Department of Public Safety and the
Bureau of Traffic Engineering and Public Safety Programs, New
Jersey Department of Transportation, conducted an investigation to
determine the feasibility of establishing the provisions of Subtitle
One of Title 39, along with various traffic regulations at the
Deptford Crossing Shopping Center; and, as a result of the field
investigation, various traffic regulations have been found to be
warranted pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1 et seq.
§ 7-41.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-41.2
1:213
The Deptford Crossing Association has filed a written consent
with the Township that the provisions of Subtitle one, Title 39 of
the Revised Statutes of New Jersey be made applicable to the
semi-public roads, streets, driveways and parking lots at the
Deptford Crossing Center and the following regulations shall be
enforceable.
2. Parking areas designated. All vehicles must park only in designated
areas and between the lines provided.
3. Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on
the site plan filed with the Township Clerk and signed with R7-8
(reserved parking sign and penalty plate) in the designated parking
areas for persons who have been issued Handicapped Parking
permits by the Division of Motor Vehicles.
4. Through streets. The following street or parts of streets described
are hereby designated as Through Streets. Stop signs shall be
installed on the near-right side of each street intersections the
Through Streets except where Yield signs are provided for in the
designation:
Name of
Street Street
Main Drive From 5 feet north of Clements Bridge Road
(County Route 544) to 5 feet north of the Main
Drive (south leg) terminus.
5. Stop intersections. The following intersections described are
hereby designated as Stop Intersections. Stop signs shall be
installed as provided therein:
Intersection Stop Signs On
Main Drive and Main Drive Main Drive (south leg)
Road A and Road C Road A
Road B and Road C Road B
Road D and exits from Lots E
and F
Exits from Lots E and F
6. Speed limits.
(a) The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the parking lots
shall be 15 m.p.h.
(b) The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following
roads are:
§ 7-41.2 § 7-41.2
1:214
Road
Speed
Limit Limits
Main Drive 15 m.p.h. Entire length
Road A, B, C, D
and E
15 m.p.h. Entire length
(c) Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained
to effect the above-designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
7. Tow-away. Any vehicle parked or standing so as to obstruct or
impede a normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways,
loading zones, oil fills, any grass area, pedestrian walkway, or
present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be removed by
towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
8. Restricted parking. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle any time
upon any of the streets or parts of streets described:
Name of Streets Sides Location
Main Drive Both Entire length
Roads A, B, D and E Both Entire length
Road C Both Entire length
(except loading zones)
9. Loading zone. The locations described are hereby designated as
Loading Zones. No person shall park a vehicle in these locations
during the times indicated, other than for the loading or unloading
of goods and materials:
Street Time Sides Location
Road C All East As indicated on site plan.
10. Installation and maintenance of pavement markings and signs. All
signs, posts, bolts, or other necessary materials shall be installed
and paid for by the applicant. Work shall be checked by the Police
Department to insure installations meet State and Federal
Specifications, and all signing shall conform to the current Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
11. Violations and penalties. Unless another penalty is expressly
provided by New Jersey Statute, every person convicted of a
violation of this section or any supplement thereto shall be liable to
a penalty of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 15 days or both.
b. DEPTFORD MALL.
§ 7-41.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-41.2
1:215
1. Written consent filed. The Department of Public Safety and the
Bureau of Traffic Engineering and Public Safety Programs, New
Jersey Department of Transportation, conducted an investigation to
determine the feasibility of establishing the provisions of Subtitle
One of Title 39 along with various traffic regulations at the
Deptford Mall; and as a result of the field investigation, various
traffic regulations have been found to be warranted pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1 et seq.
Strouse-Greenberg and Company, Inc., has filed a written consent
with the Township that the provisions of Subtitle One, Title 39 of
the Revised Statutes of New Jersey be made applicable to the
semi-public roads, streets, driveways and parking lots at the
Deptford Mall and the following regulations shall be enforceable.
2. Parking areas designated. All vehicles must park only in designated
areas and between the lines provided.
3. Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on
the plat filed with the Township and signed with R7-8 (reserved
parking sign and penalty plate), in the designated parking areas for
persons who have been issued Handicapped Parking permits by the
Division of Motor Vehicles.
4. Through streets. The following streets or parts of streets are
hereby designated as Through Streets. Stop signs shall be installed
on the near right side of each street intersecting the Through
Streets except where Yield signs are provided in the designation:
Name of Street Limits
Deptford Mall
Drive
Entire length, except at intersects with
Entrances/Exits A, B, C, D, E, F and G
Lower Level Road Entire length: From a point 2 feet north of
Road A and a point 2 feet south of Deptford
Mall Drive
Road A Entire length: From a point 05 north of
Deptford Mall Drive (south intersect) to a
point 05 west of Deptford Mall Drive (east
intersect)
Upper Level Road Entire length: From a point 2 feet west of
Lower Level Road to a point 2 feet north of
Deptford Mall Drive
5. Stop intersections. The following street or parts of streets are
hereby designated as Stop Intersections. Stop signs shall be
installed as provided therein:
§ 7-41.2 § 7-41.2
1:216
Intersection Stop Signs On
Entrance/Exit A and Deptford Mall Drive (both
intersects)
Deptford Mall Drive Entrance/
Exit B and
Deptford Mall Drive (both
intersects)
Deptford Mall Drive Entrance/
Exit C and
Deptford Mall Drive (both
intersects)
Deptford Mall Drive Entrance/
Exit D and
Deptford Mall Drive (both
intersects)
Deptford Mall Drive Entrance/
Exit E and
Deptford Mall Drive (both
intersects)
Deptford Mall Drive Entrance/
Exit F and
Deptford Mall Drive (both
intersects)
Deptford Mall Drive Entrance/
Exit G and
Deptford Mall Drive (both
intersects)
Deptford Mall Drive
6. Speed limits.
(a) The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the parking lots
shall be 15 m.p.h.
(b) The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following
roads are:
Road Speed Limit Limits
Deptford Mall
Drive
25 m.p.h. Entire length
Entrance/Exits A,
B, C, D, E, F and
G
15 m.p.h. Entire length
Lower Level Road 15 m.p.h. Entire length
Roads A, B and C 15 m.p.h. Entire length
Upper Level Road 15 m.p.h. Entire length
(c) Regulatory and Warning signs shall be erected and maintained
to effect the above designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
7. Tow-away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede
a normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zones,
oil fills, any grass area, pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a
safety or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at
the owner's or operator's expense.
8. Loading zone. These locations are hereby designated as Loading
Zones. No person shall park a vehicle in these locations during the
§ 7-41.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-41.2
1:217
time indicated other than for the loading or unloading of goods and
materials:
Location Street Time Sides
Front of
Sears as per
site plan
Upper Road Level All East
9. Reserved parking. The parking lot has Reserved Parking for various
type of vehicles, which must be properly identified as per site plan.
10. Restricted parking. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle any time
upon any of the streets or parts of streets described:
Name of
Street
Sides Hours Location
Deptford Mall
Drive
Both All Entire length
Entrance/Exit A,
B, C, D, E, F and
G
Both All Entire length
Upper Level
Road
Both All Entire length
Lower Level
Road
Both All Entire length
Roads A, B, and
C
Both All Entire length
11. Lane use. The land locations described are designated as Lane Use
Reservations and traffic shall move as indicated.
Location Movement
Entrance/Exit, A, B, C, D, E, F
and G
As shown on filed site plan
12. Bus stops. The locations described are hereby designated as Bus
Stops. No vehicle other than an omnibus, picking up or discharging
passengers, shall be permitted to occupy these locations.
Lower Level _" as per site plan
Upper Level _" as per site plan
13. Installation and maintenance of pavement markings and signs. All
signs, posts or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. Work shall be checked by the Police
Department to insure installations meet State and Federal
Specifications, and all signing shall conform to the current Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
§ 7-41.2 § 7-41.2
1:218
14. Violations and penalties. Unless another penalty is expressly
provided by New Jersey Statute, every person convicted of a
violation of this section or any supplement thereto shall be liable to
a penalty of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 15 days or both.
c. Deptford plaza.
1. Written consent filed. Thomasma-Streeter Associates are owners of
Block 484, Lot 1, within the Township, the property known as
Deptford Plaza and located on Route 41, and DNJ Associates are
owners of Block 484, Lot 9, within the Township, the property
known as Deptford Plaza and located on Route 41.
The aforesaid owners consent to the provisions of Title 39 being
made applicable to the semi-public roads, streets, roadways,
driveways, and parking lots of Deptford Plaza.
2. Findings. The Township Council believes the enforcement of Title
39 of New Jersey Statutes would be in the best interests of the
Township.
The provisions of Subtitle 1, Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of
the State of New Jersey are hereby made applicable and
enforceable to semi-public roads, streets, driveways, and parking
lots located in Block 484, Lots 1 and 9, at the Deptford Plaza. In
addition, the sections hereafter listed shall be enforceable.
3. Through street. The following street or parts of streets are hereby
designated as Through Streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the
near-right side of each street intersecting the Through Street.
Name of Street Limits
East Drive Entire length, from a point 5 feet north of
North Drive to Perimeter Drive
Main Drive Entire length, from a point 5 feet south of
Clements Bridge Road to south intersect the
Perimeter Drive as south curbline
North Drive Entire length, from a point 5 feet east of Main
Drive to a point 5 feet west of State Route 41
South Drive Entire length, from a point 5 feet east of Main
Drive to Perimeter Drive
4. Speed Limits.
(a) The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the parking lots
shall be 15 m.p.h.
(b) The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following
roads are:
§ 7-41.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-41.2
1:219
Road Speed Limits
East Drive 15 m.p.h. Entire length
Main Drive 15 m.p.h. Entire length
North Drive 15 m.p.h. Entire length
Perimeter
Drive
15 m.p.h. Entire length
South Drive 15 m.p.h. Entire length
(c) Regulatory and Warning signs shall be erected and maintained
to effect the above-designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
5. Tow-away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede
a normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zones,
oil fills, any grass area, pedestrian walkway, or to present in any
way a safety or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the
vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
6. Restricted parking. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle anytime
upon any of the streets or parts of streets described.
Name of
Street
Sides Hours Location
East Drive Both All Entire length
Main Drive Both All Entire length
North Drive Both All Entire length
Perimeter
Drive
Both All Entire length
South Drive Both All Entire length
7. Weight limitation. Vehicles over the registered gross weight are
hereby excluded from the streets or parts of streets described,
except for the pick up and delivery of materials on such streets.
Name of Street Weight Limits
East Drive 4 Tons Entire length
Main Drive 4 Tons Entire length
North Drive 4 Tons Entire length
Perimeter Drive 4 Tons Entire length
South Drive 4 tons Entire length
8. One-way pattern in parking lots. As per site plan filed in the
Township Clerk's Office, 1011 Cooper Street, Deptford, New Jersey.
9. No passing zone. As per site plan filed in the Township Clerk's
Office, 1011 Cooper Street, Deptford, New Jersey.
§ 7-41.2 § 7-41.2
1:220
10. Right turn only.
Intersection
East Drive and Clements
Bridge Road (County Route
544)
From north on East Drive on
Clements Bridge Road (County
Route 544)
11. Installation and Maintenance of Pavement Markings and Signs. All
signs, posts, bolts, or other necessary materials shall be installed
and paid for by the applicant. Work shall be checked by the Police
Department to insure installations meet State and Federal
Specifications, and all signing shall conform to the current Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
12. Violations and penalties. Unless another penalty is expressly
provided by New Jersey Statute, every person convicted of a
violation of this section or any supplement thereto shall be liable to
a penalty of not more than $50 or imprisonment for term not
exceeding 15 days or both.
d. Frank's nursery and crafts, inc.
1. Written consent filed. The Department of Public Safety and the
Bureau of Traffic Engineering and Public Safety Programs, New
Jersey Department of Transportation, conducted an investigation to
determine the feasibility of establishing the provisions of Subtitle
One of Title 39 along with various traffic regulations at Frank's
Nursery and Crafts, Inc.; and as a result of the field investigation,
various traffic regulations have been found to be warranted
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1 et seq.
Strouse-Greenberg and Company, Inc., has filed a written consent
with the Township that the provisions of Subtitle One, Title 39 of
the Revised States of New Jersey be made applicable to the semipublic
roads, streets, driveways and parking lots at Frank's
Nursery and Crafts, Inc., and the following regulations shall be
enforceable.
2. Parking areas designated. All vehicles must park only in designated
areas and between the lines provided.
3. Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on
the site plan filed with the Township Clerk and signed with R7-8
(Reserved Parking sign and penalty plate), in the designated
parking areas for persons who have been issued Handicapped
Parking permits by the Division of Motor Vehicles.
4. Through street. The following streets or parts of streets described
are hereby designated as Through Streets. Stop signs shall be
installed on the near-right side of each street intersecting the
Through Street except where Yield signs are provided for in the
designation:
§ 7-41.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-41.2
1:221
Name of
Street Limits
Jan Drive From the prolongation of the east curbline of Road
A to a point 5 feet east of Almonesson-Westville
Road
Main Drive From a point 5 feet south of Deptford Center Road
to a point 5 feet north of Jan Drive
5. Speed limits.
(a) The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the parking lots
shall be 15 m.p.h.
(b) The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following
roads are:
Road Speed Limits
East Drive 15 m.p.h. Entire length
Jan Drive 15 m.p.h. Entire length
Main Drive 15 m.p.h. Entire length
Road A 15 m.p.h. Entire length
(c) Regulatory and Warning signs shall be erected and maintained
to effect the above-designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
6. Tow-away. Any vehicle parked or standing so as to obstruct or
impede a normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways,
loading zones, oil fills, any grass area, pedestrian walkway, or
present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be removed by
towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
7. Crosswalks (mid-block).
Name of
Street Location
East Drive As per site plan
8. Restricted parking. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle any time
upon any of the streets or parts of streets described:
Name of
Street Sides Location
East Drive Both Entire length
Jan Drive Both Entire length
Man Drive Both Entire length
Road A Both Entire length
§ 7-41.2 § 7-41.2
1:222
9. Loading zone. The locations described are hereby designated as
Loading Zones. No person shall park a vehicle in these locations
during the times indicated, other than for the loading or unloading
of goods and materials:
Name of
Street Time Sides Location
Road A All North As indicated on site plan
10. One-way streets. The following described streets or parts of streets
are hereby designated as One-Way Streets in the direction
indicated. Parking on these streets will be permitted on the sides
indicated below:
Name of
Street Direction Limits
Parking
Permitted
East Drive Northbound From the
prolongation of the
north curbline of
Jan Drive to
Deptford Center
Road
None
11. Lane use. The lane locations described are designated as Lane Use
Reservations and traffic shall move as indicated:
Name of
Street Location and Movement
East Drive As indicated on site plan
Main Drive As indicated on site plan
12. Installation and maintenance of pavement markings and signs. All
signs, posts, bolts, or other necessary materials shall be installed
and paid for by the applicant. Work shall be checked by the Police
Department to insure installations meet State and Federal
specifications, and all signing shall conform to the current Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
13. Violations and penalties. Unless another penalty is expressly
provided by New Jersey State Statute, every person convicted of a
violation of this section or any supplement thereto shall be liable to
a penalty of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 15 years or both.
§ 7-41.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-41.3
1:223
§ 7-41.3. Regulation for the movement and the parking of traffic on
all other private property. [Ord. No. 0.12.01; Ord. No. 0.15.01; Ord.
No. 0.17.01]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1 the regulations of
Subtitle 1 of the Title 39 are hereby made applicable to the properties listed
below.
Property Regulation
§ 7-41.4. Regulation for the movement and the parking of traffic in
municipal parks.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-4, the regulations of
Subtitle 1, Title 39 of the Revised Statutes are hereby made applicable to
the properties listed below.
Property Regulation
(Reserved)
§ 7-41.5. Signs, pavement markings, installation and maintenance.
[New]
The owners of the premises referred to in this section shall provide and
install signs and pavement markings as required, which signage and
markings shall be in accordance with the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control
devices. The cost of procurement and installation of the signs and pavement
markings shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property. The owner
shall, subsequent to the initial procurement and installation, maintain such
signs and pavement markings in good condition at no cost or expense to the
Township. The owner shall be responsible for the repair and restoration or
replacement of same.
a. Shetland way within inverness apartments. Pursuant to N.J.S.A.
39:5A-1, Subtitle 1, Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of the State of New
Jersey are hereby made applicable to the private road known as
Shetland Way located within the lands and premises owned by
Inverness Associates, LLC, located within Lot 1, Block 2 commonly
known as Inverness Apartments.
b. Yorktown Court, Liberty Way and Carriage Way within Washington's
Crossing. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1, Subtitle 1, Title 39 of the
Revised Statutes of the State of New Jersey are hereby made applicable
to these private roads aforementioned owned by the Washington's
Crossing homeowners' association.
c. Winding Way within Knightsbridge Condominiums. Pursuant to N.J.S.A.
39:5A-1, Subtitle 1, Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of the State of New
Jersey are hereby made applicable to the private road known as
Winding Way located within the lands and premises owned by
Knightsbridge Condominium Association.
§ 7-41.3 § 7-41.6
1:224
§ 7-41.6. Violations of provisions of section 7-41. [New]
For a violation of the provision of this Section 7-41 or any supplement
thereto for which no specific penalty is provided, the offender shall be liable
to a penalty of not more than $50 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding
15 days, or both; except that for a violation of N.J.S.A. 39:4-80 et seq.,
N.J.S.A. 39:4-105 et seq., N.J.S.A. 39:123 et seq. or N.J.S.A. 39:4-140 et seq.,
the offender shall be liable to a penalty of not less than $50 or more than
$200 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
Chapter 8
ANIMAL CONTROL
§ 8-1. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 7-10-67; 1967 Code § 20-1]
As used in this chapter:
DOG — Any carnivorous domesticated mammal (Canis familiaris), whether
male or female, regardless of age.
DOG OF LICENSING AGE — Any dog which has attained the age of seven
months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
KENNEL — Any establishment wherein or whereon the business of
boarding or selling dogs or breeding dogs for sale is carried on, except a pet
shop.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a dog, every person
having a right of property in such dog and every person who has such dog
in his keeping.
PERSON — An individual, firm, partnership, corporation or association of
persons.
PET SHOP — Any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition pen, not part
of a kennel, wherein dogs for sale are kept or displayed.
POUND — An establishment for the confinement for the confinement of
dogs seized under the provisions of this chapter.
SHELTER — Any establishment where dogs are received, housed and
distributed without charge.
STRAY OR ABANDONED ANIMAL — Any domesticated animal, carnivorous
or otherwise, to effectuate this section.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Deptford in the County of Gloucester.
VICIOUS DOG — Any dog biting any person, dog or other animal.
§ 8-2. LICENSING OF DOGS.
§ 7-41.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-2.1
1:225
§ 8-2.1. License required. [Ord. No. 7-10-67; 1967 Code § 20-2]
No person shall keep, harbor or possess any dog within the Township,
without first obtaining a license therefor, to be issued by the Township
Clerk and/or the enforcing official of the Township Board of Health, upon
application by the owner and payment of the prescribed fee. No person shall
keep, harbor or possess any dog in the Township except in compliance with
the provisions of this section.
§ 8-2.2. Application for license and registration. [Ord. No. 7-10-67;
1967 Code § 20-3]
Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog of licensing age shall in
the month of January 1967, and annually thereafter, apply for and procure
from the Township Clerk and/or the enforcing official of the Township Board
of Health a license and official metal registration tag for each such dog so
owned, kept or harbored, and shall place upon each such dog a collar or
harness with the registration tag securely fastened thereto.
§ 8-2.3. Fees; exception. [Ord. No. 7-10-67; Ord. No. 0-32-78; Ord.
No. 9-28-81; Ord. No. 0-6-85 § 1; 1967 Code § 20-4]
§ 8-2.4. Dogs of licensing age. [Ord. No. 7-10-67; 1967 Code § 20-5]
The owner of any newly acquired dog of licensing age or of any dog which
attains licensing age shall make application for a license and registration
tag for such dog within 10 days after such acquisition or age attainment.
§ 8-2.5. Application information. [Ord. No. 7-10-67; 1967 Code
§ 20-6]
The application shall state the breed, sex, age, color and markings of the
dog for which a license and registration are sought and whether it is of a
long- or short-haired variety, and the name, street and post office address
of the owner and the person who shall keep or harbor such dog. The
information on the application and the registration number issued for the
dog shall be preserved for a period of three years by the Township Clerk.
In addition, he shall forward similar information to the State Department
A. The annual license fee for each dog within the Township is as follows:
(1) Sexually altered dog: $7;
(2) Unaltered dog: $10;
The license for any dog shall expire on the 31st day of December
following the day of its issuance.
B. Dogs used as guides for blind persons and commonly known as "Seeing
Eye" dogs shall be licensed and registered as other dogs hereinabove
provided for, except that the owner or keeper of such dog shall not be
required to pay any fee therefor.
§ 8-2.1 § 8-2.5
1:226
of Health each month on forms furnished by the Department. Registration
numbers shall be issued in the order of the applications.
§ 8-2.6. Dogs from another state. [Ord. No. 7-10-67; 1967 Code
§ 20-7]
Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Township, any
dog licensed in another state for the current year, bearing a registration
tag, and who shall keep the same or permit the same to be kept within the
Township for a period of more than 90 days shall immediately apply for a
license and registration tag for each such dog, unless such dog is licensed
under subsection 8-3.4 of this chapter.
§ 8-2.7. Removal of registration tag. [Ord. No. 7-10-67; 1967 Code
§ 20-8]
No person, except an officer in the performance of his duties, shall remove a
registration tag from the collar of any dog without the consent of the owner,
nor shall any person attach a registration tag to a dog for which it was not
issued.
§ 8-3. KENNELS, PET SHOPS, SHELTERS AND POUNDS.
§ 8-3.1. License required. [Ord. No. 7-10-67; 1967 Code § 20-9]
Any person who keeps or operates or proposes to establish a kennel, a pet
shop, a shelter or a pound shall apply to the Township Clerk for a license to
entitle him to keep or operate such establishment.
§ 8-3.2. Application for license. [Ord. No. 7-10-67; 1967 Code
§ 20-9A]
The application shall describe the premises where the establishment is
located or is proposed to be located and the purpose or purposes for which
it is to be maintained and shall be accompanied by the written approval
of the enforcing official of the Board of Health or the Township Board of
Health, showing compliance with the local and State rules and regulations
governing the location of and sanitation at such establishments, and shall
be accompanied in writing the approval of the adjoining property owners
within 200 feet of a proposed establishment.
§ 8-3.3. Purpose; expiration; revocation of license. [Ord. No.
7-10-67; 1967 Code § 20-9B]
All licenses issued for a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall state the
purpose for which the establishment is maintained, and all such licenses
shall expire on the last day of January of each year and be subject to
revocation by the Township Council on recommendations of the State
Department of Health or the Township Board of Health for failure to comply
with the rules and regulations of the State Department or the Township
§ 8-2.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-3.3
1:227
Board of Health governing the same after the owner has been afforded a
hearing by either the State Department or the Township Board of Health.
§ 8-3.4. Individual dog licenses not required; nontransferable. [Ord.
No. 7-10-67; 1967 Code § 20-9C]
Any person holding such license shall not be required to secure individual
licenses for dogs owned by such licensee and kept at such establishments,
and such licenses shall not be transferable to another owner or different
premises.
§ 8-3.5. License fees. [Ord. No. 7-10-67; Ord. No. 0-7-80; 1967 Code
§ 20-10]
The annual license fee for 10 or less dogs shall be $50 and the license fee
for more than 10 dogs shall be $100 and the annual license fee for a pet
shop shall be $50. No fee shall be charged for a shelter or pound.
§ 8-3.6. Safe control required. [Ord. No. 7-10-67; 1967 Code
§ 20-11]
No dog kept in a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall be permitted off
such premises, except on leash or in a crate or other safe control.
§ 8-3.7. List forwarded to state health department. [Ord. No.
7-10-67; 1967 Code § 20-13]
The Township Clerk shall forward to the State Department of Health a list of
all kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds licensed within 30 days after the
licenses therefor are issued, which list shall include the name and address
of the licensee and the kind of license issued.
§ 8-4. DISPOSITION OF REVENUE.
§ 8-4.1. Use of fees. [Ord. No. 7-10-67; 1967 Code § 20-12A]
License fees and other moneys collected or received under the provisions
of this chapter, except registration tag fees, shall be forwarded to the
Township Treasurer at the regular meeting of the Township Council each
month after collection or receipt and shall be placed in a special account
separate from any of the other accounts of the Township and which shall be
used for the following purposes only:
A. For collecting, keeping and disposing of dogs liable to seizure under
this chapter.
B. For local prevention and control of rabies.
C. For providing antirabic treatment under the direction of the local Board
of Health for any person known or suspected to have been exposed to
rabies.
§ 8-3.3 § 8-4.1
1:228
§ 8-4.2. Transferral of unexpended balance. [Ord. No. 7-10-67; 1967
Code § 20-12B]
Any unexpended balance remaining in such special account shall be
retained therein until the end of the third fiscal year following and may be
used for any of the purposes set forth in this subsection. At the end of the
third fiscal year following and at the end of each fiscal year thereafter, there
shall be transferred from such special account to the general funds of the
Township any amount then in such account which is in excess of the total
amount paid into the special account during the last two fiscal years next
preceding.
§ 8-4.3. Registration tag fee forwarded to state department of
health. [Ord. No. 7-10-67; 1967 Code § 20-12]
The registration tag of $0.50 for each dog shall be forwarded within 30
days after the collection by the Township Clerk to the State Department of
Health.
§ 8-5. ANNUAL DOG CANVASS. [Ord. No. 7-10-67; 1967 Code
§ 20-14]
The Township shall, promptly after February 1, annually thereafter, cause a
canvass to be made of all dogs owned, kept or harbored within the limits of
the Township and shall report to the Township Clerk, the Township Board
of Health and to the State Department of Health the result thereof, setting
forth in separate columns the names and addresses of persons owning,
keeping or harboring such dogs, the number of licensed dogs owned, kept
or harbored by each of the persons, together with the registration numbers
of each of the dogs, and the number of unlicensed dogs owned, kept or
harbored by each of the persons, together with a complete description of
each of the unlicensed dogs.
§ 8-6. DOG WARDEN.
§ 8-6.1. Appointment; duties. [Ord. No. 7-10-67; Ord. No. 0-27-77;
1967 Code § 20-15]
The Township Manager shall have the power to appoint a Dog Warden
and a Deputy Dog Warden and to designate a person or facility for the
impounding, destroying or disposing of dogs or other animals pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter. The Dog Warden's and Deputy Dog Warden's
duties shall be to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and they may
impound all dogs running at large in violation of the provisions of this
chapter and perform such other acts as are allowed by law.
D. For all other purposes prescribed by the statutes of New Jersey
governing the subject and for administering the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 8-4.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-7
1:229
§ 8-7. IMPOUNDMENT OF DOGS.
§ 8-7.1. Impounding, destroying or disposing of dogs. [Ord. No.
7-10-67; Ord. No. 0-27-77; 1967 Code § 20-16]
A. The Dog Warden of the Township shall take into custody and impound,
or cause to be taken into custody and impounded, and thereafter
destroyed or disposed of as provided in this subsection:
(1) Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring the dog which the Dog Warden or his agent or agents
have reason to believe is a stray dog.
(2) Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring the dog without a current registration tag on his collar.
(3) Any female dog in season off the premises of the owner or of the
person keeping or harboring the dog.
B. If any dog so seized wears a collar or harness having inscribed thereon
or attached thereto the name and address of any person or a
registration tag or if the owner or the person keeping or harboring the
dog is known, the Dog Warden shall forthwith serve on the person
whose address is given on the collar or on the owner or the person
keeping or harboring the dog, if known, a notice in writing stating that
the dog has been seized and will be liable to be disposed of or destroyed
if not claimed within seven days after the service of the notice.
C. A notice under this subsection may be served either by delivering it to
the person on whom it is to be served, by leaving it at the person's usual
or last known place of abode or at the address given on the collar or by
forwarding it by post in a prepaid letter addressed to that person at his
usual or last known place of abode or to the address given on the collar.
D. Every dog so seized and impounded shall be kept, fed and kindly
treated by the Dog Warden and Deputy Dog Warden or that person or
facility designated by the Township Manager for the purpose of
impoundment for the above period of seven days and may be redeemed
by the owner by the payment of the license fee and maintenance fee,
which shall be $5 for the first day, $4 for the second day and $3 for each
additional day that the dog is impounded. All moneys collected by the
Dog Warden shall be turned over to the Township Treasurer no later
than the first day of each month following receipt thereof by the Dog
Warden, and a report thereof shall be made to the Township Council at
its next regular meeting.
E. Every dog impounded as aforesaid and not redeemed within the period
of seven days may be destroyed by such Dog Warden or such other
person or facility designated by the Township Manager for such
purpose but only in such humane manner causing as little pain as
possible. A dog which has bitten a human being or which is suspected of
being a rabid dog shall be held for 10 days.
§ 8-7 § 8-7.1
1:230
§ 8-7.2. Access to premises authorized; exception. [Ord. No.
7-10-67; 1967 Code § 20-17]
Any officer or agent authorized or empowered to perform any duty under
this section is hereby authorized to go upon any premises to seize for
impounding any dog or dogs which he may lawfully seize and impound when
such officer is in immediate pursuit of such dog or dogs, except upon the
premises of the owner of the dog if the owner is present and forbids the
same.
§ 8-7.3. Interference with authorized personnel prohibited. [Ord.
No. 7-10-67; 1967 Code § 20-18]
No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this chapter, and any person who
shall in any way hinder or interfere with the Dog Warden, Deputy Dog
Warden, Police Officers or officials or any other peace officers in the
performance of their duty under the provisions of this chapter or who shall
refuse to give information to any person authorized under this chapter shall
be deemed to have violated the provisions of this chapter.
§ 8-8. VICIOUS DOGS.
§ 8-8.1. Control required. [Ord. No. 7-10-67; 1967 Code § 20-19;
New]
No vicious dog, whether licensed or not, shall be permitted by the owner or
person harboring the dog to be in or upon any public street or public place
in the Township at any time or to trespass upon the property of any other
person in the Township without being safely muzzled and accompanied by a
person at least 14 years of age and of such a mental and physical capacity
that he or she is able to control the dog at all times, provided always, in any
case, that there shall be a leash control of the dog by an adequate leash with
not more than six feet thereof extended between the person in control of the
dog and the dog itself, and any vicious dog so unmuzzled and/or running at
large shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and shall be impounded by
any Policeman, special officer or Dog Warden and be delivered to the official
dog pound of the Township and the owner or person harboring such dog
in violation of this subsection shall be issued a summons or warrant by the
impounding officer and shall be brought before the Judge of the Municipal
F. If any resident of the Township shall deliver to the Dog Warden or such
other person or facility authorized by the Township Manager any dog
owned by the resident who requests that the dog be destroyed, that
resident shall be required to pay to the Township a fee no less than $3
or such other fee as may have been established by the Township by
agreement with other persons or facilities. Upon good cause shown, the
Township Manager may waive payment of the fee. No impounded dog
shall be redeemed or released until after the same has been duly
licensed and tagged as required by this section.
§ 8-7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-8.1
1:231
Court of the Township, and the Judge shall decide in his discretion whether
the dog be destroyed and shall assess the owner or person harboring such
dog in accordance with the penalty section of this chapter.
§ 8-9. CONTROL OF DOGS.
§ 8-9.1. Running at large prohibited. [Ord. No. 7-10-67; 1967 Code
§ 20-22]
Any person owning, keeping or harboring any dog (whether the dog is
licensed or unlicensed) who shall suffer or permit the dog to run at large in
or about the streets, highways or public places of the Township, or to run
at large upon lands and premises of any person other than the owner or
persons in possession of the dog without permission of the landowner first
obtained in writing shall be guilty of a violation of this section.
§ 8-9.2. Adequate leash required. [Ord. No. 7-10-67; 1967 Code
§ 20-23]
No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog shall suffer or permit the
same to be upon the public streets or in any public places of the Township
unless such dog is accompanied by a person over the age of 12 and of such
mental and physical capacity that he or she is able to control the dog by
leash, provided always in any case that there shall be a leash control of
such dog by an adequate leash with not more than six feet thereof extended
between the person in control of such dog and the dog itself.
§ 8-9.3. Injury to person, property prohibited. [Ord. No. 7-10-67;
1967 Code § 20-24]
No person owning, keeping or harboring a dog shall permit or suffer it to do
any injury to persons, or to do any damage to any lawn, shrubbery, flowers,
grounds or property of any kind.
§ 8-9.4. Unreasonable barking, howling prohibited. [Ord. No.
7-10-67; 1967 Code § 20-25; Ord. No. 0-12-94]
No person who owns, keeps, harbors, or possesses any dog or dogs shall
suffer or permit such dog or dogs to bark or howl in such a manner as to
be unreasonable in its intensity or duration so as to annoy, disturb or create
discomfort of residents within the vicinity of such occurrence. Unreasonable
barking or howling shall include but shall not be limited to a dog barking or
howling continually for 10 minutes or intermittently for 30 minutes, unless
provoked.
§ 8-9.5. Quarantine. [Ord. No. 7-10-67; 1967 Code § 20-26]
Any dog, cat or other animal which has attacked or bitten a person shall
be confined at the expense of the owner or person in charge of it, upon
the premises of the owner or person in charge or at some other place
designated in the notice issued by the quarantining officer, who shall be the
§ 8-8.1 § 8-9.5
1:232
appointed Dog Warden, Deputy Dog Warden or the enforcing official of the
Board of Health. Quarantine period shall be for at least 10 days after the
animal has attacked or bitten a person. The rules and regulations of the
local Board of Health governing quarantine procedure shall be followed.
§ 8-10. RABID ANIMALS. [Ord. No. 7-10-67; 1967 Code § 20-21]
Any dog or other warm blooded animal showing signs and/or symptoms and/
or appearing to be mad or rabid and threatening human beings or other
animals, shall be killed immediately by any Policeman, special officer or
Dog Warden, in a manner not to mutilate the head portion of the dog or
animal and the head shall be delivered promptly to the New Jersey State
Department of Health Laboratories for analysis, to determine whether the
dog or animal was infected with communicable rabies.
§ 8-11. FINES AND COSTS. [Ord. No. 7-10-67; 1967 Code § 20-20]
All fines under this chapter shall be made payable to the Dog Account of
the Township of Deptford and all costs recovered under this chapter shall
be paid to the Township Treasurer.
§ 8-12. ENFORCEMENT. [Ord. No. 7-10-67; 1967 Code § 20-27]
For the better enforcement of this chapter, the Chief of Police of the
Township and every member of the Department shall share with the Dog
Warden all the responsibilities of enforcement and it shall be the duty of the
Chief of Police and all officers under his command to see that the provisions
of this chapter are strictly enforced. The Dog Warden may at any time call
upon the Chief of Police or any officer under his command for aid and
assistance wherever such aid is more conducive toward the effectuating
of this chapter and it shall be the duty of the Police Department and all
members thereof to respond promptly to the call of any citizen who reports
any violation hereof.
§ 8-13. PROCEDURE FOR COMPLAINTS; AUTHORITY OF COURT.
[Ord. No. 7-10-67; 1967 Code § 20-28]
The Judge of the Municipal Court of the Township or any person duly
designated to sit in his stead is empowered by this chapter upon the filing
of a complaint in writing by any person authorized by the local Board of
Health, when the plaintiff is the local Board of Health and by the Chief of
Police or any member of the Police Department, the Director of the Police
Committee of the Township or the duly designated Dog Warden, when the
plaintiff is the Municipality, alleging that a violation of this chapter has
occurred, which complaint may be made upon information and belief, to
issue process at the suit of the local Board of Health, or of the Township
as the case may be, as plaintiff. The process shall be either in the nature
of a summons or warrant, which warrant may issue without any order of
the Court first being obtained against the person so charged, which process
when in the nature of a warrant shall be returnable forthwith and when
§ 8-9.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-13
1:233
in the nature of a summons shall be returnable in not less than five days.
The process shall state what provision of this chapter or of any statute
pertaining to the subject matter hereof has been violated by the defendant
or defendants. The Court having jurisdiction may, at all times, amend all
defects and errors in the complaint and process issued hereunder.
§ 8-14. PENALTIES. [New]
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall be liable
for a penalty of not less than $5 or more than $50 for the first offense, and
not less than $10 nor more than $50 for each subsequent offense, to be
recovered in the manner provided by N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.19, et seq. Any person
who shall violate any other provision of the chapter shall be liable for a
fine of not more than $100 for the first offense, and for each subsequent
offense, shall be liable, upon conviction, for the penalty stated in Chapter 1,
Section 1-5. Each day in which such violation continues shall be deemed to
constitute a separate offense.
§ 8-15. POLICE DOGS.
§ 8-15.1. Unlawful treatment. [Ord. No. 0-13-81; 1967 Code § 20-32]
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to willfully strike, or attempt
to strike, torment, interfere with or otherwise harm or inflict cruelty upon
dogs attached to the Canine Unit of the Township Police Department or any
other canine unit of any lawfully constituted Police Department.
§ 8-15.2. Violations and penalties. [Ord. No. 0-13-81; 1967 Code
§ 20-33]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to a fine not exceeding $200 for each
violation or to imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, or both.
§ 8-16. DISPOSAL OF DOG EXCRETA.
§ 8-16.1. Discharge of excreta on public or private property
prohibited.23
§ 8-17. FRIGHTENING HORSES AND ANIMALS; RUNNING AT
LARGE.
§ 8-17.1. Frightening horses and animals. [Ord. No. 7-14-24; Ord.
No. 0-35-78; 1967 Code § 46-8A]
No person shall engage in any practice, sport or exercise having a tendency
to frighten horses or other animals, or to annoy persons passing in the
streets or on the sidewalks.
23.Editor's Note: See Chapter BH:8, subsection BH:8-1.1, Enumeration of Nuisances.
§ 8-13 § 8-17.2
1:234
§ 8-17.2. Animals running at large. [Ord. No. 7-14-24; Ord. No.
0-35-78; 1967 Code § 46-8B]
No person shall allow any animal owned or kept by him to run at large in
or about the streets, highways or public places of the Township or to run at
large upon lands and premises of any other person without first obtaining
the written permission of the landowners.
Chapter 9
PARKS AND RECREATIONAL AREAS
§ 9-1. GENERAL REGULATIONS.
§ 9-1.1. Purpose of regulations. [Ord. No. 0-25-75; 1967 Code
§ 45A-1]
It is hereby declared to be for the best interest, health, safety and general
welfare of the citizens of the Township that regulations be promulgated for
the control of public parks and playgrounds in the Township.
§ 9-1.2. Regulations for use of public parks and playgrounds. [Ord.
No. 0-25-75; Ord. No. 0-18-78; 1967 Code § 45A-2; New]
a. Requirements concerning use of grounds and facilities. Each person,
firm or corporation using the public parks and playgrounds shall:
1. Clean up all debris, extinguish all fires when such fires are
permitted, and leave the premises in good order and the facilities in
a neat and sanitary condition.
2. Comply with all applicable provisions of the State motor vehicle
traffic laws in regard to equipment and operation of vehicles,
together with such regulations as are contained in this and other
regulations.
3. Obtain the written permission of the Manager before bringing any
buses or charter groups over 20 people into park premises.
4. Comply with insurance requirements as required by the Township
Manager.
b. Prohibited acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation
using such parks and playgrounds to either perform or permit to be
performed any of the following acts:
1. Property. No one shall:
(a) Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, displace
or remove any building, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces,
railings, paving or paving material, waterlines or other public
utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or
§ 8-17.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-1.2
1:235
placards whether temporary or permanent, monuments,
stakes, posts or other boundary markers, or other structures
or equipment, facilities or park or playground property or
appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal.
(b) Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in
the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or other
body of water in or adjacent to any park or any other body of
water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm
sewer or drain flowing into such waters any substance, matter
or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the
pollution of the waters.
(c) Bring in or dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass,
ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage or
refuse or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in
any waters in or contiguous to any park or playground or be
left anywhere on the grounds thereof, but shall be placed in the
proper receptacles where these are provided. Where
receptacles are not so provided, all such rubbish or waste shall
be carried away from the park or playground by the person
responsible for its presence and properly disposed of
elsewhere.
(d) Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant or
injure the bark or pick the flowers or seeds of any tree or plant;
nor shall anyone attach any rope, wire or other contrivance to
any tree or plant. A person shall not dig in or otherwise disturb
grass areas or in any other ways injure or impair the natural
beauty or usefulness of any area.
2. Animals. No one shall:
(a) Cause or permit any animal owned or in one's custody or under
one's control to go or become at large.
(b) Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot or
throw stones or any missiles at or give of offer any poisonous
food to any animal, reptile, bird or the eggs of same, except
that the foregoing shall not prohibit the killing of any deadly
animal.
3. General conduct. No one shall:
(a) Bring in or upon, have brought in or upon or cause to be
brought in or upon the park or the grounds thereof any
alcoholic beverage, nor sell, purchase, consume or drink any
alcoholic beverage at any time in the park. Any person entering
the park or found within the park to be under the influence of
alcoholic liquor shall be immediately removed.
§ 9-1.2 § 9-1.2
1:236
(b) Bring in or cause to be brought in or have in his or her
possession or set off or otherwise cause to be exploded,
discharged or burned any firecracker, torpedo, rocket or other
fireworks or explosive or flammable material, or discharge
them or throw them into any area of the park upon the land
adjacent thereto. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the park
grounds or facilities thereon may be used for a scheduled
fireworks program under permit.
(c) Build or attempt to build a fire, except in a fireplace designated
and constructed for such purposes and under such regulations
as may be adopted by the Township Council or Recreation
Board. No person shall drop, throw or otherwise scatter
lighted matches, burning cigars or cigarettes, tobacco or any
other flammable material within the park.
(d) Enter upon ice, except such ice designated for skating
purposes, provided that a safety signal is so displayed on the
ice or displayed on an adjacent area.
(e) Engage in any disorderly conduct or any behavior tending to
cause a breach of the public peace. No person shall disturb or
otherwise interfere with any other person or group of persons
occupying any area or engaging in any organized activity.
(f) Sell or offer for sale any object or merchandise or any other
thing within the parks or playgrounds or place any other
equipment or apparatus within the parks or playgrounds,
except by permit or as may be permitted by rules and
regulations in accordance with the requirements set forth in
this Code.
(g) Remove or open permanent or temporary barriers, signs,
directionals, gates or fences.
(h) Picnic or lunch in a place other than those designated for that
purpose.
(i) Endanger the safety of any person by any conduct or act.
(j) Prevent any person from using any park or playground, or any
of its facilities, or interfere with such use in compliance with
this chapter and the rules applicable to such use.
(k) Fail to obey, nor shall any person interfere with, an officer in
the proper performance of his duties.
(l) Leave any motor vehicles overnight.
(m) Leave bicycles, except in racks provided.
(n) Ride bicycles or other vehicles without regard to the safety of
others.
§ 9-1.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-1.2
1:237
(o) Ride a horse, except in areas provided in undeveloped parts of
parks during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
to 9:00 p.m.
(p) Gamble.
(q) Change clothing anywhere but in a bathing house.
(r) Sleep on park benches.
(s) Camp, except with the written permission of the Township
Manager.
(t) Solicit alms or contributions, except with the written
permission of the Township Manager.
(u) Carry firearms or other weapons.
(v) Bring any concession trucks or otherwise sell any food or
beverages in park areas or 500 feet from park entrances
without the prior written permission of the Township Manager.
c. Hours of operation.
1. Public parks and playgrounds shall be open for any use by any
person every day of the year during the hours designated as set
forth below:
(a) November 1 to March 31: 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., or 1/2 hour
after completion of any scheduled special activities for which a
Township permit has been issued.
(b) April 1 to October 31: 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m., or 1/2 hour after
completion of any scheduled special activities for which a
Township permit has been issued.
2. Signs setting forth the hours that the parks and playgrounds will be
open will be posted at least two locations setting forth thereon the
following language.
PARKS AND PLAYGROUND HOURS:
November 1 to March 31: 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
April 1 to October 31: 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
VIOLATORS WILL BE PROSECUTED
ACCORDING TO LAW
3. The Township Manager may, in his discretion, extend the hours of
operation for a particular park or playground, if he finds that such
extension will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the
promotion of the public health, welfare, safety and recreation of the
residents of the Township or deprive the adjacent property owners
of the quiet use and enjoyment of their premises. The Township
§ 9-1.2 § 9-1.2
1:238
Manager shall have the authority to revoke such an extension, upon
a finding of violation or any rule or ordinance or upon good cause
shown.
d. Permits for use beyond regular hours.
1. Any organization or group of persons desiring to utilize any public
park or playground for any special activities extending beyond the
posted hours of operation shall be first required to obtain from the
Township Manager a permit, which application for permit shall be
made at least five days in advance of such activity.
2. Issuance of the permit shall be made according to the following
procedure:
(a) The Township Manager shall issue such permit upon
completion of an application, on forms to be supplied by the
Township Clerk, in which the applicant shall set forth the
organization and/or group of persons making the request, the
days and time extension required, the public park or
playground where the activities are to take place, the purpose
for which the permit is requested and an estimate of the
anticipated attendance.
(b) The Township Manager shall not unduly withhold issuance of
any permit, unless he finds and determines that the proposed
activity or activities for which a permit is sought would
probably result in, at the time proposed for scheduling, the
depriving of adjacent property owners of the quiet use and
enjoyment of their premises or could not be conducted without
jeopardizing the public health, safety and welfare of those for
whom the permit is sought or other citizens of the Township or
adjacent thereto, or would result in a public nuisance or
disturbance.
(c) In the event of a denial of a request for a permit, the Township
Manager shall apprise the applicant, in writing, of his reasons
for refusing a permit, and any aggrieved person shall have the
right to appeal, in writing, to the Township Council within 10
days from receipt of such denial. The Township, in reviewing
any such appeal, may make an independent determination of
the facts, but shall at all times apply those legal standards set
forth in paragraph d,2(b) hereof in the rendering of such
determination.
(d) In the event that the denial of a request for permit results in a
hearing date beyond that requested in the application for
permit, the applicant shall be permitted to amend his
application on appeal to request another date beyond the
hearing set by the Township Council.
§ 9-1.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-1.2
1:239
§ 9-1.3. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 0-25-75; Ord. No. 0-18-78; 1967
Code § 45A-3]
§ 9-2. CHARLES "CHUCK" FASOLA RECREATIONAL PARK.
§ 9-2.1. Intent; applications. [Ord. No. 0-14-78; 1967 Code § 45A-7]
In addition to the provisions of this chapter hereinafter set forth to
specifically apply to the Charles "Chuck" Fasola Recreational Park, all the
regulations governing the use of public parks and playgrounds and the
enforcement of the regulations and the provision of penalties for the
violation thereof as set forth in Section 9-1 of this chapter, or as amended,
are hereby incorporated herein, it being the intent of this section to
supplement Section 9-1 as herein provided.
§ 9-2.2. Incorporation of provisions; hours; prohibitions. [Ord. No.
0-14-78; 1967 Code § 45A-8' New]
(e) The permit holder shall be bound by all park and playground
rules and regulations and all applicable ordinances fully as
though the same were inserted in the permits.
(f) The Township Manager shall have the authority to revoke a
permit, upon finding a violation of any rule or ordinance or
upon good cause shown.
a. The Township Manager shall, in connection with his duties, enforce the
provisions of this chapter, and in furtherance of those duties may
designate such enforcement to the Recreation Commission or such
other persons employed or appointed by the Township.
b. The Township Manager, or those he shall designate, including the
members of the Department of Public Safety, shall have the authority to
eject from the parks and playground areas any person or persons acting
in violation of this chapter.
c. The Township Manager, or those he shall designate, shall have the
authority to seize, confiscate, hold and/or retain, subject to the
constraints of due process of law, any property, thing or device used in
violation of this chapter in any public park and/or playground.
d. The Township Manager shall have the authority to adopt rules and
regulations to implement this chapter, which shall become effective
seven days after filing with the Township Clerk. The rules will be posted
in a conspicuous place.
a. All regulations contained in Section 9-1 of this chapter are hereby
incorporated.
b. Park and facility hours.
§ 9-1.2 § 9-2.2
1:240
§ 9-2.3. Definitions. [Ord. No. 0-14-78; 1967 Code § 95A-9]
As used in this section:
FAMILY POOL MEMBERSHIP — Includes husband and wife and all minor
children under age 18.
HANDICAPPED MEMBERSHIP — Includes all persons handicapped
according to N.J.S.A. 52:32-6b, generally one confined to a wheelchair or
who walks with difficulty or who has a hearing, sight, coordination or
perception deficiency.
INDIVIDUAL POOL MEMBERSHIP — One person.
MEMBER OF HOUSEHOLD — Includes all children over age 18 living
at home and anyone else residing at the home on a full-time basis. This
category is available only in conjunction with family membership.
NONRESIDENT — Any individuals in the above categories who are not
residents or taxpayers of the Township.
RESIDENT — Includes all families or individuals who have either paid
property tax in the Township or are actual residents in the Township.
SENIOR CITIZEN POOL MEMBERSHIP — Includes all individual senior
citizens as defined in N.J.S.A. 55:141-3a (age 62 or over) and spouses.
§ 9-2.4. Swimming pool fees.
1. General park grounds hours shall be as designated by the Township
Manager.
2. General public swimming hours shall be as designated by the
Township Manager.
3. Individuals paying a daily use charge for entry into the swimming
pool will be admitted for the 12:00 noon to 4:00 p.m. shift or the
4:00 to 8:00 p.m. shift.
4. Tennis court hours will be the same as general grounds hours,
subject to rules promulgated by the Township Manager.
c. Prohibited acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation
using the Charles "Chuck" Fasola Recreational Park to either perform
or permit to be performed any of the following acts:
1. Swimming or wading in the natural pond located in the park.
2. Attempting to gain entry to the swimming pool or tennis courts
without paying the proper fee.
3. Attempting to use any playing field or other area which has been
reserved for use by some other person, firm, corporation or group.
4. Attempting to gain entry to a special event without paying the
required admission fee.
§ 9-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-2.4
1:241
§ 9-2.5. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 0-14-78; 1967 Code § 45A-12; Ord.
No. 0-10-89 § 4]
a. The following fees shall be charged for annual pool membership:
1. Full season membership sold up to July 1. Family:
(a) Resident: $150.
(b) Nonresident: $300.
(c) Each additional member of household: $25.
2. Single:
(a) Resident: $100.
(b) Nonresident: $200.
(c) Persons age 65 and over: 1/2 daily fee. Children age five and
under — free.
b. Annual members shall pay their fees once each year and will not pay
any daily usage charge.
c. Senior citizens and handicapped members will pay 1/2 of the
appropriate fee for their category.
d. The following fees shall be charged for daily use of the pool:
1. Resident: $2.
2. Nonresident: $4.
3. Children under eight years: free.
e. Daily use fees will entitle the person to entry into the pool for either a
12:00 noon to 4:00 p.m. shift or 4:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m. shift.
f. Senior citizens and handicapped individuals will pay 1/2 of the
appropriate daily use charge for their category.
a. The Township Manager shall, in connection with his duties, enforce the
provisions of this section and, in furtherance of those duties, may
designate such enforcement to the Recreation Commission or such
other persons employed or appointed by the Township.
b. The Township Manager or those he shall designate, including the
members of the Department of Public Safety, shall have the authority to
eject from the parks and playground areas any person or persons acting
in violation of this section.
c. The Township Manager or those he shall designate shall have the
authority to seize, confiscate, hold and/or retain, subject to the
§ 9-2.4 § 9-2.5
1:242
§ 9-3. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [Ord. No. 0-10-89 § 5; New]
Any person or persons found to be in violation of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to the General Penalty established
in Section 1-5 of this Code.
Chapter 10
BUILDING AND HOUSING
§ 10-1. STATE UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE ENFORCING
AGENCY.
§ 10-1.1. Enforcing agency established. [Ord. No. 0-3-77; 1967 Code
§ 11-1]
constraints of due process of law, any property, thing or device used in
violation of this section in any public park or playground.
d. The Township Manager shall have the authority to adopt rules and
regulations to implement this section, which shall become effective
seven days after filing with the Township Clerk and which will be posted
in a conspicuous place.
a. There is hereby established in the Township a State Uniform
Construction Code enforcing agency to be known as the "Township
Construction Code Enforcing Agency," consisting of a Construction
Official, Building Subcode Official, Plumbing Subcode Official,
Electrical Subcode Official, Fire Protection Subcode Official and such
other subcode officials for such additional subcodes as the
Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs, State of New
Jersey, shall hereafter adopt as part of the State Uniform Construction
Code. The Construction Official shall be the chief administrator of the
Enforcing Agency.
b. Each official position created in paragraph a. hereof shall be filled by a
person qualified for such position pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, as
amended, and N.J.A.C. 5:23, provided that in lieu of any particular
subcode official, an on-site inspection agent may be retained by
contract pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23. More than one such official position
may be held by the same person, provided that such person is qualified
pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, and N.J.A.C. 5:23 to hold each such
position.
c. The public shall have the right to do business with the Enforcing
Agency at the office location except for emergencies and unforeseen or
unavoidable circumstances. Upon the enactment date of this section,
the Township Manager shall post in the office of the Clerk and publish
in an official newspaper of the Township notice of the location of the
Township Construction Code Enforcing Agency together with, upon its
§ 9-2.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-1.1
1:243
§ 10-1.2. Construction fees.24 [Ord. No. 0-3-77; Ord. No. 0-33-78;
1967 Code § 11-2; Ord. No. 84-07-R; Ord. No. 0.3.94; Ord. No. 0.7.00
§§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 0.2.99 §§ 2, 3; Ord. No. 0.2.99 § 3c; Ord. No. 0-7-02
§ 1]
The fee for a construction permit shall be the sum of the subcode fees
hereinafter enumerated and shall be paid before the permit is issued.
The fee for new construction shall be calculated by using the volume of
structure and, in addition, any related subcode fees. Where the physical
value of a building, structure or improvement must be determined as
hereinafter specified the fee charged shall be based on replacement cost
by using the value established by the building valuation data report as
published by BOCA International, Inc. as referenced in N.J.A.C. 5:23-3 as
may be periodically amended. All such fees shall be rounded to the nearest
dollar amount as referenced in N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.17(a)1.
adoption, a designating resolution by the Township Council of the
names, addresses and business telephone numbers of the code office
and all subcode officials or their duly appointed designees.
d. Notwithstanding any provisions of this section, the Township Fire
Commissioner may adopt and provide for the enforcement of a Fire
Safety Maintenance Code or continue to enforce an existing Fire Safety
Maintenance Code. The provisions of the State Uniform Construction
Code Act, P.L. 1975, c. 217 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.), provide for the
adoption and enforcement of a Fire Prevention Subcode and shall apply
to fire prevention in related construction activities which are defined as
those of fire prevention in related construction activities which in any
way may affect, pertain to or involve the issuance of a construction
permit or initial Certificate of Occupancy under the Act. No Fire Safety
Maintenance Code or the enforcement thereof shall in any way conflict
with or otherwise affect the terms and enforcement of the State
Uniform Construction Code adopted pursuant to the State Uniform
Construction Code Act aforesaid.
e. Central permit office. The Township shall establish a central permit
office under the direction and supervision of the Township Construction
Official, which office shall be the same location as the Construction
Code Enforcing Agency. This office shall receive applications for
construction permits and plan review; issue construction permits and
Certificates of Occupancy; collect fees, penalties and fines; and issue
notices and orders. The office shall be open during normal business
hours at times to be determined by the Township. These times shall be
posted in a conspicuous place and shall be comparable with the amount
of construction activity in the Township. Nothing herein shall prevent
the Township from establishing branch offices, but the public shall not,
unless in the case of an emergency or unforeseen or unavoidable
circumstance, be required to do business except at the central office.
24.Editor's Note: See Section 2-74, Policy on Waiver of Certain Fees for Handicapped Persons
or Qualified Senior Citizens.
§ 10-1.1 § 10-1.2
1:244
a. Building subcode fees.
1. For new construction, the fee shall be computed as follows:
(a) One and nine-tenths cents per cubic foot of building volume up
to 50,000 cubic feet of building or structure volume provided
that the minimum charge of $35 be assessed for each permit.
(b) One and seven-tenths cents per cubic foot of building volume
for the building volume in excess of 50,000 cubic feet of
building structure or volume and less than 500,000 cubic feet
of building structure or volume.
(c) One and five-tenths cents per cubic foot of building volume for
the building volume of 500,000 cubic feet and in excess of
500,000 cubic feet of building or structure.
2. For renovations, alterations and repairs, $12 per $1,000 of
estimated cost of work inclusive of labor. The minimum fee shall be
$25.
3. For additions, the amount charged per cubic foot of building
volume for the added portion shall be in accordance with the
schedule of fees as previously set forth in paragraph a,1. above
provided that the minimum charge of $35 be assessed for each
permit.
4. For combinations of renovations and additions, the sum of the fees
shall be computed separately as renovations and additions. The
minimum fee shall be $35.
5. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1. through 5. above,
the following construction fees, when computed as part of new
construction, additions or renovations shall be as follows:
(a) Aluminum siding and all other siding $12 per $1,000 of
estimated cost provided that the minimum shall be $25.
(b) Roofing, $12 per $1,000 of estimated cost provided that the
minimum shall be $25.
(c) Signs, $1 per square foot of surface area of the sign, provided
that the minimum fee shall be $35. In the case of double faced
signs, the area of the surface of one side only shall be used for
the purpose of fee computation.
(d) Fences, $10 per $1,000 of estimated cost of work provided that
a minimum fee shall be $10.
(e) Heating, air conditioning and ventilation, $15 per $1,000 of
estimated cost of work provided that a minimum fee shall be
$25.
b. Plumbing subcode fees.
§ 10-1.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-1.2
1:245
1. Ten dollars per plumbing fixture or devices except where specified
to the contrary herein. For the purposes of this paragraph, fixtures
shall include, but are not limited to; lavatories, sinks, urinals, water
closets, bathtubs, shower stalls, laundry tubs, floor drains, drinking
fountains, dishwashers, garbage disposals, clothes washers, hot
water heaters, roof drains, hose bibbs, vent stacks or similar
devices.
2. Forty dollars for the following special devices: Soda dispensers,
coffee makers, acid neutralizing devices, grease interceptors, oil
and/or sand interceptors, backflow preventers, air conditioning or
refrigeration units, gas piping, sewer ejectors, hot water and steam
boilers. This list is not exhaustive and the fee shall also apply to
special fixtures or equipment delineated in the plumbing code.
3. Forty dollars for each water and sewer connection and gasoline
piping for each tank.
4. Forty dollars for the following: Baseboard radiation and radon
piping.
5. Unless specified herein to the contrary, a minimum plumbing fee
shall be $35.
6. All plumbing inspections include the area from the curbline or
right-of-way to the structure or structures.
c. Electrical subcode fees.
1. Electrical subcode fees shall be computed as follows:
(a) Fixtures (outlets, switches, receptacles): For one to 50 fixtures,
$35. For each additional 25 fixtures or fraction thereof in
excess of 50 fixtures the fee shall be $5.
(b) Light Standards (mogul base, mercury base or fixtures other
than those specified in the previous subsection): For one to five
fixtures, $35. For each additional lamp $5.
(c) Swimming pools: New installation including bonding, wiring of
one receptacle and motor. The fee shall be $45 for above
ground, and $60 for in ground pools.
(d) Motors: For one to 10 horsepower, $20. From 11 to 40
horsepower, $35. From 41 to 100 horsepower, $65 and for 100
horsepower, $350.
(e) Service meter equipment and feeders: For up to 200 amperes
service, $35. For 201 amperes to 1,000 amperes, $65; for 1,001
amperes and over, $350.
§ 10-1.2 § 10-1.2
1:246
(f) Heating, cooling, cooking and similar appliances. Single outlet
of 20 kilowatts or less, $35. Each additional outlet $5 including
dishwasher, garbage disposal, dryer, water heaters.
(g) Generators, transformers (vaults, enclosure-substations): For
one to 10 kilowatts, $20. For 11 to 50 kilowatts, $35. For 51 to
100 kilowatts, $65. For over 100 kilowatts, $350.
(h) Electrical signs: For one to five signs, $35. For each additional
sign $4.
(i) Reintroduction of service: For reintroduction of service the fee
shall be $35.
(j) Unless specified herein to the contrary, minimum electrical
fees shall be $35.
(k) For any items not specifically listed or included above a special
fee shall be determined by the Construction Official and
Electrical Subcode Official subject to review of the Township
Council upon request.
d. Fire protection subcode fees.
1. Sprinkler heads and detectors. For one to 10, $35. From 11 to 25,
$75. From 26 to 100, $250. From 101 to 200, $400. From 201 to
400, $600. From 401 to $1,000, $900. Over $1,000, $2,200.
2. Special suppression and hood exhaust. The fee shall be $50 each.
3. Alarm systems and detectors. The fee shall be $15 per $1,000 of
estimated cost. The minimum fee shall be $25.
4. Standpipes. The fee shall be $200 per riser.
5. Heating systems. The fee shall be $20 per appliance for residential
properties and $35 per appliance for commercial properties. The
minimum fee for all properties is $35.
6. Fireplaces and wood stoves. The fee shall be $35.
7. Heating fuel tanks. The fee shall be $35 per tank for residential
properties and $60 per tank for commercial properties.
8. The fee for installation of each above ground or in ground gasoline
or propane tank shall be $60.
9. Gasoline tanks: The fee shall be $60 for the installation of each
above ground or in ground gas tank.
e. The construction plan review fee. The construction plan review fee shall
be 25% of the amount to be charged for the construction permit and
shall be paid before the plans are reviewed. The amount paid for this
§ 10-1.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-1.2
1:247
fee shall be credited toward the amount of fee to be charged for the
construction permit.
f. Demolition or removal of buildings or structures.
1. The fee for a permit for demolition of a building or structure shall
be $50 for residential property and $100 for commercial property.
2. The fee for a permit for removal of underground storage tanks shall
be $60 for each tank.
3. The fee for a permit for the removal of a structure from one lot to
another or to a new location on the same lot shall be $25 per $1,000
of estimated costs of moving. The fee for a new foundation shall be
as set forth in paragraph a,1(a). The fee for the removal of a
commercial structure shall be $50 per $1,000 of estimated cost as
set forth above. The minimum fee for all properties shall be $35.
4. Cleanup shall be performed in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:23-2.17(a)(b)(c). All debris and material resulting from the
removal or demolition of buildings or structures as defined in
paragraph f,1 and 2. hereof shall be completed within 30 days from
the completion of removal or demolition, including the filling in of
any open area created by the demolition or removal. Each holder of
a permit shall notify the office of the Construction Official upon
completion of cleanup within the thirty-day period. However, the
demolition of any buildings or structures less than 5,000 cubic feet
shall be completed, and the Construction Official notified, within 15
days.
5. In addition to the provisions specified in paragraph f, 1-3. hereof,
all applicants shall be required to comply with Board of Health
requirements regarding securing of rodent infestation inspection
(Chapter BH:12) of the Code of the Township of Deptford.
g. Pool Construction Permit Fee. The fee for a construction permit for the
installation of a pool shall be calculated at $12 per $1,000 of estimated
cost of work inclusive of labor. The minimum fee shall be $25.
h. Certificates.
1. The fee for a certificate of occupancy shall be 10% of the total of
the permit fee with a minimum charge of $25.
2. The fee for a certificate of occupancy granted pursuant to a change
of use shall be $100.
3. The fee for a multiple certificate of occupancy shall be $25 per unit.
4. In the event a temporary certificate of occupancy is issued an
additional fee of $10 is required.
5. Reserved.
§ 10-1.2 § 10-1.2
1:248
§ 10-1.3. Preparation of annual report. [Ord. No. 0-3-77; 1967 Code
§ 11-3]
The Construction Official shall, with the advice of the subcode officials,
prepare and submit to the Director of Community Development, annually,
a report recommending a fee schedule based on the operating expenses of
the agency and any other expenses of the Township fairly attributable to the
enforcement of the State Uniform Construction Code Act.
§ 10-1.4. Collection of surcharge fee. [Ord. No. 0-3-77; 1967 Code
§ 11-4]
6. Certificate of approval: There shall be no fee for a certificate of
approval as required by the NJ.A.C.
i. Elevator installation permit fee.
1. All fees related to plan review, device inspection and tests, and
periodic inspections and reinspections for elevators, escalators,
and moving walks shall be charged a fee as noted in N.J.A.C. 5:83
subchapter 12;
2. No fee shall be charged for any public building or public or private
school.
j. Variation application fee. The fee for an application for a variation shall
be $250 for Class I and Class II structures and $50 for Class III
structures.
k. Other fee schedules. Those construction permit fees not specifically
designated by this section or established by rules and regulations of the
Construction Official in the manner hereinafter established for the
adoption of other fee schedules are established in the regulations of the
Department of Community Affairs (Title 5, Chapter 23 of the New Jersey
Administrative Code, presently or as hereafter amended). Those fees
set forth within the regulations shall be applied in determining the
construction permit fee.
a. In order to provide for the training, certification, and technical support
programs required by the Uniform Construction Code Act and the
regulations,25 the Construction Code Enforcing Agency shall collect, in
addition to the fees specified above, a surcharge fee of $0.0006 per
cubic foot of volume of new construction. The surcharge fee shall be
remitted to the Bureau of Housing Inspection, Department of
Community Affairs, on a quarterly basis for the fiscal quarters ending
September 30, December 31, March 31 and June 30, and not later than
one month next succeeding the end of the quarter for which it is due. In
the fiscal year in which the regulations first become effective, the fee
shall be collected and remitted for the third and fourth quarters only.
25.Editor's Note: The regulations are those established by the Commissioner of the
Department of Community Affairs.
§ 10-1.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-1.4
1:249
§ 10-1.5. Applications for permits: examination, approval,
expiration or cancellation. [Ord. No. 0-3-77; 1967 Code § 11-5]
§ 10-1.6. Waiver of fees for permits.26 [Ord. No. 0-3-77; 1967 Code
§ 11-5.1; Ord. No. 84-10-R]
Township Council may, in its discretion, waive construction fees otherwise
required to be paid under this section.
b. The Construction Code Enforcing Agency shall report annually, at the
end of each fiscal year, to the Bureau of Housing Inspection, and not
later than July 31, the total amount of the surcharge fee collected in the
fiscal year. In the fiscal year in which the regulations first become
effective the report shall be for the third and fourth quarters only. A
copy of this report shall be filed in the office of the Clerk.
a. The Construction Code Enforcing Agency shall examine each
application for a construction permit. If the application conforms with
this section, the Agency shall approve the application and shall issue a
construction permit to the applicant. Every application for a
construction permit shall be granted, in whole or in part, or denied
within 20 business days. If application is denied in whole or in part the
Construction Code Enforcing Agency shall set forth the reasons
therefor in writing. If the Construction Code Enforcing Agency fails to
grant, in whole or in part, or deny any application for a construction
permit within the period of time prescribed herein, such failure shall be
deemed a denial of the application for purposes of an appeal to the
Gloucester County Construction Board of Appeals unless such period of
time has been extended with the consent of the applicant. The
Construction Code Enforcing Agency may approve changes in plans and
specifications previously approved by it, if the plans and specifications
when so changed do not require site plan approval. Except as otherwise
provided in this section the construction or alteration of a building or
structure shall not be commenced until a construction permit has been
issued. The construction of a building or structure shall be in
compliance with the approved application for a construction permit,
and with all conditions of site plan approval, if required.
b. A construction permit, issued in accordance with paragraph a.,
pursuant to which no construction has been undertaken above the
foundation walls within one year from the time of issuance, shall expire.
The Construction Code Enforcing Agency may suspend, revoke, or
cancel a construction permit in case of neglect or failure to comply with
the provisions of this Act or the code, or upon a finding by it that a false
statement or representation has been made in the application for the
construction permit.
26.Editor's Note: See Section 2-74 Policy on Waiver of Certain Fees for Handicapped Persons
or Qualified Senior Citizens.
§ 10-1.4 § 10-1.7
1:250
§ 10-1.7. Inspections; right of entry; stop-work orders. [Ord. No.
0-3-77; 1967 Code § 11-6]
a. The Construction Code Enforcing Agency shall periodically inspect all
construction undertaken pursuant to a construction permit issued by it
to ensure that the construction or alteration is performed in accordance
with law and with the conditions of the construction permit.
b. The owner of any premises upon which a building or structure is being
constructed shall be deemed to have consented to the inspection by the
Construction Code Enforcing Agency, of the entire premises and of any
and all construction being performed on it until a Certificate of
Occupancy has been issued. An inspector or team of inspectors, on
presentation of proper credentials, shall have the right to enter and
inspect such premises and any and all construction thereon, for
purposes of ensuring compliance with the provisions of the applicable
construction permit and other applicable laws and regulations. All
inspection pursuant to this section shall be between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 5:00 p.m.; however, inspections may be conducted at other
times if the Construction Code Enforcing Agency has reasonable cause
to believe that an immediate danger to life, limb or property exists or if
permission is given by an owner or his agent, architect, engineer or
builder. No person shall accompany an inspector or team of inspectors
on any inspection pursuant to this section unless his presence is
necessary for the enforcement of this ordinance or the Act (P.L. 1975, c.
217), and regulations adopted pursuant thereto (N.J.A.C. 5:23), or
unless consent is given by an owner or his agent, architect, engineer or
builder.
c. If the construction of a structure or building is being undertaken
contrary to the provisions of a construction permit, this section or other
applicable laws or ordinances, the Construction Code Enforcing Agency
may issue a stop-construction order in writing which shall state the
conditions upon which construction may be resumed and which shall be
given to the owner or the holder of the construction permit or to the
person performing the construction. If the person doing the
construction is not known or cannot be located with reasonable effort,
the notice may be delivered to the person in charge of, or apparently in
charge of, the construction. No person shall continue, or cause or allow
to be continued, the construction of a building or structure in violation
of a stop-construction order, except with the permission of the
Construction Code Enforcing Agency in order to abate a dangerous
condition or remove a violation, or except by court order. If an order to
stop construction is not obeyed, the Construction Code Enforcing
Agency may apply to the appropriate court as otherwise established by
law for an order enjoying the violation of the stop-construction order.
The remedy for violation of such an order provided in this subsection
shall be in addition to, and not in limitation of, any other remedies
provided by law or ordinance.
§ 10-1.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-1.7
1:251
§ 10-1.8. Indemnity bonds. [Ord. No. 0-3-77; 1967 Code § 11-7]
In connection with the provisions of this section and the State Uniform
Construction Code hereby established and adopted as a part hereof, the
following indemnity bonds may be posted in respect to each specific section
hereinafter cited, which sections are hereby amended to read as follows:
§ 10-1.9. Legislative authority; construction. [Ord. No. 0-3-77; 1967
Code § 11-8]
This section is adopted pursuant to the provisions of the State Uniform
Construction Code Act, Chapter 217, Laws of New Jersey 1975 (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-119 et seq.) and State regulations implementing the Act (N.J.A.C.
5:23). In the event of any ambiguities, inconsistencies or conflicts between
the terms and provisions of Chapter 1 of this Code and the State Uniform
Construction Code Act and the State regulations aforesaid, the provisions
set forth and the standards established in the Act and regulations shall
apply.
§ 10-1.10. Violations and penalties. [Ord. No. 0-3-77; Ord. No.
0-33-78; 1967 Code § 11-9]
d. Neither an appeal to the Gloucester County Construction Board of
Appeals nor an appeal to the Department of Community Affairs nor an
appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction shall automatically stay any
order to stop construction issued pursuant to this section or prevent the
seeking of an order in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin the
violation of a stop-construction order.
a. Sign bonds. The owner of every sign shall be bonded in an amount not
less than $100 for the erection and maintenance of such sign or
billboard.
b. Wrecking bonds. The owner or person to whom a permit has been
issued to wreck or demolish a building shall provide a bond, in the
amount of $1,000, which shall require the completion of the work and
the clearing and filling in of the site and will protect and indemnify the
municipality against loss or damage.
c. Moving bonds. The owner of a building to be moved shall furnish a
bond, in the amount of $1,000, which shall require the completion of
work and the restoration of the site as provided by this section and the
State Uniform Construction Code and will protect and indemnify the
Township against loss or damage.
d. Modification of performance guaranty indemnify bonds. Where
required, the Construction Code Official may require each owner or
persons required to post bond in an amount in excess of that required in
paragraphs a. through c. hereof; the Construction Code Official may
accept, in lieu of bond, cash or such other security as may be approved
by the Township Attorney.
§ 10-1.7 § 10-1.10
1:252
§ 10-2. INSTALLATION OF SMOKE DETECTORS AND FIRE ALARM
SYSTEMS.
§ 10-2.1. Statement of policy. [Ord. No. 0-34-78; 1967 Code § 11A-1]
It shall be the public policy of the Township to encourage the maximum
use of smoke detectors in all buildings and residences. The effective use
a. Any person or corporation, including an officer, director or employee of
a corporation, shall be subject to a penalty of not more than $500 who:
1. Violates any of the provisions of this section.
2. Constructs a structure or building in violation of a condition of a
building permit.
3. Fails to comply with any order issued by the Construction Code
Enforcing Agency or its designees.
4. Makes a false or misleading written statement or omits any
required information or statement in any application or request for
approval to the Construction Code Enforcing Agency or its
designees or any agency or board of the Township.
b. Anyone who knowingly refuses an inspector, who is lawfully authorized
to inspect any premises, building or structure pursuant to this section,
entry or access to such premises, building or structure, or who
unreasonably interferes with such an inspection, shall be subject to a
fine of not more than $250.
c. With respect to paragraph a,3. of this subsection, a person shall be
guilty of a separate offense for each day that he fails to comply with a
stop-construction order validly issued by the Uniform Construction
Code Enforcing Agency or its designees, and by any other agency or
department authorized by law, and for each week that he fails to comply
with any other order validly issued by the Construction Code Enforcing
Agency or its designees or other agency or department. With respect to
paragraphs a,1. and 4. of this subsection, a person shall be guilty of a
separate offense for each violation of any provision of this section and
for each false or misleading written statement or omission of required
information or statement made in any application or request for
approval to the Uniform Construction Code Enforcing Agency, or its
designees or other agency or department authorized by law. With
respect to paragraph a,2. of this subsection, a person shall be guilty of a
separate offense for each violation of the conditions of a construction
permit.
d. The imposition of fines and any appeal therefrom shall be in the manner
set forth in the Uniform Construction Code Act, P.L. 1975, c. 217
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.). All penalties hereunder may be collected
in a summary proceeding pursuant to the Penalty Enforcement Law,
N.J.S.A. 2A:58-1 et seq.
§ 10-1.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-2.1
1:253
of smoke detectors has been a proven life saver and a potential property
preserver.
§ 10-2.2. Enforcement agency designated. [Ord. No. 0-34-78; 1967
Code § 11A-2]
The Fire Marshal or his designee is hereby appointed the enforcement
agency. The Fire Marshal or his designee is hereby authorized and directed,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.9, to make inspections and to perform such
other acts and deeds consistent with lawful authority to determine whether
the smoke detectors or fire alarm systems required by this section are
installed and are in proper working order. In all residential one- and twofamily
units, no inspection(s) shall be permitted by the Fire Marshal or his
designee unless such inspection is required for a Certificate of Occupancy
or unless there is imminent danger to the lives, health or safety or
preservation of the property of the occupants, or persons adjacent thereto,
without the express consent of the occupant or owner of each dwelling or
dwelling unit or the person in charge thereof.
§ 10-2.3. Multifamily buildings exceeding 35 feet in height. [Ord.
No. 0-34-78; 1967 Code § 11A-3]
For all multifamily buildings more than 35 feet in height above the mean
grade, the automatic fire warning systems shall meet the standards for the
detection of ionized gases or of the production of combustion produced by
burning or smoldering materials as required for that particular building
as specified in those provisions of the BOCA Basic Building Code, 1975,
pertaining to Automatic Fire Alarm Systems, Section 1216.0 et seq. (and
as amended hereafter); and such automatic fire warning systems shall be
installed in accordance therewith, and such system shall also initiate the
sounding of an audible alarm capable of being heard in all occupied areas
of the building or structure and shall register the location of the alarm at a
specified location within the building. The sounding of this system shall also
be connected to the Township Fire Control Center for receipt of fire alarms
or emergencies or such other fire control designation as may hereinafter
be established by the Township. All automatic fire alarm systems required
hereunder shall be approved by Underwriters' Laboratory, Inc. or Factory
Mutual Research Corporation.
§ 10-2.4. Structures not exceeding 35 feet in height. [Ord. No.
0-34-78; 1967 Code § 11A-4]
Every building, structure or dwelling not exceeding 35 feet in height above
the mean grade, erected, substantially altered or presently occupied for
residential purposes, shall be protected with an automatic fire warning
system equipped with automatic smoke and/or gas detection devices
principally intended for the protection of lives by indicating abnormal
conditions as hereinafter provided:
§ 10-2.1 § 10-2.4
1:254
§ 10-2.5. Additional standards. [Ord. No. 0-34-78; 1967 Code
§ 11A-5]
a. Those systems or devices shall conform to the requirements of the 1975
Edition of the National Fire Protection Association designated as "NFPA
No. 74," entitled "Household Fire Warning Equipment, 1975," and any
amendments subsequent thereto (hereinafter referred to as "NFPA No.
74") relating to household fire warning equipment. The devices,
commonly referred to as "smoke or heat detectors," must meet with the
approval of the Underwriters' Laboratory, Inc. or Factory Mutual
Research Corporation.
b. Such smoke or heat detectors may be either electrically powered,
battery-powered or a combination of both. Battery-powered units shall
contain an audible signal denoting failure of equipment. If electrically
powered, the electric power supply for the smoke detector should be
either on a completely separate circuit or on a circuit ahead of the
service disconnect, so that the smoke detector circuit will always
operate unless there is a failure of electricity coming into the building.
c. Upon activation, such smoke or heat detector shall provide an audible
alarm which is to be so distinct and of such volume that it can be heard
in all rooms of the building, structure or residence or dwelling unit with
the door closed. Any alarm sounding device having less than a minimum
rating of 85 decibels at 10 feet shall be deemed insufficient.
d. All such smoke and heat detectors shall meet the equipment
performance tests set forth in Chapter 2, Section 2, of NFPA No. 74.
e. Detector location and spacing within the building, structure or dwelling
unit shall be such that at least one such device shall be located on each
floor of living space or in each sleeping unit of a multidwelling building,
provided that where in a dwelling sleeping units shall be on different
levels, at least one such device shall be located adjacent to that sleeping
unit on each level, or, where such sleeping units, such as in a one-level
dwelling, are substantially separated, then one such device shall be
placed adjacent to each sleeping unit. In furtherance of the provisions
set forth in this paragraph, detector locations and space requirements
shall be as generally set forth in Chapter 2, Section 5, Chapter 3,
Section 3, of NFPA No. 74.
a. Installation of central air conditioning. All existing buildings installing
central air conditioning or central forced air with withdrawal must
install a smoke detector at the highest point in the residence, and the
smoke detector shall be so connected that activation of the detector will
deactivate the main power supply for the central air conditioner, forced
air heating system or air withdrawal fan in addition to sounding the
alarm.
b. Audible signal. The audible signal shall be distinctive from other
audible signaling devices which may be used for other purposes in the
§ 10-2.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-2.5
1:255
§ 10-2.6. Testing and inspection. [Ord. No. 0-34-78; 1967 Code
§ 11A-6]
§ 10-2.7. Required installation. [Ord. No. 0-34-78; 1967 Code
§ 11A-7]
building. The smoke or heat detector systems shall be so designed to
be capable of either self-restoration or manual restoration to normal
conditions for operation. No provisions shall be made for the
deactivation of the audible alarm other than by reactivation of the
system.
c. Power supplies. All power supplies shall be sufficient to operate the
alarm signal(s) for at least four continuous minutes.
d. Exception. Upon application to the Fire Marshal, buildings or portions
thereof equipped with an automatic fire alarm system connected to a
sprinkler system may receive exemption from the provisions of this
section.
a. Automatic detector devices shall be tested periodically as specified by
the Life Safety Code, NFPA No. 101, and NFPA No. 74, and
amendments thereto.
b. In multifamily units and in buildings or structures constructed in
accordance with the provisions of subsection 10-2.8, all detector
devices and/or fire alarm systems shall be periodically inspected by the
Fire Marshal during reasonable hours. The Fire Marshal, for this
purpose, may promulgate rules and regulations to implement a
schedule of inspection. However, no rules or regulations shall take
effect except upon public notice and after hearing and approval by
resolution of the Township Council.
c. "Public notice" shall be defined as publication of the proposed rules and
regulations in the Township's official newspaper, posting in the Clerk's
office and delivery of a copy of the proposed rules and regulations to the
Township Council. No public hearing on any proposed rules or
regulations shall be held less than seven days prior to compliance with
the public notice requirements herein.
a. All newly constructed premises subject to sale, rent, transfer, grant or
lease, including but not limited to dwellings, motel rooms and
apartment units (except detached accessory buildings), shall be
equipped with an automatic fire alarm system or smoke or heat
detectors, where permitted, installed in accordance with the standards
and provisions of this section.
b. Existing buildings which come under the provisions of this section, with
the exception of residential one- and two-family dwellings, shall install
automatic fire alarm systems or smoke or heat detectors, where
permitted.
§ 10-2.5 § 10-2.7
1:256
§ 10-2.8. New construction. [Ord. No. 0-34-78; 1967 Code § 11A-8]
All new construction for residential occupancy more than four stories in
height, including but not limited to apartment buildings, hotels,
dormitories, clubhouses, sanitariums, surgical institutions, hospitals,
asylums, homes for the aged or other similar construction for occupancy
on a temporary or permanent basis, shall include the installation of an
automatic fire warning system equal or greater in capacity to that required
by the BOCA Basic Building Code, 1975, (as amended) and as may be
required for that construction by any other Federal, State or local agency
by law and/or regulation, which automatic fire warning system shall be
installed prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy.
§ 10-2.9. Compliance officer designated. [Ord. No. 0-34-78; 1967
Code § 11A-9]
The Construction Code Official or such other person as the Township
Manager shall appoint shall be designated as the "Compliance Officer." The
duties and functions of the Compliance Officer shall be to act as liaison
on behalf of the Township with the Fire Marshal in the dissemination of
public information to effect compliance with this section, and to aid in the
promulgation, if required, of rules and regulations pursuant to subsection
10-2.6 and to perform such other services or functions as the Township
Manager may designate to effect the intent and purpose of this section.
c. All residential one- and two-family units shall install an automatic fire
alarm system or smoke or heat detectors in accordance with the
standards and provisions of this section.
d. Transfer or sale or property, change of occupancy.
1. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection 10-2.7, paragraphs a.
through c. herein, all buildings, structures or dwelling units
hereafter sold, or in which there has been a change of occupants,
shall be in full compliance with the standards and provisions of this
section. No Certificate of Occupancy shall issue until such
compliance has been demonstrated. The transferor of any building,
structure or dwelling unit shall be responsible for the installation of
these detection devices.
2. Where there is a change of occupants in any apartment unit, no
occupancy shall be permitted unless the owner or the owner's
designated agent shall have demonstrated that the apartment or
other dwelling unit to be leased is in compliance with the terms and
provisions of this section. The lessor of any apartment or other
dwelling unit shall be responsible for the installation of these
detection devices.
§ 10-2.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-2.10
1:257
§ 10-2.10. Legislative authority; construal of provisions. [Ord. No.
0-34-78; 1967 Code § 11A-10]
This section is adopted pursuant to the provisions of the State Uniform
Construction Code Act, P.L. 1975, c. 217 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.), and
as a supplement to Section 10-1 of this chapter implementing the Act. In the
event of any ambiguities, inconsistencies or conflicts between the terms and
provisions of this section and the State Uniform Construction Code Act and
the State regulations aforesaid, the provisions set forth and the standards
established in the Act and regulations shall apply.
§ 10-2.11. Violations and penalties. [Ord. No. 0-34-78; 1967 Code
§ 11A-11; New]
a. Any person or corporation, including an officer, director or employee of
a corporation who:
1. Violates any of the provisions of this section;
2. Fails to comply with any order issued by the Fire Marshal or his
designee acting pursuant to lawful authority in the enforcement of
this section; shall be subject to the General Penalty established in
Section 1-5 of this Code.
b. Anyone who knowingly refuses an inspector, who is lawfully authorized
to inspect any premises, building or structure pursuant to this section,
entry or access to such premises, building or structure or who
unreasonably interferes with such an inspection shall be subject to a
fine of not more than $250.
c. With respect to paragraph a,2. of this subsection, a person shall be
guilty of a separate offense for each day that he fails to comply with a
stop-construction order validly issued by the Construction Code
Official, or his designee, and by any other agency or department
authorized by law, and for each week that he fails to comply with any
other order validly issued by the Township Fire Marshal, or his
designee, or other agency or department. With respect to paragraphs
a,1. and 2. of this subsection, a person shall be guilty of a separate
offense for each violation of any provision of this section and for each
false or misleading written statement or omission of required
information or statement made in any application or request for
approval to the Township Fire Marshal, or its designee, or other agency
or department authorized by law.
d. The imposition of fines and any appeal therefrom shall be in the manner
set forth in the Uniform Construction Code Act, P.L. 1975, c. 217
(N.J.S.A. 2A:58-1 et seq.). All penalties hereunder may be collected in a
summary proceeding pursuant to the Penalty Enforcement Law, N.J.S.A.
2A:58-1 et seq.
e. Exemptions. Notwithstanding the penalties imposed hereunder, no
penalty shall be imposed on any owner or occupant of any one- or two-
§ 10-2.10 § 10-2.11
1:258
§ 10-3. Reserved.
§ 10-4. UNSAFE STRUCTURES.
§ 10-4.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 8-24-70; 1967 Code § 74-1]
As used in this section:
BUILDING — Any building or structure, or part thereof, whether used
for human habitation or otherwise, and includes any outhouses and
appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith.
GOVERNING BODY — The Township Council of the Township of Deptford.
OWNER — The holder or holders of the title in fee simple.
PARTIES IN INTEREST — All individuals, associations and corporations
who have interests of record in a building and any who are in actual
possession thereof.
PUBLIC AUTHORITY — Any housing authority or any officer whose
functions relate to health, fire, building regulations, or to other activities
concerning buildings within the Township.
PUBLIC OFFICER — The Construction Code Official, Fire Chief Official and
the Board of Health Inspector, or such other official duly designated by the
Township Council to enforce this section.
§ 10-4.2. Designation of powers. [Ord. No. 8-24-70; 1967 Code
§ 74-2]
The Public Officer, as defined, of the Township is hereby designated and
appointed to exercise the powers prescribed within this section.
§ 10-4.3. Hearing to be held when complaint is filed. [Ord. No.
8-24-70; 1967 Code § 74-3]
Whenever a petition is filed with the Public Officer by a public authority,
or by at least five residents of the Township, charging that any building is
unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use, or whenever it appears to
the Public Officer, on his own motion, that any building is unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use, the Public Officer shall, if his preliminary
investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be
served upon the owner of and parties in interest in such building a
complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that
a hearing will be held before the Public Officer or his designated agent, at
a place therein fixed not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days after the
serving of the complaint. The owner and parties in interest shall be given
the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or
otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint.
family dwelling unit failing to comply with the provisions of subsections
10-2.4 and 10-2.7, paragraph c.
§ 10-2.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-4.3
1:259
The rules of evidence prevailing in the courts shall not be controlling in
hearings before the Public Officer or his designated agents.
§ 10-4.4. Findings; order to comply; authority to remedy. [Ord. No.
8-24-70; 1967 Code § 74-4]
If, after such notice and hearing, the Public Officer determines that the
building under consideration is unfit for human habitation or occupancy
or use, he shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of such
determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner
thereof and parties in interest an order:
§ 10-4.5. Costs and payment of charges. [Ord. No. 8-24-70; 1967
Code § 74-5]
The cost of filing of legal papers, expert witnesses' fees, search fees and
advertising charges, incurred in the course of any proceeding taken under
this section determined in favor of the Township, and such cost of such
repairs, alterations or improvements, or vacating and closing, or removal
or demolition, if any, or the amount of the balance thereof remaining after
deduction of the sum, if any, realized from the sale of materials derived from
such building, or from any contract for removal or demolition thereof, shall
be a Municipal lien against the real property upon which such cost was
incurred; and the lien shall be enforced and collected in the same manner
as other Municipal liens are now enforced and collected in the Township.
If the building is removed or demolished by the Public Officer, he shall sell
the materials of such building. There shall be credited against the cost of
a. Requiring the repair, alteration or improvement of the building to be
made by the owner, within a reasonable time, which time shall be set
forth in the order or at the option of the owner to vacate or have the
building vacated and closed within the times set forth in the order; and
b. If the building is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the
health and safety of persons on or near the premises, and the owner
fails to repair, alter or improve the building within the time specified in
the order, then the owner shall be required to remove or demolish the
building within a reasonable time, as specified in the order of removal.
c. If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve or,
at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the building, the Public
Officer may cause such building to be repaired, altered or improved, or
to be vacated and closed. The Public Officer may cause to be posted on
the main entrance of any building so closed a placard with the following
words: "This building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use;
the use of occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful."
d. If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the
building, the Public Officer may cause such building to be removed or
demolished or may contract for the removal or demolition thereof after
advertisement for, and receipt of, bids therefor.
§ 10-4.3 § 10-4.5
1:260
the removal or demolition thereof the proceeds of any sale of such materials
or any sum derived from any contract for the removal or demolition of
the building. All costs and credits are to be determined pursuant to the
provisions of R.S. 40:48-2.5.
§ 10-4.6. Guides for determining fitness of building. [Ord. No.
8-24-70; 1967 Code § 74-6]
The Public Officer may determine that a building is unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use if he finds that conditions exist in such
building which are dangerous or injurious to the health or safety of the
occupants of such building, the occupants of neighboring buildings or other
residents or to the Township; such conditions may include the following
(without limiting the generality of the foregoing): Defects therein increasing
the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities: lack of adequate
ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; dilapidation; disrepair, structural
defects; uncleanliness, and such additional standards which the Township
may promulgate by rules and regulations to guide the Public Officer or
his agents in determining the fitness of a building for human habitation or
occupancy or use.
§ 10-4.7. Serving of notices or orders. [Ord. No. 8-24-70; 1967 Code
§ 74-7]
Complaints or orders issued by the Public Officer pursuant to the provisions
of this section shall be served upon persons either personally or by
registered mail, but if the whereabouts of such persons is unknown and
the same cannot be ascertained by the Public Officer in the exercise of
reasonable diligence, and the Public Officer shall make an affidavit to that
effect, then the serving of such complaint or order upon such persons
may be made by publishing the same once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper printed and published within the Township, or, in the
absence of such newspaper, in one printed and published in the County and
circulating within the Township. A copy of such complaint or order shall be
posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected by the complaint or
order. A copy of such complaint or order shall be duly recorded for record
with the County Recording Officer.
§ 10-4.8. Procedure for injunctive relief. [Ord. No. 8-24-70; 1967
Code § 74-8]
Any person aggrieved by an order issued by a Public Officer under this
section may, within 60 days after the posting and service of such order,
bring an action for injunctive relief to restrain the Public Officer from
carrying out the provisions of the order or for any other appropriate relief.
The remedy herein provided shall be exclusive, and no person affected by
an order of the Public Officer shall be entitled to recover any damages for
action taken pursuant thereto, or because of noncompliance by any person
with any order of the Public Officer.
§ 10-4.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-4.9
1:261
§ 10-4.9. Additional powers of public officer. [Ord. No. 8-24-70;
1967 Code § 74-9]
The Public Officer may exercise such additional powers as may be necessary
or convenient to accomplish the objectives of this section, including those
powers and provisions enumerated within R.S. 40:48-2.9.
§ 10-4.10. Authority to appropriate funds for administration of
section. [Ord. No. 8-24-70; 1967 Code § 74-10]
The Township Manager shall have prepared an estimate of the annual
expenses or costs to provide equipment, personnel and supplies necessary
for periodic examinations and investigations of the buildings within the
Township for the purpose of determining the fitness of such buildings
for human habitation or occupancy or use, and for the administration of
this section. The Township Council is further authorized to make such
appropriations from its general revenues as it may deem necessary for this
purpose and may accept and apply grants or donations to assist in carrying
out the provisions of this section.
§ 10-4.11. Powers supplemental to other legislation. [Ord. No.
8-24-70; 1967 Code § 74-11]
Nothing in this section shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers
of the Township to enforce any provisions of any act of a legislature of
the State of New Jersey, or its ordinances or regulations, nor to prevent or
punish violations thereof; and the powers conferred in this section shall be
in addition and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law of
the State of New Jersey or ordinance adopted by the Township.
§ 10-4.12. Authority of Township Council to initiate process. [Ord.
No. 8-24-70; 1967 Code § 74-12]
a. In addition to the procedure enumerated in subsections 10-4.2 through
10-4.7, the Township Manager may, upon his own motion, or upon
notice of report from the Public Officer, determine whether there exists
in any building or other structure such a condition as to make it
dangerous to the health and safety of persons at or near the premises,
or is unfit for human habitation or occupancy, as defined in subsection
10-4.6. Such determination may be made by a majority of the members
of the Township Council present at any regular, adjourned or special
meeting by resolution. The resolution shall specify the violation and
determination of the Township Council, and the findings as to whether
the building or structure, or portion thereof, shall be repaired, altered,
improved, removed or demolished, and the manner, time and terms of
action to be taken by the owner or owners of any land or premises
affected thereby.
b. If the owner or owners of any land or premises affected, upon service of
proper notice, fails to repair, alter, improve, demolish or take such
action as is requested by the Township Council within the time specified
§ 10-4.9 § 10-4.12
1:262
§ 10-4.13. Copy of resolution served upon owner. [Ord. No. 8-24-70;
1967 Code § 74-13]
A copy of the resolution adopted by the Township Council shall be served
upon the owner or owners, or such other persons or manner as provided by
subsections 10-4.7 and 10-4.22, paragraph b.
§ 10-4.14. Appeal. [Ord. No. 8-24-70; 1967 Code § 74-14]
A property owner who desires to appeal from any action taken under
subsection 10-4.12 of this section shall, within 10 days from the date of the
action file with the Township Clerk an application in writing for review and
revocation or modification of the action. The Township Council shall grant
such property owner a hearing at such time and upon such notice as it
shall determine. After such hearing, the property owner shall be notified in
writing as to the action taken by the Township Council and shall, within five
days from the date the notice is received, take the necessary steps to fully
comply with the original notice as affirmed or modified.
§ 10-4.15. Declaration of nuisance by Township Council. [Ord. No.
8-24-70; 1967 Code § 74-15]
Whenever it shall come to the attention of the Township Council that, due
to conditions existing on any lot or plot of land or in or about any building
or buildings in the Township, a nuisance is created or maintained, that it
is or may be detrimental to the safety, health or general welfare of the
community or tend to create or extend the conflagration, the Township
Council may pass a resolution declaring that the conditions complained
of constitute a nuisance within the meaning of this section and providing
for the abatement thereof in the same manner as provided in subsection
10-4.12.27
§ 10-4.16. Custodian designated. [Ord. No. 8-24-70; 1967 Code
§ 74-16]
The Manager may appoint a custodian on its behalf, who may be either the
Public Officer or persons specially designated to enter into and take charge
of any building or structure upon the failure of the owner to make the
required repairs, to supervise the abatement of a nuisance, the correction of
the defective conditions, or the maintenance of the premises in the proper
condition so as to conform to the requirements of this section and all other
in the resolution, the Township Manager shall instruct the Public
Officer designed by it in the manner prescribed in subsection 10-4.4
paragraphs b. through d., to take such action as required.
c. All costs incurred by reason of owner's noncompliance, requiring
Township participation to effect mandates of resolution, shall be
apportioned as enumerated in subsection 10-4.5.
27.Editor's Note: See also Nuisance Code, a Board of Health ordinance.
§ 10-4.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-4.16
1:263
ordinances of the Township and Laws of the State of New Jersey applicable
thereto.
§ 10-4.17. Compensation of appointed custodian. [Ord. No. 8-24-70;
1967 Code § 74-17]
The Township Council, prior to the appointment of a custodian, shall by
resolution affix a reasonable compensation.
§ 10-4.18. Costs. [Ord. No. 8-24-70; 1967 Code § 74-18]
All costs, expenses, including the compensation of the custodian, shall be
assessed and collected as provided in subsection 10-4.5.
§ 10-4.19. Appointment of administrator to enforce provisions and
to be receiver by court action. [Ord. No. 8-24-70; 1967 Code
§ 74-19]
Upon the adoption of this section and pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.3 et seq., and in the event that any owner of the buildings or
structures within the Township shall fail to abate a condition harmful to
the health and safety of the occupants of the building or structure and the
general public with the Township after notice and opportunity to do so, a
Township officer may be designated by the Township Manager to administer
and enforce the provisions of this section and, with the approval of the
Township Manager, to bring an action in the Superior Court to be appointed
receiver ex officio of the rents and income of such real property for the
purpose of collecting the rents and income from such property and expend
the same for the purpose of abating the conditions. The rents and income
so collected by the receiver shall also be available for the payment of such
costs and expenses of the receivership, as may be adjudged by the Court,
and for the payment to the Township of any fines or penalties which may
have been imposed on the owner for violations of this section and which may
not have been paid by the person liable therefor. The Court may proceed in
the action in a summary manner or otherwise. Such receiver shall not be
required to give bond and shall be appointed only for these purposes.
§ 10-4.20. Agent to manage property may be appointed. [Ord. No.
8-24-70; 1967 Code § 74-20]
Upon his appointment, the receiver, by and with the approval of the
Township Council, in all cases where the real property in question is
encumbered by a first mortgage shall appoint such first mortgagee, if such
mortgagee is a proper person and is willing to accept such appointment, as
the receiver's agent to collect the rents and income from such real property
and manage the same, and in all other cases the receiver, by and with the
approval of the Township Council may designate the person in charge or
management of such real property or some other competent person as the
receiver's agent, to collect the rents and income from such real property
and manage the same, which mortgagee or other person shall account
§ 10-4.16 § 10-4.20
1:264
promptly to the receiver for the rents and income so collected; provided,
however, that if the mortgagee or other person so designed is derelict in
collecting or accounting for such rents and income, or in the management
of such real property, the receiver shall apply to the Court for the removal
of such designated mortgagee or other person, upon notice in writing to
him, and the Court, upon removing such designated mortgagee or other
person, in its discretion, may designate another person to collect the rents
and income from such real property and manage the same and account to
the receiver for the rents and income of such real property as aforesaid. In
any such receivership no fees shall be allowed the receiver or his counsel
for action as such receiver or counsel.
§ 10-4.21. Procedure in receivership action; jurisdiction of court.
[Ord. No. 8-24-70; 1967 Code § 74-21]
Except as otherwise provided herein, the procedure in respect to any such
receivership shall be as in the case of interests, costs and expenses wherein
a Collector of taxes of a Township or other officer of the Township is such
receiver. In any receivership proceeding under this section, the Court shall
have jurisdiction to make such orders and directions to the receiver as may
be necessary to effectuate the purposes of this section and to conserve the
real property during the pendency of the receivership.
§ 10-4.22. Registration of owners of buildings and structures
occupied by two or more families. [Ord. No. 8-24-70; 1967 Code
§§ 74-25-74-27]
a. Registration required; procedure. Every building and structure within
the Township which is occupied by two or more families as tenants of
the owner or lessor shall be required to register with the Township
Clerk upon forms prescribed and furnished by the Township. Every
such registration form shall include the name and address of the owner,
the name and address of the lessor if other than the owner, and the
name and address of an agent in charge of the premises residing in the
Municipality.
b. Notice in case of noncompliance. Where the owner or lessor has failed
to register his premises with the Township Clerk, as required, and
designated an agent in respect to the premises residing in the
Township, or where such agent has been designated but cannot be
found at the address given in the registration form, the service of
notices required under this section, or any other ordinance heretofore
or hereafter adopted by the Township, or required to be served
pursuant to any State law applicable to the Township, upon the owner,
lessor and agent, shall be deemed sufficient notice to the owner or
lessor, and valid effective service of any such notice by posting it upon
the premises in a conspicuous place.
c. Filing of date with Clerk. In the event notice is given and effected by
posting it upon the premises in a conspicuous place, the individual or
§ 10-4.20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-4.22
1:265
§ 10-4.23. Penalties for violation. [New]
Any person or persons, firm or corporation failing to obey the provisions of
this section, or the orders of the Public Officer or Township Council issued
pursuant to this section, shall be subject to the General Penalty established
in Section 1-5 of this Code.
§ 10-4.24. Records to be kept of proceedings. [Ord. No. 8-24-70;
1967 Code § 74-30]
It shall be the duty of the Township Clerk and the Public Officer of the
Township to keep a book in which he shall record and file all proceedings
required to be taken hereunder by the Township Council and the Public
Officer.
§ 10-5. MULTIPLE DWELLING SECURITY FUNDS.
§ 10-5.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 0-26-73; Ord. No. 0-7-75; 1967 Code
§ 38A-1]
As used in this section:
AUTHORITY — The Deptford Township Multiple Dwelling Emergency
Commission. The membership of the Commission shall be comprised of
the following individuals: Township Manager, Construction Code Official,
member of the Township Council and member of the Board of Health, to
be annually appointed by each respective body, and two citizen members
to be appointed by the Township Council initially for terms of one and two
years, respectively, and thereafter the appointment to be for a period of two
years. All such citizen members shall serve until their successors have been
duly appointed. The Manager or Construction Code Official may designate
an alternate to act in his stead.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or rooms, suite, apartment, townhouse,
condominium, condominium apartment and townhouse as defined in
N.J.S.A. 46:8B-3 et seq., whether furnished or unfurnished, which is
occupied or intended, arranged or designed to be occupied for sleeping,
dwelling or residence purposes by one or more persons.
EMERGENCY CONDITION — Any condition dangerous or injurious to the
health or safety of the occupant or occupants of neighboring buildings,
which arises out of any of the following circumstances or conditions:
Public Officer making the posting shall by affidavit, within three days
thereafter, file with the Township Clerk the date, time and exact place
of posting the notice upon the premises.
a. Lack of adequate ventilation or light.
b. Lack of adequate and properly functioning sanitation facilities.
c. Lack of adequate and healthful water supply.
§ 10-4.22 § 10-5.1
1:266
MULTIPLE DWELLING — Any building or structure of one or more stories,
and any land appurtenant thereto and any portion thereof, in which four or
more dwelling units are occupied or are intended to be occupied; except
that any townhouse as a dwelling unit, connected in a line of three or more
shall, for the purpose of this section, be considered a "multiple dwelling."
Premises which are used primarily for purposes other than sleeping,
dwelling or residence shall not be considered a "multiple dwelling."
OFFICER — The Township Construction Code Official, Fire Marshal, Code
Enforcement Officer, Health Inspector or any other duly designated
Township official charged with the responsibility of protecting the health,
safety and general welfare of Township residents.
§ 10-5.2. Deposit of security funds. [Ord. No. 0-26-73; Ord. No.
0-7-75; 1967 Code § 38A-4]
The owner of a multiple dwelling, and any association created for the
maintenance of condominium common elements, open space, and/or
management of the condominium, shall deposit with the Township Clerk
security funds to be used for the repair, maintenance, supply or replacement
of those items of structure, equipment or supplies which are necessary to
correct, eliminate or alleviate an emergency condition. The amount of the
security funds to be deposited with the Township Clerk shall be computed
in the following manner:
Any structural, mechanical, electrical or other defect or insufficiency
which may be detrimental to the health and safety of any occupants of
a dwelling unit as defined by this section, or any "emergency condition"
of the land or premises which would constitute a violation of Section
10-4, Unsafe Structures, and Section 10-3, Housing Code, of this
chapter, and as determined by a duly authorized officer of the
Township.
d.
Lack of properly functioning heating unit which shall be capable of
maintaining every habitable room in each dwelling unit at a
temperature of at least 72° F. whenever the outside temperature falls
below 60° F. from October 1 of each year until the next succeeding May
20, and where air conditioning is provided within a dwelling unit such
cooling facility shall be sufficient to maintain a constant temperature of
70° F., based on outside temperature of 85° F.
e.
a. Where the owner owns between four and 25 dwelling units, the owner
shall deposit $100 for each dwelling unit.
b. Where the owner owns between 26 and 40 dwelling units, the owner
shall deposit $2,500 for the first 25 units and $50 for each additional
dwelling unit owned.
c. Where the owner owns more than 40 dwelling units, the owner shall
deposit $2,500 for the first 25 units, $50 per unit for the next 15 units,
and $30 per unit for each additional unit.
§ 10-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-5.2
1:267
§ 10-5.3. Expenditure of funds; hearings. [Ord. No. 0-26-73; 1967
Code § 38A-5]
d. In no event shall an owner be required to deposit more than $5,000 in
security funds pursuant to this section. All funds required to be
deposited under the terms of this section shall be delivered to the office
of the Township Clerk within 15 days after receipt of notice from the
authority of the amount due. Notice of the amount due may be given by
the authority or its agent by personally delivering same to the owner, or
the owner's agent, servant, employee or joint venturer on the owner's
premises, or by certified mail sent to the owner's last registered
address. Upon receipt of such security funds, the Township Clerk shall
deposit these funds in an interest-bearing savings account at a federally
insured bank depository within the Township in the name of the
Township Multiple Dwelling Emergency Commission in trust for each
particular owner. All interest payable on such accounts shall accrue to
the particular owner on whose behalf the account is maintained by the
authority. The authority may expend up to 1% of the trust fund for
administration expenses, including bank charges, postage, stationery,
secretarial services, engineering and legal services, and such other
professional services as are necessary to perform its duties, all to be
paid by voucher, a copy of which shall be provided to the owner
originally posting the trust fund, except that legal services and other
expenses required to be expended to secure compliance with the
provisions of this section from the owner and/or condominium
association shall be considered as additional administration expenses
properly charged against the trust fund.
e. Condominium associations created for the administration and/or
management of common elements and open space and/or management
of the condominiums shall be required to make deposits in accordance
with the number of dwelling units within the condominium association,
equal to 50% of that sum provided in paragraphs a. through d. of this
subsection.
a. In the event the authority spends money from any account, as
authorized by this section, thus reducing the amount in the account and
leaving less than the sum required as computed in subsection 10-5.2,
the Township Multiple Dwelling Emergency Commission shall
immediately notify the owner and/or association in the same manner as
notification is required in subsection 10-5.2 of this section of the
amount necessary to bring that account up to the originally required
amount. The owner and/or association shall deposit such required funds
as follows:
1. Where the balance remaining in the account is more than $1,500,
the deposit shall be made within 30 days from the date notice is
received.
§ 10-5.2 § 10-5.3
1:268
§ 10-5.4. Failure to comply. [Ord. No. 0-26-73; 1967 Code § 38A-6]
In the event that the owner and/or condominium association, or any party
required to deposit escrows or make reimbursement to the authority, shall,
after proper notice, fail to comply with the provisions of this section, the
Township Solicitor shall be authorized to maintain legal action in a court
of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with the provisions of this
section.
§ 10-5.5. Authority authorized to expend trust account funds. [Ord.
No. 0-26-73; 1967 Code § 38A-7]
The authority shall be authorized to expend the moneys from the trust
account it maintains for any party to correct, eliminate or alleviate an
emergency condition only when:
2. Where the balance remaining in the account is $1,500 or less, the
deposit shall be made within 15 days from the date notice is
received.
b. Where the authority has spent money from an account, the owner and/
or association may appeal to the Mayor and Township Council for a
hearing concerning solely the issues of whether or not an emergency
condition did exist and whether the amount expended to remedy the
emergency condition was reasonable. If such appeal is desired, the
appellant shall, within 10 days of receiving notice of the amount spent,
file with the Township Clerk a letter requesting such appeal. The Mayor
and Township Council shall hold a hearing regarding the
aforementioned issues not less than 10 nor more than 30 days after the
Township Clerk has received the request from the appellant, and it shall
render its decision within 14 days after the hearing has been concluded.
By mutual consent between the Mayor and Township Council and the
aggrieved party, the time limitations herein may be extended. A record
of any such hearings shall be made and kept at the office of the
Township Clerk.
c. If the Mayor and Township Council shall determine that the money
expended by the authority is not reasonable or that an emergency
condition did not exist, then such aggrieved party shall be given credit
by the authority for such improper expenditure of funds and shall not be
required to redeposit money with the Township Clerk in accordance
with subsection 10-5.2 of this section. At the end of the budget year in
which such unreasonable expenditure is made, the Township Council
shall provide a line item in its budget for the reimbursement of such
unreasonable expenditure to the trust account of the aggrieved party.
Thereafter, the aggrieved party shall be required to maintain the trust
account in accordance with the provisions of this section.
a. It has examined those circumstances and conditions alleged to
constitute an emergency condition, has received a report on such
§ 10-5.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-5.5
1:269
§ 10-5.6. Affidavits and testimony; liability for false statements.
[Ord. No. 0-26-73; 1967 Code § 38A-8]
alleged emergency condition from the duly authorized officer, and has
declared an emergency condition to exist; and
b. The remedying of such emergency condition is the owner's and/or
association's responsibility; and
c. The owner, association or the owner's and/or association's agent,
servant, employee or joint venturer has received notice of the
circumstances or conditions constituting the emergency condition from
either the authority or an affected tenant or resident in person or by
regular mail, telegram or telephone conversation and an appropriate
affidavit or sworn testimony under oath has been filed and/or made with
and/or to the authority, by the individual who has so notified the owner's
and/or association's agent, servant, employee or joint venturer; and
d. No work has been commenced by the owner and/or association, or the
owner's and/or association's agent, servant, employee or joint venturer
to correct, eliminate or alleviate the emergency condition within 48
hours after notification has been received of the circumstances and
conditions constituting the emergency condition as described
paragraph c. of this subsection; or
e. Where work has commenced within the forty-eight-hour period referred
to in paragraph d. of this subsection but such work has not been
reasonably completed within 72 hours after the work was commenced,
and in the opinion of a duly authorized officer the work could have been
completed within 72 hours.
f. The Township Clerk is authorized to withdraw and expend security
funds only after he has received in writing an authorization by the
authority, which authorization shall be signed by the Chairman and
Secretary of the authority.
a. Any affidavit of notice or testimony of notice given by any individual
under oath to the authority shall include the circumstances and
conditions alleged by that individual to constitute an emergency
condition, and such affidavit or sworn testimony shall provide and/or
acknowledge that individual's liability under paragraph b. of this
subsection.
b. Any person and/or persons who intentionally, willfully, negligently or
falsely represent any affidavit or, under oath, any material fact(s)
concerning notice, or the alleged emergency condition upon which the
authority relies causing it to improperly expend trust funds which must
be reimbursed by the Township, shall, in addition to other penalties
provided herein for violation of this section, reimburse the Township to
the extent of such improper expenditure.
§ 10-5.5 § 10-5.7
1:270
§ 10-5.7. Violations and penalties; enforcement. [Ord. No. 0-26-73;
1967 Code § 38A-9; New]
§ 10-6. TRAILERS.
§ 10-6.1. Findings. [Ord. No. 0-11-88, Preamble]
The residents of the Township are occasionally forced out of their homes
by reason of fire, flood, or other catastrophe which renders their homes
temporarily uninhabitable and there is currently no provision in the
ordinances of the Township permitting temporary emergency housing for
such persons, or provisions for other types of trailers. The Township Council
finds that in order to preserve and protect the public's health, safety and
welfare, temporary emergency housing for such persons, and other types of
trailers should be permitted.
§ 10-6.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 0-11-88 § 2]
As used in this section:
EMERGENCY — Fire, flood or other catastrophe by which residential
dwellings in the Township are rendered temporarily uninhabitable.
EMERGENCY HOUSING — A trailer/mobile dwelling unit meeting the
standards set forth under Article 6, entitled "Specific Use and Occupancy
Requirements," Section 621 of the 1987 edition of the BOCA Code, and as
further determined by the Construction Code Official.
TRAILER/CONCESSIONS SOLD FOR RECREATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS
— Trailers used to sell concessions in conjunction with sporting events
sponsored by a nonprofit organization serving residents of the Township.
TRAILER/CONSTRUCTION OFFICE SALES UNIT — A wheel-based
commercial vehicle that is designed to be transported by traction and which
is used or may be used commercially for conducting sales of dwelling units
as part of development applications.
TRAILER/CONSTRUCTION STORAGE UNIT — A trailer utilized for the
temporary storage of construction materials on a development site.
TRAILER/MOBILE DWELLING UNIT — Any structure designed for
mounting upon wheels and could be used as a conveyance whether through
its own or other motive power. Such "trailers" are normally connected to
a. Any person, firm, association or persons or corporation found guilty of
violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to the General Penalty established in Section 1-5 of
this Code.
b. Notwithstanding any penalties hereinabove described which may be
imposed for the violation of any provision of this section, the Township,
the authority or any duly authorized official may take such other action
or institute such proceedings in any court of competent jurisdiction as
shall be required to enforce the provisions of this section.
§ 10-5.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-6.2
1:271
a cab or motorized unit for traveling or hauling. It shall be constructed
or designed so as to permit the occupancy thereof as a permanent or
temporary dwelling or sleeping place for one or more persons, and shall
have no permanent foundation other than wheels, jacks, or skirtings.
§ 10-6.3. Trailers prohibited. [Ord. No. 0-11-88 § 3]
Except as set forth herein or otherwise set forth in the Zoning Code of the
Township, trailers are prohibited within the Township of Deptford.
§ 10-6.4. Permitted trailers. [Ord. No. 0-11-88 § 4]
Subject to the regulations and requirements set forth hereafter, trailers
for "emergency housing," "construction office sales units," "construction
storage," and "trailers used for concessions by recreational organizations"
as defined herein are permitted.
§ 10-6.5. Permit process. [Ord. No. 0-11-88 § 5]
All permits shall be issued through the Construction Code Official's Office.
Each applicant must submit an application to the Construction Code Official
together with a permit fee.
§ 10-6.6. Application for permit. [Ord. No. 0-11-88 § 6]
The application for a permit for temporary trailer shall be submitted to the
Code Enforcement Officer and shall state:
a. The name and address of the owner of the trailer.
b. The number of occupants that will be occupying the trailer.
c. The name and addresses of the owners of the damaged permanent
premises.
d. The location and distance of the nearest buildings immediately adjacent
to the proposed trailer.
e. The proposed setback of such trailer from the roadway.
f. Provide a safe and sanitary method of sewerage disposal, if applicable.
g. Provide an adequate method of supplying potable water to the trailer, if
applicable.
h. Provide a safe and sanitary method of garbage and trash disposal, if
applicable.
i. Provide an adequate electrical service for the efficient illumination and
safe operation of the appliances and equipment within the trailer.
§ 10-6.2 § 10-6.7
1:272
§ 10-6.7. Duration of permits. [Ord. No. 0-11-88 § 7]
Permits for "emergency housing" shall have a duration of six months. All
other permits shall be for a term of one year.
§ 10-6.8. Extensions. [Ord. No. 0-11-88 § 8]
The Construction Code Official shall grant an additional three months
extension to an applicant for "emergency housing" provided the following
conditions have been met:
§ 10-6.9. Exceptions to permit requirement. [Ord. No. 0-11-88 § 9]
This section shall not apply to nor affect traveling carnivals, circus acts or
organizations or groups of similar character which shall enter the Township
having received written authority from the Township Council of the
Township of Deptford, and from which carnival, circus act or similar group,
a portion of the money received is turned over to a fire company, religious
group or other civic enterprise in the Township of Deptford.
§ 10-6.10. Revocation of permit. [Ord. No. 0-11-88 § 10]
Should the applicant fail or refuse to abide by any of the conditions imposed
by the Construction Code Official, the official may revoke the permit after
affording the applicant a reasonable opportunity to correct the violation.
§ 10-6.11. Inspection of trailer. [Ord. No. 0-11-88 § 11]
The Construction Code Official shall have the right to inspect the trailer in
advance of issuing the permit and thereafter, upon reasonable notice, shall
be permitted an inspection of the trailer, both inside and outside, at his
discretion.
a. Applicant has commenced significant construction of the permanent
dwelling unit which was the subject of the catastrophe.
b. Applicant has applied for an extension in advance of the expiration of
the original six-month period.
c. Applicant has complied with all of the requirements set forth herein and
the trailer is otherwise consistent with the Zoning Code of the Township
of Deptford.
Other permits shall be issued by the Construction Code Official for
additional one year periods provided new applications and application
fees are paid and the applicant has complied with the terms of this
section and the Zoning Laws of the Township. In no event shall a
"construction office sales unit trailer" be permitted for over two years
without the consent of Township Council.
§ 10-6.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-6.12
1:273
§ 10-6.12. Storage of trailers. [Ord. No. 0-11-88 § 12]
For the purpose of this section, it shall be presumed that an individual,
partnership, corporation or other entity is storing any trailer as prohibited
by this section when the trailer shall remain in the stationary position for
more than 24 hours upon any private or public lands within the municipal
limits. No permits for such trailer shall be issued by the Construction Code
Official of the Township of Deptford.
§ 10-6.13. Permit fees. [Ord. No. 0-11-88 § 13]
Each application for a permit as required hereunder shall be accompanied
by the following fees:
§ 10-6.14. Violations. [Ord. No. 0-11-88 § 14]
Any person, corporation, partnership, or other entity violating this section
shall be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
Chapter 11
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
§ 11-1. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
§ 11-1.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 0.2.90, Preamble; Ord. No. 0.1.99 § 1B]
The Township Council has reviewed "The BOCA National Property
Maintenance Code/1996" (Fifth Edition); and the Township Council believes
there is an increased need to emphasize property maintenance
requirements and to adopt provisions that are determined to be of minimum
standards to further the health, safety and welfare of residents in the
Township of Deptford.
§ 11-1.2. Adoption of Property Maintenance Code. [Ord. No. 0.2.90
§ 1; Ord. No. 0.1.99 § 1B]
"The BOCA National Property Maintenance Code, Fifth Edition, 1996" as
published by the Building Officials and Code Administrators International,
Inc. is hereby adopted as The Property Maintenance Code of the Township
for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each
and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of
the BOCA National Property Maintenance Code are hereby adopted and
a. Emergency housing: no fee.
b. Construction office sales trailer and construction storage trailer: $200
per year.
c. Trailers used in conjunction with concessions for recreational nonprofit
organizations: $10 per year.
§ 10-6.12 § 11-1.2
1:274
made part hereof, as if more fully set out in this section, with the additions,
insertions, deletions, and changes, if any, set forth in subsection 11-1.3.
§ 11-1.3. Additions, insertions and changes. [Ord. No. 0.2.90 § 2]
"The BOCA National Property Maintenance Code" is amended and revised
in the following respects:
Section PM-100.1 (page 1, second line). Insert: Township of Deptford.
Section PM-109.2 (page 7, third line). Insert: $25 as the minimum fine
amount and $1,000 as the maximum amount.
Section PM-109.2 (page 7, fourth line). Insert: 90 days as the maximum
permitted period of imprisonment.
Section PM-302.12 (page 17, first line). Delete: During the period from
(Date) to (Date), and change "every" to Every."
Section PM-601.1 (page 27, tenth line). Insert: October 1st. to May 1st.
Section PM-601.2 (page 27, second line). Insert: October 1st. to May 1st.
§ 11-1.4. Enforcing agency. [Ord. No. 8-25-69; 1967 Code § 32-2;
Ord. No. 0.2.94 § 1; New]
The Department of Community Development of the Township of Deptford is
hereby designated as the Agency to exercise the powers prescribed by this
section.
§ 11-1.5. BOCA National Property Maintenance Code/1996 adopted
by reference; copies available for the public. [Ord. No. 0.2.94 § II;
Ord. No. 0.1.99 § 1B]
Pursuant to the provisions of the "BOCA National Property Maintenance
Code, Fifth Edition, 1996" as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc., as approved by the Township Council,
is hereby accepted, adopted and established as a standard to be used
as a guide in determining whether dwellings and other structures in this
municipality are safe, sanitary and fit for human habitation and rental.
Three copies of the "BOCA National Property Maintenance Code" have been
placed on file in the Office of the Township Clerk and are available to all
persons desiring to use or examine same.
§ 11-1.6. Inspections. [Ord. No. 0.2.94 § III; Ord. No. 0.1.99]
A. Right of entry. The Agency is hereby authorized and directed to make
inspections to determine the condition of dwellings, dwelling units,
rental units and premises and commercial structures located within the
Township of Deptford in order that he/she may perform his duty of
safeguarding the health and safety of the occupants of dwellings and
the general public. For the purpose of making such inspections, the
§ 11-1.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-1.6
1:275
§ 11-1.7. Notice of violation to person responsible. [Ord. No.
8-25-69; 1967 Code § 32-4]
Whenever the Agency determines that there are reasonable grounds to
believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this section
or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, the Agency shall
give notice of such alleged violation to the person or persons responsible
therefor as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall be put in writing, include
a statement of the reasons why it is being issued, allow a reasonable time
for the performance of any act it requires, and be served upon the owner
or his agent, or the occupant, as the case may require, provided that such
notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner or agent, or
upon such occupant, if a copy thereof is served upon him personally, if a
copy thereof is sent by registered mail to his last known address, if a copy
thereof is posted in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling affected
by the notice, or if he is served with such notice by any other method
Agency is hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey at reasonable
times all dwellings, dwelling units, rental units and premises. The
owner or occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit and rental unit,
or the person in charge thereof, shall give the Agency access to such
building, dwelling unit or rental unit and its premises at all reasonable
times for the purpose of such inspection, examination and survey. Every
occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall give the owner thereof, or
his agent or employee, access to any part of such dwelling unit or its
premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs
or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions
of this section or with any lawful rule or regulation adopted or any other
lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of this section.
B. Certificate of occupancy required. No owner shall permit occupancy of
nor shall any person occupy or use any dwelling, dwelling unit, multiple
apartment building unit, or commercial structures in the Township of
Deptford without first having obtained a Certificate of Occupancy,
certifying that an inspection of the premises has been made on a
specified date unless the dwelling, dwelling unit, multiple dwelling unit,
apartment building unit or structure complies in all respects with the
requirements of this section or any other regulation or ordinance of the
Township requiring the fulfilling of conditions or other specified
prerequisites prior to the initial, continued or change of use or
occupancy thereof.
C. Fees. For all those inspections conducted by the Agency in connection
with the sale or rental of a single-family dwelling, including
condominiums and townhouses, the fee shall be $40 per unit. For
inspections, conducted in connection with rental units in an apartment
complex, the fee shall be $25 per unit.
(1) For inspection conducted in connection with a Continued
Certificate of Occupancy of a commercial structure the fee shall be
$100.
§ 11-1.6 § 11-1.7
1:276
authorized or required under the laws of this State. Such notice may contain
an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with the
provisions of this section and with rules and regulations adopted pursuant
thereto.
§ 11-1.8. Hearings. [Ord. No. 8-25-69; 1967 Code § 32-5; Ord. No.
0.2.94 § IV]
Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection
with the enforcement of any provision of this section, or of any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant thereto, may request and shall be granted a
hearing on the matter before the Department Head, provided that such
person shall file in the Department of Community Development a written
petition requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the
grounds therefor within 10 days after the day the notice was served. Upon
receipt of such petition, the Department Head shall set a time and place for
such hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. At such
hearing the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to
show why such notice should be modified or withdrawn. The hearing shall
be commenced not later than 10 days after the day on which the petition
was filed, provided that upon application of the petitioner the Department
Head may postpone the date of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond
such ten-day period if, in his judgment, the petitioner has submitted a good
and sufficient reason for such postponement. After such hearing, the officer
shall sustain, modify or withdraw the notice, depending upon his findings
as to whether the provisions of this section and of the rules and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with. If the Department Head
sustains or modifies such notice, it shall be deemed to be an order. Any
notice served pursuant to this section shall automatically become an order
if a written petition for a hearing is not filed in Department of Community
Development within 10 days after such notice is served. The proceedings at
such hearing, including the findings and decision of the Department Head,
shall be summarized, reduced to writing and entered as a matter of public
record in the office of the Township Clerk. Such record shall also include
a copy of every notice or order issued in connection with the matter. Any
person aggrieved by the decision of the Department Head may seek relief
therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction as provided for by the
laws of the State. Whenever the Department Head finds that an emergency
exists which requires immediate action to protect the public health or
safety, he/she may, without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the
existence of such an emergency and requiring that such action be taken
as he deems necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding the other
provisions of this section, such order shall be effective immediately. Any
person to whom such order is directed shall comply therewith immediately,
but upon petition to the Department Head shall be afforded a hearing as
soon as possible. After such hearing, depending upon his/her finding as
to whether the provisions of this section and of the rules and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with, the Department Head
shall continue such order in effect, or modify it, or revoke it.
§ 11-1.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-1.9
1:277
§ 11-1.9. Rules and regulations. [Ord. No. 8-25-69; 1967 Code
§ 32-6]
The Department Head, with the approval of the Township Manager is
hereby authorized and empowered to make and adopt such written rules
and regulations as he/she may deem necessary for the proper enforcement
of the provisions of this section; provided, however, that such rules and
regulations shall not be in conflict with the provisions of this section, nor
in any way alter, amend or supersede any of the provisions thereof. The
Department Head shall file a certified copy of all rules and regulations
which he/she may adopt in his office and in the office of the Township Clerk.
§ 11-1.10. Dwellings to meet standards. [Ord. No. 8-25-69; 1967
Code § 32-7; Ord. No. 0.2.94 § 5]
No person shall occupy or allow to be occupied, any dwelling or dwelling
unit for the purpose of living therein which does not conform to the
provisions of the "BOCA National Property Maintenance Code Fifth Edition,
1996" established hereby as the standard to be used in determining
whether a dwelling unit is safe, sanitary and fit for human habitation.
§ 11-1.11. Fines and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this section shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than
$1,000 and/or imprisonment in the County Jail for not more than 90 days or
both. Each day that a separate violation shall exist shall be construed as a
separate offense.
§ 11-1.12. Saving clause. [Ord. No. 0.2.90 § 4; New]
Nothing in this section or in The Property Maintenance Code hereby
adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in
any Court, or any rights acquired or liability incurred or any cause or costs
of action that are existing under any Act or Ordinance in force at the time
that the suit or proceeding was instituted.
§ 11-2. REMOVAL OF BRUSH, WEEDS AND DEBRIS.
§ 11-2.1. Power of Township Council. [Ord. No. 8-24-70; 1967 Code
§ 74-22; New]
The Township Manager shall have the power to require the owner or
tenant of land lying within the limits of the Township, wherever it shall be
necessary and expedient for the preservation of the public health, safety,
general welfare or to eliminate a fire hazard, to remove from such land
or destroy the brush, weeds (including ragweed), dead and dying trees,
stumps, roots obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash and debris within
10 days after notice to remove the same, and to provide for the removal
of the same by or under the direction of the Director of the Department
of Community Development or individual specifically appointed by the
§ 11-1.9 § 11-2.1
1:278
Township, if the owner or tenant shall have refused or neglected to remove
same after notice and within the time provided aforesaid.
§ 11-2.2. Procedural requirements. [Ord. No. 8-24-70; 1967 Code
§ 74-23]
All procedural requirements, notice, hearings, findings and determinations
shall be as enumerated in subsections 10-4.12 through 10-4.14 of Chapter
10 of this Code.
§ 11-2.3. Costs a lien when Township removes. [Ord. No. 8-24-70;
1967 Code § 74-24; New]
In all cases where brush, weeds (including ragweed), dead and dying trees,
stumps, roots, obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash and debris are
removed or destroyed from any land under the provisions of this section,
by or under the direction of the Public Officer or the individual specifically
designated by the Manager to perform such functions, such Director of the
Department of Community Development shall certify the costs thereof to
the Manager who shall examine the certificate and, if found correct, shall
cause the costs as shown thereon to be charged against the lands, the
amount so charged shall forthwith become a lien upon such lands and shall
be added to and become and form part of the taxes next to be assessed and
levied upon such lands, the same to bear interest at the same rate as taxes,
and shall be collected and enforced by the same officers and in the same
manner as taxes are collected and enforced in the Township.
Chapter 12
FIRE PREVENTION
§ 12-1. UNIFORM FIRE SAFETY ACT ENFORCING AGENCY.
§ 12-1.1. Local enforcement. [Ord. No. 0-14-85 § 1]
Pursuant to Section 11 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983, c.383), the
New Jersey Uniform Fire Code shall be locally enforced in the Municipality
of the Township of Deptford.
§ 12-1.2. Agency designation. [Ord. No. 0-14-85 § 2]
The local enforcing agency shall be the Bureau of Fire Prevention of the
Township Fire District established pursuant to Section 2-22 of this Code and
which sets forth the boundaries of the Fire District.
§ 12-1.3. Duties. [Ord. No. 0-14-85 § 3]
The local enforcement agency shall enforce the Uniform Fire and Safety Act
and the Codes and regulations adopted under it in all buildings, structures
and premises within the established boundaries of the Township, other than
§ 11-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-1.3
1:279
owner-occupied one and two-family dwellings, and shall faithfully comply
with the requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety Act and the Uniform Fire
Code.
§ 12-1.4. Life hazard uses. [Ord. No. 0-14-85 § 4]
The local enforcing agency shall carry out the periodic inspections of the
life hazard uses required by the Uniform Fire Code on behalf of the
Commissioner of Community Affairs.
§ 12-1.5. Organization. [Ord. No. 0-14-85 § 5]
The local enforcing agency shall be part of the Township Fire District. Such
funds as may be necessary to support the operations of the agency shall be
raised by the District in the manner provided by law.
§ 12-1.6. Appointments, term of office, removal. [Ord. No. 0-14-85
§ 6]
§ 12-1.7. Board of Appeals. [Ord. No. 0-14-85 § 7]
Pursuant to Sections 15 and 17 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act, any person
aggrieved by any order of the local enforcement agency shall have a right
to appeal to the Construction Board of Appeals of the County of Gloucester.
a. Appointment of fire official. The local enforcing agency shall be under
the supervision of a Fire Official who shall be the Fire Marshal and
appointed by the Board of Fire Commissioners of the Township Fire
District. In making the appointment, the appointing authority shall
make the appointment from among those persons that they shall
consider qualified, which persons shall have been certified pursuant to
the provisions of Title 5.
b. Term of office. The Fire Official/Fire Marshal shall serve for a term of
two years. Any vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term in
accordance with the provisions of New Jersey Administrative Code,
Title 5, Chapter 18A, Subchapter 4.
c. Inspectors and employees. Such inspectors and other employees as may
be necessary in the local enforcing agency shall be appointed by the
Township Board of Fire Commissioners upon the recommendation of
the Fire Official.
d. Removal from office. The Fire Official/Fire Marshal, inspectors and
other employees of the enforcing agency shall be subject to removal by
the Township Board of Fire Commissioners for inefficiency or
misconduct. The Fire Official, inspector or employee to be so removed
shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard by the appointing authority
or a designated hearing officer.
§ 12-1.3 § 12-1.8
1:280
§ 12-1.8. Required life hazard fees. [Ord. No. 0-14-85 § 8]
The life hazard fees required pursuant to this section shall be those required
pursuant to the Uniform Fire Safety Act and the regulations of the New
Jersey Department of Community Affairs, including any amendments or
supplements thereto.
§ 12-1.9. Additional inspection fees.
Reserved.
§ 12-1.10. Permits. [Ord. No. 0-14-85 § 10]
The permit fees required by this sections hall be those established by the
Uniform Fire Code, including any amendments or supplements thereto.
§ 12-1.11. Technical amendments.
Reserved.
§ 12-2. ESTABLISHMENT OF FIRE DISTRICT AND BOARD OF FIRE
COMMISSIONERS.
§ 12-2.1. Fire district established. [Ord. No. 10-25-65; 1967 Code
§ 27-1]
All of the land lying and being within the corporate boundary lines of the
Township are hereby established and designated as the Fire District of the
Township.
§ 12-2.2. Board of Fire Commissioners. [Ord. No. 10-25-65; 1967
Code § 27-2]
Pursuant to the provisions of the statutes of the State of New Jersey in such
case made and provided, the legal voters of the Township shall by ballot
determine the amount of money to be raised for the ensuing year and elect
a Board of Fire Commissioners to consist of five persons in accordance with
the provisions of the statutes.
§ 12-2.3. Responsibility of Board. [Ord. No. 10-25-65; 1967 Code
§ 27-3]
The Board of Fire Commissioners shall be responsible for the administration
of the Fire District pursuant to the provisions of the statutes of the State of
New Jersey in such case made and provided.
§ 12-2.4. Fire departments and fire districts. [Ord. No. 0-1-72; 1967
Code § 2-65]
All Fire Departments and Fire Districts heretofore created are hereby
continued in the manner designated by ordinance.
§ 12-1.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-3
1:281
§ 12-3. R-1 AND/OR R-2 MULTIPLE FAMILY DWELLING UNITS.
§ 12-3.1. Registration and inspection required. [Ord. No. 0.8.94]
All multiple-family dwelling units within the Township classified as R-1 and/
or R-2 as defined by the New Jersey Construction Code shall be required to
register with the Bureau of Fire Prevention of the Deptford Township Fire
Department and complete forms provided by the Bureau. These multiplefamily
dwelling units shall be inspected periodically, but not less than once
every 12 months.
§ 12-3.2. Registration fees. [Ord. No. 0.9.94]
Annual registration fees for non-life hazard use multiple-family dwelling
units shall be as follows:
Use Group R-1 $25 per dwelling unit
Use Group R-2 $25 per dwelling unit
§ 12-4. INSPECTION AND FEE SCHEDULE FOR ALL NONLIFE
HAZARD USES.
§ 12-4.1. Registration and inspection requirements. [Ord. No.
0.3.01 § 1]
All assembly, commercial, industrial and multifamily dwelling uses within
the Township of Deptford shall be required to register with the Bureau of
Fire Prevention of the Deptford Township Fire Department and complete
forms provided by the Bureau. These uses shall be inspected periodically,
but not less than once every 12 months. Multifamily dwelling units shall
have no less than 20% of the complex inspected annually so that the entire
complex is inspected once every five years.
§ 12-4.2. Annual inspection fees. [Ord. No. 0.3.01 § 2]
Annual inspection fees assessed to the owner(s) of the property or business
for non-life hazard uses shall be as follows:
Use Group Description Fee
Assembly Uses
NLA-1 Place of Assembly, occupancy less than 100 $55
NLA-2 Place of Assembly, Temporary (less than 90
days)
$35
Tent
NLA-3 Reserved
Business Uses (offices, etc.)
NLB-1 Place of Business, less than 500 square feet $20
§ 12-3 § 12-4.2
1:282
Use Group Description Fee
NLB-2 Place of Business, greater than 500, less than
2,500 square feet
$30
NLB-3 Place of Business, greater than 2,500, less
than 5,000 square feet
$35
NLB-4 Place of Business, greater than 5,000, less
than 7,500 square feet
$50
NLB-5 Place of Business, greater than 7,500, less
than 10,000 square feet
$75
NLB-6 Place of Business, greater than 10,000, $100
Educational Uses
NLE-1 Educational use, less than 50 occupancy $50
Factory Uses (manufacturing)
NLF-1 Factory use, less than 2,500 square feet $30
NLF-2 Factory use, greater than 2,500, less than
5,000 square feet
$40
NLF-3 Factory use, greater than 5,000, less than
7,500 square feet
$50
NLF-4 Factory use, greater than 7,500, less than
10,000 square feet
$75
NLF-5 Factory use, greater than 10,000, less than
12,000 square feet
$125
Mercantile Uses
NLM-1 Mercantile, less than 500 square feet $20
NLM-2 Mercantile, greater than 500, less than 2,500
square feet
$30
NLM-3 Mercantile, greater than 2,500, less than
5,000 square feet
$40
NLM-4 Mercantile, greater than 5,000, less than
7,500 square feet
$50
NLM-5 Mercantile, greater than 7,500, less than
10,000 square feet
$75
NLM-6 Mercantile, greater than 10,000, less than
12,000 square feet
$125
NLM-7 Mercantile-Temporary (less than 90 days)
Kiosk, Cart (located in the common area of
another use)
$35
NLM-8 Mercantile-Permanent Kiosk (located in the
common area of another use)
$35
Residential Uses
NLR-1 Residential-Hotel/Motel (per dwelling unit) $25
§ 12-4.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-4.2
1:283
Use Group Description Fee
NLR-2 Residential-Multifamily dwellings (per
dwelling unit) NOTE: not less than 20% of
each complex will e inspected Each year so
that the entire complex is inspected once
every 5 years
$25
Storage Uses
NLS-1 Storage use, less than 2,500 square feet $30
NLS-2 Storage use, greater than 2,500, less than
5,000 square feet
$40
NLS-3 Storage use, greater than 5,000, less than
7,500 square feet
$50
NLS-4 Storage use, greater than 7,500, less than
10,000 square feet
$75
NLS-5 Storage use, greater than 10,000 square feet $125
§ 12-4.3. Exemptions. [Ord. No. 0.3.01 § 3]
The following uses shall be exempt from the payment of inspection fees
imposed by this section.
§ 12-4.4. Other fees. [Ord. No. 0.3.01 § 4]
Category Fee
Fire Investigation reports $25
Certificate of Fire Code Status $25
Cost of Suppression-Apparatus (per hour
with operator)
$100 (1 truck/1 hour
minimum)
Cost of Suppression-Fire fighters (per
member, per hour)
$25 (5 fire fighters minimum)
Cost of Suppression — Minor vehicles $50
a. All fire/rescue stations;
b. All Township owned and operated buildings;
c. All county owned and operated buildings;
d. All State owned and operated buildings;
e. All Federally owned and operated buildings.
f. All State registered Life Hazard Uses;
g. All uses required to obtain all annual permit in accordance with the N.J.
Uniform Fire Code (N.J.A.C. 5:70-1.1 et seq.);
h. Churches.
§ 12-4.2 § 12-4.4
1:284
Category Fee
Fire flow testing (on request) $50
The above fees shall apply if the non-life hazard use was cited for a
violation and this violation causes the need for suppression.
§ 12-5. RAPID ACCESS KEY BOXES.
§ 12-5.1. Required; exceptions. [Ord. No. 0.7.94 § 1]
All properties within the Township having an automatic fire alarm system or
a fire sprinkler system shall be equipped with a key box. This shall not apply
to owner occupied one and two-family dwellings.
§ 12-5.2. Type of box and location. [Ord. No. 0.7.94 § 2]
The key box shall be of a UL type and approved by the Township Fire
Official. The rapid entry key box shall be installed in a location approved by
the Fire Official.
§ 12-5.3. Key box contents. [Ord. No. 0.7.94 § 3]
The rapid key boxes shall contain the following:
§ 12-5.4. Penalties. [Ord. No. 0.7.94 § 4]
Any building owner violating this section shall be subject to penalties set
forth in the Uniform Fire Code.
§ 12-6. (RESERVED)
§ 12-7. OUTDOOR STORAGE OF RUBBER TIRES AND RECYCLED
RUBBER PRODUCTS.
a. Keys to locked points of egress, whether on interior or exterior of such
buildings;
b. Keys to the locked mechanical rooms;
c. Keys to the locked elevator rooms;
d. Keys to the elevator controls;
e. Keys to any fence or secured areas;
f. Keys to any other areas as directed by the Fire Official;
g. A floor plan of the rooms within the building.
§ 12-4.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-7.1
1:285
§ 12-7.1. Findings. [Ord. No. 0.17.94, Preamble]
The outdoor storage of rubber tires and/or recycled rubber products may
create a fire and health hazard; and the Township wishes to regulate the
amount of rubber tires and/or recycled rubber products that may be stored
in any one location. N.J.A.C. 5:18-4.5 provides that a municipality may, by
ordinance, make its Fire Code more restrictive than the Uniform Fire Code.
§ 12-7.2. Regulations for outdoor storage of rubber tires. [Ord. No.
0.17.94 § 1]
All tires stored outdoors in the Township shall be stored in accordance with
the National Fire Protection Association's Standard No. 231D, 1989 Edition,
Appendix "C", except as modified herein.
§ 12-7.3. Storage of tires in excess of 500 prohibited. [Ord. No.
0.17.94 § 2]
The number of loose tires, mounted or unmounted, to be permitted to be
stored outside any one lot shall not exceed 500 tires. There shall be no
distinction between new or used tires for the purposes of this section.
§ 12-7.4. Standards for storage of tires. [Ord. No. 0.17.94 § 3]
Tires shall be stored in the following manner.
§ 12-7.5. Recycled rubber products. [Ord. No. 0.17.94 § 4]
Any business that recycles used tires or other rubber products shall not
store the products in the same area as the processing plant. The products
shall be packaged for storage as soon as possible after processing and
removed to buildings that meet or exceed the requirements for storage
of such materials as determined by the Uniform Construction Code. The
process of recycling used tires into other products shall conform and comply
with any and all other regulations that may be established by the Township
Fire Official.
§ 12-7.6. Exceptions to tire storage. [Ord. No. 0.17.94 § 5]
The provisions of subsections 12-6.1 and 12-6.2 shall not apply to any
business that recycles used rubber tires into another product on site. In
such a case, the business may store only the number of tires that may be
recycled in one business day. Tires must be stored in a suitable enclosure
that meets Township and State regulations.
a. Tires shall be stored in piles no greater than 10 feet in height;
b. Tires shall be stored no closer than 25 feet from any building or lot line;
c. Tires shall be stacked in such a manner as to be readily counted.
§ 12-7.1 § 12-7.7
1:286
§ 12-7.7. Violations. [Ord. No. 0.17.94 § 6]
Any person who violates these provisions shall be liable for penalties as set
forth in the Uniform Fire Code.
Chapter 13
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
§ 13-1. CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF STREETS AND
SIDEWALKS.
§ 13-1.1. Street layout. [Ord. No. 11-3-67; 1967 Code § 65-1]
§ 13-1.2. New curb or sidewalk. [Ord. No. 11-3-67; 1967 Code
§ 65-2]
Any new curb or sidewalk constructed after the passage of this section or
any present curb or sidewalk repaired to an extent of 25% of length thereof
on any one property shall conform to the specifications as hereinafter
provided.
§ 13-1.3. Sidewalks. [Ord. No. 11-3-67; 1967 Code § 65-3]
a. The laying of any street or public highway shall be approved as to name,
location, width, lines and grade by the Township Council before any
acceptance thereof as a public street of the Township.
b. Streets shall be brought to grade and concrete curbs shall be in place
before their acceptance as Township streets.
a. The paved portion of any sidewalk, provided that the width of the street
permits, shall be not less than four feet in width.
b. The full width of the sidewalk from fence line to curbline shall remain
unobstructed unless special privilege is secured from the Township.
c. The grade of the sidewalks, regardless of the material of construction,
shall have a uniform pitch of 1/4 of an inch to the foot toward the
curbline, except where the physical conditions alter the situation, and
in such case modifications must be first approved by the Township
Council.
d. The materials for paved portion of sidewalk may be concrete, brick or
flagstone, provided that the alignment, grade, construction and
ingredients correspond to the provisions of this section. In all cases
where the subgrade shall be a clay or spongy nature, there shall be an
additional excavation to a depth of four inches below the base of the
improved sidewalk, and the space filled and well tamped with sand or
broken stone.
§ 12-7.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-1.3
1:287
e. Concrete sidewalks shall be at least four inches in thickness. Concrete
shall comply with the New Jersey State Highway Department Standard
Specifications. Cement for concrete shall be air-entraining Portland
cement, Type IA or IIA. Materials shall be proportioned to provide a
3,000 pound test concrete, twenty-eight-day strength, bit in no case
shall there be less than 5.5 bags of cement per C.Y. Test samples will be
taken by a testing laboratory on order from the Township Engineer. In
event of failure of a sample to comply to strength requirements,
additional samples may be ordered by the Engineer at the contractor's
expense. Failure indicated by these additional samples will require
replacement of completed curbs at the contractor's expense. The
Township Engineer shall at all times have twenty-four-hour advance
notice of all pours to arrange for samples.
The contractor will be required to supply affidavits for each load of
transit-mix concrete, guaranteeing the contents as complying to these
specifications.
Forms shall be removed in sufficient time to allow the proper finish to
the concrete surface. Plastering will not be permitted. Voids showing
anywhere in the concrete must be eliminated by rubbing with a
carborundum stone, or in a manner satisfactory to the Engineer, or
the section of sidewalk replaced at the contractor's expense.
f. The concrete shall be placed in the forms for the full thickness of the
pavement in the one-course type and finished with a steel trowel. No
topping or plastering will be permitted.
g. Expansion joints at least 1/4 of an inch in width shall be cut through the
full thickness of the pavement every four to six feet. About every 30 feet
a 1/2 inch tar filler shall be placed.
h. Flagstone Sidewalks. Each flagstone to be at least two inches thick and
to contain not less than eight square feet, to be laid on a foundation of
cinders, sand or crushed stone not less than five inches deep. Stones to
be cut straight so that they fit properly against each other, and so laid
as to preserve a straight line along the edges. All stones shall be placed
in a rich mixture of grout in order that they may hold their alignment
and grade.
i. Brick sidewalks. The earth shall be leveled at least five inches below the
finished grade of the sidewalk, and shall be well settled by ramming. A
foundation shall be laid of concrete 2 1/2 inches thick, composed of one
part cement, three parts clean sand and five parts of broken stone,
pebbles or slag (by volume) and brought to a good even grade. After
this has set, 1/2 inch of sand shall then be laid over the surface. The
bricks, not less than two inches thick of good hard quality, shall be laid
upon this foundation with all interspaces filled in with a good grout
mixture. The stratum of brick along each edge of the walk shall be laid
on edge lengthwise or on end, forming a border, and preserving a
straight line along both edges of the pavement. The concrete
§ 13-1.3 § 13-1.3
1:288
§ 13-1.4. Curbs. [Ord. No. 11-3-67; 1967 Code § 65-4]
§ 13-1.5. Curb corners. [Ord. No. 11-3-67; 1967 Code § 65-5]
All corners shall be rounded with a fifteen-foot radius, unless otherwise
ordered in writing by the Township Engineer. All curbs and sidewalks lying
within the intersection of the sidelines of intersecting streets will be paid
for by the Township upon certificate as to the location and measurements
by the Township Engineer.
§ 13-1.6. Driveways. [Ord. No. 11-3-67; 1967 Code § 65-6]
All driveways shall slope from the grade of the outer edge of the paved
portion of the sidewalk (as shown on plates referred to in subsection 13-1.8
to the gutter.
§ 13-1.7. Gutters. [Ord. No. 11-3-67; 1967 Code § 65-7]
Where gutters are considered necessary, they shall be laid and paid for
by the Township. Determination of necessity shall be by the Township
Engineer.
§ 13-1.8. Grades: construction, curbs and sidewalks. [Ord. No.
11-3-67; 1967 Code § 65-8]
foundation shall extend for the full width of the pavement, including the
edges.
a. All curbs, except where granite is specified by the Township Council,
shall be constructed of concrete of the one-course type and of the same
ingredients and mixture as provided in subsection 13-1.3e, (Sidewalks).
The surface of the concrete shall have the trowel finish. The outer edge
of the top of curbs shall be finished with an edging tool having a oneinch
radius.
b. Curb forms must be removed soon enough to afford proper finishing.
The face of the curbs shall be finished for at least 12 inches below the
top. No topping or plastering will be permitted.
c. The curbs shall be of at least six inches below the top and seven inches
in thickness at the base, giving a one-inch flare on the face, and shall be
at least 16 inches in depth.
d. Expansion joints at least 1/4 inch in width shall be cut not over eight
feet apart for the full width and depth of the curbs. About every 30 feet
a tar filler 1/2 inch in thickness shall be fitted.
e. Excess concrete extending over the thickness of the curb at the top is to
be removed, leaving a straight line along the inner edge of the curb.
a. All curbs and sidewalks shall be laid at the established grade and in
conformity with the place for such respective street or section thereof
§ 13-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-1.8
1:289
§ 13-1.9. Line and grade. [Ord. No. 11-3-67; Ord. No. 0-13-74; 1967
Code § 65-9]
(the plates to be on file at the Township Clerk's office and Township
Engineer's office).
b. The owner or owners of lands fronting or bordering on the public
streets of the Township are hereby required to construct, pave, repave,
curb, recurb, improve and/or repair, at his or their own proper cost and
expense, the sidewalks on both sides of the public streets of the
Township, in accordance with the provisions of this section; provided,
however, that nothing herein shall be construed to affect any sidewalks
and curbs on the streets now in good repair and constructed at the
grade or slope and substantially in accordance with this section, and
subject to the provisions in subsection 13-1.2 of this section.
c. The determination of which street and/or streets, curbs and sidewalks
are to be constructed, paved, repaved, curbed, recurbed, improved and/
or repaired shall be determined by resolution of the Township Council.
d. Upon the failure of the owner or owners of lands fronting or bordering
on any public street to construct, pave, repave, curb, recurb, improve
and/or repair the sidewalks within 30 days after the service of notice,
pursuant to the provisions of an Act of the Legislature of the State of
New Jersey entitled "An Act Concerning Municipalities," approved
March 27, 1917, and the Acts amendatory thereof and supplemental
thereto and N.J.S.A. 40:65-1 et seq. and the Acts supplementary thereto
and amendatory thereof, the improvements shall be done by the
Township or under its direction, pursuant to the provisions of the Act of
the Legislature and the New Jersey Revised Statutes, and the cost
assessed against the lands affected in accordance with that statute.
a. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, where the owner
or owners of lands are required to make improvements pursuant to
subsection 13-1.8b, prior to putting in the permanent improvement, the
owner or owners of lands shall be required to secure the approval of the
Township Engineer of the proposed line and grade. The property owner
shall be responsible for the Township Engineer's fee for the review and/
or inspection related to the putting in of the permanent improvement.
b. At the request of the property owner, the line and grade may be
furnished by the Township Engineer, the cost for the Township
Engineer's services to be paid by the property owner.
c. In all cases the Township Engineer, upon notification, shall be required
to submit an estimate for services required to be rendered pursuant to
the provisions of this subsection. The property owner shall be required,
upon receipt of that estimate for services, to post that sum with the
Township Manager prior to putting in any improvement. The Township
Manager shall make the payment to the Township Engineer only upon
the submission of an itemized voucher for services rendered. A copy of
§ 13-1.8 § 13-1.9
1:290
§ 13-1.10. Permit. [Ord. No. 11-3-67; 1967 Code § 65-10]
Prior to the work of laying of any curb or sidewalk or the repair of any which
exceeds 25% of the total length of the curb or sidewalk on any one property,
a permit shall be obtained from the Township Clerk. The permit shall expire
90 days from the date of issue thereof.
§ 13-1.11. Permit fee. [Ord. No. 11-3-67; Ord. No. 0-7-80; 1967 Code
§ 65-11]
There shall be paid for each permit for doing such work the sum of $10, and
such permit shall state the location of the proposed work, the name of the
owner and the name of the contractor; provided, however, that if the cost
of the proposed work is $500 or less, there shall be no charge for obtaining
the permit. No person shall do any such work without a permit as herein
required.
§ 13-1.12. Inspection. [Ord. No. 11-3-67; 1967 Code § 65-12]
All such work shall be subject to the inspection of the Township Engineer
and finished to the satisfaction of the Engineer.
§ 13-1.13. Violations and penalties. [New]
Each and every person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the General Penalty
established in Section 1-5 of this Code.
§ 13-2. FIRE HYDRANTS SPECIFICATIONS.
§ 13-2.1. Specifications. [Ord. No. 0-7-83; 1967 Code § 29-1]
that voucher shall be sent to the property owner. Any sum for services
rendered in excess of the escrow deposit shall be paid by the property
owner upon notice. If the fee for professional services rendered is less
than the escrow deposit, the Township Manager shall reimburse the
amount remaining to the property owner. The Township Engineer's
fee shall be in accordance with that schedule of fees for professional
services filed with the Township.
a. The specifications for all fire hydrants to be installed in the Township
subsequent to the passage of this ordinance will be pursuant to
specifications on file with the Township Clerk.
b. All hydrants shall have water openings 4.250 inches or greater, with
two hose nipples of 2.500 inches, having 7.500 threads per inch. There
shall be one four and five-hundred-thousands-inch nippled with four
threads per inch, and 1.500 inches (point to flat), five-sided pentagon
nuts, to include the operating nut and three caps shall be shake-fit and
hydrants shall open to the left. Hydrants shall be either four feet to five
feet, buried in stone, or the center of the steamer nipple shall be 18
§ 13-1.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-2.1
1:291
§ 13-2.2. Violations and penalties. [New]
Anyone found guilty of installing a fire hydrant contrary to the aforesaid
specifications will be subject to the General Penalty established in Section
1-5 of this Code.
§ 13-3. REGULATING STREET AND RIGHT-OF-WAY OPENINGS.
§ 13-3.1. Applicability. [Ord. No. 0.10.97]
The regulations in this section shall apply to the opening of any Township
street or right-of-way.
§ 13-3.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 0.10.97 § 1]
The words, terms or phrases listed below shall, for the purpose of this
section, be defined and interpreted as follows:
CONNECTION — The installation of a pipeline or pipeline to bring utilities
of any kind into property from a public street or the extension of an
existence utility within a public street.
IMPROVED ROAD — Any Township road surfaced with existing asphalt,
concrete, bituminous concrete, or similar pavement. Minimum standards
for improved roads shall be six inches of dense graded aggregate or soil
aggregate, (1-5), four inches of bituminous-stabilized-concrete base course
(Mix 1-2) and two inches of FABC (Mix 1-5) surface course.
INSPECTION AND APPROVAL OFFICER — The person designated by the
Manager to supervise street openings on all Township roads in the Township
of Deptford.
PERSON — Includes corporations, companies, associations, societies, firms,
partnerships and joint-stock companies as well as individuals.
RIGHT-OF-WAY (ROW) — That portion of land as delineated on the Township
Tax Maps and on property surveys which allows continuous right of passage
to the Township.
UNIMPROVED ROAD — Any cinder, dirt or gravel road without concrete or
bituminous concrete treatment and all other roads and rights-of-way under
the jurisdictions of Deptford Township.
§ 13-3.3. Permit required. [Ord. No. 0.10.97 § 2]
No person shall cut, dig, or drill or mark any hole, trench or other
excavation in any portion of the Township right-of-way including but not
limited to a road, street, alley, highway or other public way under the
jurisdiction of the Township of Deptford without first having obtained a
permit from the Department of Public Works in the manner set forth in this
inches to 36 inches above the crown of the roadway. All hydrants shall
comply with specifications and detailed sheet prepared on April 26,
1983, by G.L. Davenport, Executive Director, Deptford Township MUA.
§ 13-2.1 § 13-3.3
1:292
section; nor shall any person willfully or otherwise mar, deface, injure or
destroy the surface of any such road, street, alley or public way.
§ 13-3.4. Emergencies. [Ord. No. 0.10.97 § 3]
§ 13-3.5. Fees; performance bond; escrow. [Ord. No. 0.10.97 § 4]
a. In the event of any emergency, when the Public Works Department is
unavailable to receive applications for permits and to issue permits in
compliance with the provisions of this section, it shall be lawful for the
street to be opened to cure such an emergency; provided, however, that
the appropriate permit application, accompanied by the proper fees,
bonds, and deposits, is submitted and a permit received no later than at
the end of the next regular business day of the Department of Public
Works. Failure to do so and to procure the necessary permit will
constitute a violation of this section.
b. The emergency hereinbefore referred to must be such as to endanger
health, life or property only. Unauthorized openings shall not be
permitted except as hereinabove stated, and any violation of the
provision will be prosecuted as stated in this section.
a. The application fee shall be $50.
b. The applicant must post a performance guaranty bond in the amount of
$50 per square yard of trench excavation, with the minimum
performance guaranty being not less than $350.
c. The escrow inspection fee to be paid upon filing an application for
utility openings permit for the improved roads shall be based on the
following:
1. One hundred fifty dollars for trench areas totaling 60 square yards
or less.
2. An amount equal to 5% of the performance guaranty as determined
by paragraph b. above for trench areas greater than 60 square
yards.
d. Where trenching is to take place outside the cartway but within the
R.O.W., fees and bonding requirements will be as in paragraphs a., b.
and c. above.
e. Where tunneling or trenchless technology is utilized in lieu of the open
cut method, a bond will be posted as required in paragraph b. above,
with the provision that the trench width will be based upon the open cut
method. All fees will be as required in paragraphs a., b. and c. above.
f. No fee shall be charged for a permit to construct a curb on any street
unless such construction will result in damage to the street surface. In
such an event, an escrow fee shall be determined by the Inspections
and Approval Officer in such amount as shall be required to pay the cost
§ 13-3.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-3.5
1:293
§ 13-3.6. Permit rules and regulations. [Ord. No. 0.10.97 § 5]
All permits issued under this section shall be subject to the following rules
and regulations and requirements:
of repairing the surface of such street by Deptford Township should
the permittee fail in his responsibility to repair the road surface as
required. Curbing broken or removed during the installation of utilities
covered under a utility opening permit shall be repaired or replaced by
the permittee. The cost of the repair shall be borne by the permittee.
Should the permittee fail to repair curbing broken by his activities,
Deptford Township shall repair curb and assess the permittee for all
costs incurred.
g. In the event that the Inspection and Approval Officer determines that
any excavation for which a permit has been issued is of greater
dimensions than those stated in the permit, or if the Inspection and
Approval Officer determines that any street surface has been damaged
in connection with the construction of curbs and such damage has not
been repaired, then and in either case the Inspection and Approval
Officer shall notify the applicant, who shall pay any additional fee and
post any additional bond as required forthwith and before continuing
any further work in connection with such excavation or construction.
h. In all cases where the forgoing bonds are posted, the permittee shall
restore the surface of the street upon the completion of the work by the
permittee in accordance with the provisions of this section. Upon
verification of completion of the restoration of the street surface by the
Inspection and Approval Officer, and a six-month maintenance period,
the bond fees shall be released to the permittee. Any unused escrow
fees shall be returned to the permittee.
a. Every permittee shall keep each opening properly guarded and shall
backfill and close open trench areas by the end of each workday.
Restoration with bituminous stabilized base material must occur within
24 hours of opening the trench. Under no circumstances will trenches
be left backfilled to grade with stone or similar material for more than
24 hours. Additional devices shall be installed by the applicant as
required by the Inspection and Approval Officer. All work done under
any permit shall be done in such a manner as to cause a minimum of
interference with travel along the affected street. No street shall be
closed to traffic unless specific permission therefor has been granted by
the Inspection and Approval Officer and proper notification has been
provided to the Deptford Township Police Department and all
emergency service agencies.
b. Each permittee shall, as a condition of accepting any permit issued
hereunder, save, hold and keep harmless and indemnify the Township of
Deptford, its officers, and agents against any claims, demands or
expense arising out of any suit or claim for damage or injury alleged to
have been sustained as a result of any work done under such permit.
§ 13-3.5 § 13-3.6
1:294
§ 13-3.7. Restoration of surface. [Ord. No. 0.10.97 § 6]
In all cases where permits are issued hereunder wherein the permittee is
to restore the surface of the street, the following rules, regulations and
requirements shall apply:
c. Upon application being made therefor, the Inspection and Approval
Officer may extend the time during which any permit shall be valid for
such a period as the Inspection and Approval Officer deems it advisable.
In the event that the work required to be done by a permittee shall not
be completed within the time stated on any permit or any extension
thereof, then the Inspection and Approval Officer may complete the
work required to be done by the permittee and restore the surface of
the street affected. The permittee shall upon demand, pay Deptford
Township the cost of completing such work as the permittee is required
to do under this section, and such amount may be recovered by
Deptford Township in a court of competent jurisdiction.
d. No work for which a permit is issued hereunder shall be conducted in
such a manner as to interfere with any water main or sewer line or any
connection from either of the same to any building, unless specific
permission to interfere with such main or line is obtained in advance
from the Inspection and Approval Officer. No excavation which may
result in damage to or destruction of any trees or shrubbery or any
Deptford Township property shall be made unless specific permission
therefor is granted by the Inspection and Approval Officer prior to the
work being done.
e. Every permittee shall completely backfill any excavation made and
replace as much as possible of the material excavated. Such material
shall be compacted by rolling, tamping or other suitable means as
directed by the Inspection and Approval Officer. Any additional backfill
material required shall be furnished by the permittee. In any case
where the Inspection and Approval Officer determines that the
excavation material is unsatisfactory for backfill, the permittee shall
backfill the excavation with sand, gravel or other approved material,
which shall be placed in layers not exceeding six inches in depth,
moistened and thoroughly compacted as directed by the Inspection and
Approval Officer as to achieve minimum 95% modified proctor density.
Upon completion of the work, the permittee shall remove any excess
material and leave the premises in a clean condition. Upon
determination of the Inspection and Approval Officer that any backfilled
excavation has settled or caved in, the permittee shall promptly upon
notice of such determination continue backfilling as above described
until the Inspection and Approval Officer determines that the
settlement is complete.
f. In the event that tunneling operations shall be required to reach a point
of connection with any main line, the backfill in any such tunnel shall
consist of rammed cement concrete or flowable fill material.
§ 13-3.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-3.7
1:295
§ 13-3.8. Revocation upon noncompliance. [Ord. No. 0.10.97 § 7]
The Township Manager may revoke any permit for noncompliance with any
provision of this section. In any special case, the Township Council may by
resolution impose special conditions to which issuance of the permit will be
subject, or the Township Council may in any such case deem by resolution
that any provision of this section shall not apply or shall be altered.
a. No permittee shall commence the restoration of any street foundation
or surface until the Inspection and Approval Officer deemed that the
settlement of the subsurface is complete and the area properly
prepared for restoration.
b. All sub bases and base courses shall be restored to a width of 12 inches
wider than the width of the excavation and to a length of 12 inches
longer than the length of the excavation.
c. The street surface shall be restored to a width of 12 inches wider than
the width of the restored foundation and to a length of 12 inches longer
than the length of the restored foundation.
d. When any foundation is restored by the use of cement concrete, the
same shall consist of 3,000 psi concrete in accordance with NJDOT.
e. All foundations and surfaces of improved roads shall be restored to
their original thickness, width and grade with the same type of material
as existed prior to the making of the excavation. Care should be taken
to reconstruct the trench areas so as to recreate or improve upon the
road cross section. In no case, however shall restoration be completed
with less than the following materials and thickness:
1. Six inches compacted dense graded aggregate or soil aggregate,
I-5.
2. Four inches bituminous stabilized base course, Mix I-2 constructed
in layers not more than two inches compacted thickness.
3. Two inches FABC Mix I-5 surface course applied and tack coated to
existing edge of pavement.
4. A hot sealer shall be applied to all joints where new and old
bituminous material meet.
f. The foundations and surfaces of improved roads shall be made with the
materials as specified herein or as directed by the Inspection and
Approval Officer.
g. Restoration work must be completed within 45 days of the original
approval of the utility opening permit and application.
§ 13-3.7 § 13-3.9
1:296
§ 13-3.9. Violations and penalties. [Ord. No. 0.10.97 § 8]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding $500 or imprisonment
not exceeding 90 days, or both.
§ 13-3.10. Moratorium on openings. [Ord. No. 0.10.97 § 9]
No permits shall be granted on a newly improved Township road for period
of five years except in cases of emergency. Emergencies shall include utility
repairs and any other emergency certified by the Township Manager and
the Township Engineer or Public Works Director.
§ 13-3.11. Severability. [Ord. No. 0.10.97 § 10]
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this section is for
any reason held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional
or invalid, such decision shall not effect the remaining portions of this
section, which shall remain valid and in effect irrespective of such decision
affecting any part thereof.
§ 13-4. STANDARDS FOR WAIVER OF CURB AND SIDEWALK
REQUIREMENTS.
§ 13-4.1. Preamble. [Ord. No. 0-4-89, Preamble]
Section 13-1 of the Code of the Township of Deptford mandates the
installation of curbs and sidewalks within the Township, and the Township
Council recognizes the rural character of the Township, and believes that
the Township Council should be vested with discretion to waive curb and
sidewalk requirements given certain circumstances. The Township Council
has provided standards to be considered when reviewing a request for
waiver or curbs and sidewalks.
§ 13-4.2. Curbs and sidewalks required. [Ord. No. 0-4-89 § 1]
Except as otherwise set forth herein, curbs and sidewalks shall be required
by the Township in all instances where a building permit is required and the
proposed buildings/structures front public streets.
§ 13-4.3. Request for waiver; standards to be considered. [Ord. No.
0-4-89 § 2]
The Township Council, upon request made by the applicant, may waive the
requirement to install curbs and/or sidewalks. In making a determination
to waive curbs and/or sidewalks with regard to a particular application the
Township Council shall consider the following:
a. The existence of curbs and/or sidewalks in front of existing properties
on the street in which the subject property fronts.
§ 13-3.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-4.3
1:297
§ 13-4.4. Procedure to request waiver. [Ord. No. 0-4-89 § 3]
b. The existence of curbs and/or sidewalks along streets in the immediate
vicinity of the subject street.
c. The character and nature of the community for the ability to connect
curbs and sidewalks on the subject site to curbs and sidewalks on the
remaining portion of the street.
d. The effect that the installation of curbing will have on the drainage on
the subject street.
e. The plans of the Township to construct or reconstruct the road
immediately adjacent to the intended curb and sidewalk.
f. The existence of vacant land on the subject street, and the likelihood
that such vacant land will be developed in the future.
g. The existence of the lot frontage on two or more streets with one or
more of the streets being unimproved and its improvement is not
contemplated by the Township.
h. Whether the width of the municipality right-of-way is insufficient to
contain curbs and/or sidewalks.
i. Whether construction of curb or sidewalk is impractical by virtue of
existing road profiles being excessively higher or lower than proposed
road profiles such that the improvements would be buried or elevated,
requiring extraordinary construction.
j. The commendation made by the Township Engineer which shall
consider and evaluate the above items.
a. Applicant shall submit a request for waiver of curb and/or sidewalk to
the Construction Code Official on forms prepared by such official. In
addition to completing the forms the applicant shall submit 10 copies of
a sketch plat or plan which contains the following:
1. A designation of all lots located on either side of the entire street
which also shows lot frontage distance on the street for each lot.
The applicant may utilize the Township Tax Map to determine these
distances.
2. A designation of curb and/or sidewalk locations for each lot on the
subject street.
b. No application shall be deemed complete until the "PLAN" as
designated above is submitted as provided herein.
§ 13-4.3 § 13-4.5
1:298
§ 13-4.5. Township Council may provide list of exempt streets. [Ord.
No. 0-4-89 § 4]
The Township Council may, by Resolution, adopt a list of streets in which
curbs and/or sidewalks need not be installed. In the event that such a list is
adopted, the streets shall be deemed exempt from the installation of curbs
and/or sidewalks and no additional waiver shall be required.
§ 13-4.6. Township Council may establish list of streets on which
exemption not permitted. [Ord. No. 0-4-89 § 5]
The Township Council, by Resolution may also adopt a list of streets in
which applications for waivers will not be accepted by the Construction
Code Official or heard by the Township Council.
§ 13-4.7. Request for waiver to accompany building permit
application. [Ord. No. 0-4-89 § 6]
Request for curb and sidewalk waivers shall be requested in writing at
the time application for a building permit is made. A fee of $100 shall
accompany such a waiver.
§ 13-4.8. Signing of request for waiver. [Ord. No. 0-4-89 § 7]
All requests for curb and/or sidewalk waivers shall be signed by the
owner(s) of the property.
§ 13-4.9. Township's rights not impaired. [Ord. No. 0-4-89 § 8]
This section shall not be construed to prohibit or impede the right of the
Township to install curbs and/or sidewalks on roads within the Township
and, thereafter, collect monies from benefited property owners by special
assessment as provided by law.
§ 13-4.10. Compliance with the section required for issuance of
certificate of occupancy. [Ord. No. 0-4-89 § 10]
No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued unless this section has been
complied with.
Chapter 14
SEWER AND WATER
§ 14-1. SEWER CONNECTIONS.
§ 14-1.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 0-4-73; Ord. No. 0-9-73; 1967 Code
§ 62A-1]
As used in this section:
§ 13-4.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-1.1
1:299
BUILDING — Any building or structure heretofore or hereafter constructed
and designed or used for dwelling purposes, either temporary or
permanent, or for any other use or occupancy by persons whatsoever,
including but not limited to commercial or industrial use.
CONNECTION DATE — The 90th-day, when used with respect to a building
constructed prior to the date of the initial operation, as part of any sanitary
sewage treatment and disposal system and water system in the Township
owned or operated by the Township or the Township Municipal Utilities
Authority, of sewer and water available to serve the building; and when used
with respect to a building constructed after the date of initial operation,
as a part of any sanitary sewage treatment and disposal system and water
facilities owned or operated by the Township or the Authority, of sewer and
water available to serve the building, the 60th-day after the date of initial
occupancy of the building, whichever of the dates shall be earlier in point of
time.
SEWER — Any sewer or main designed or used for collection or disposal of
sanitary sewage within the Township.
WATER — Any water or main designed or used for supplying the public with
water within the Township.
§ 14-1.2. Connection required. [Ord. No. 0-4-73; 1967 Code § 62A-2]
§ 14-1.3. Material specifications. [Ord. No. 0-4-73; 1967 Code
§ 62A-3]
a. The owner of each property along the line of any sewer or water main
now or hereafter constructed in the Township by the Township or by the
Township Municipal Utilities Authority shall connect each building on
such property with sewer and/or water prior to the connection date
with respect to the building.
b. The owner of each building located anywhere in the Township in which
a sewer is now constructed or shall be hereafter constructed shall, prior
to such connection date with respect to such building:
1. Install a toilet in such building unless a toilet is installed therein.
2. Connect such building and the toilet therein with such sewer.
a. Sewer connections. Every connection required by this section shall be
made with cast-iron soil pipe from inside the building to a point not less
than five feet outside the building. From this point to the sewer main,
cast-iron pipe caulked and leaded or asbestos cement pipe with slipjoint
rubber gaskets may be used. All pipes must be not less than four
inches in diameter.
b. Water connections. Every connection required by this section shall be
made with such materials as specified by the State Uniform
Construction Code or Ordinance now in effect or hereafter adopted, and
§ 14-1.1 § 14-1.3
1:300
§ 14-1.4. Failure to make connection. [Ord. No. 0-4-73; 1967 Code
§ 62A-4]
If the owner of any properties affected thereby shall neglect, after lawful
notice is provided, to make any water and/or sewer connection or
installation of toilet, the Township Municipal Utilities Authority may cause
such connection or installation to be made under the direction and
supervision of its Executive Director, or such officer of the Township
Municipal Utilities Authority, or may award one or more contracts for the
making of such improvements.
§ 14-1.5. Notice of intention to do work. [Ord. No. 0-4-73; 1967
Code § 62A-5]
Before proceeding to make any such connection or installation or awarding
any contract for the making thereof, the Township Municipal Utilities
Authority shall cause notice of such contemplated connection or installation
to be given to the owner of any properties affected thereby. The notice
shall contain a description of the property affected, sufficiently definite in
terms to identify it, as well as a description of the required connection or
installation, and notice that unless the connection or installation shall be
completed within 30 days after the service thereof, the Township Municipal
Utilities Authority, pursuant to the grant of authority given it by the
Township will proceed to make such connection, or cause the same to be
done, pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 40:63-54, and also pursuant to
the authority of this section.
§ 14-1.6. Service of notice. [Ord. No. 0-4-73; 1967 Code § 62A-6]
The notice may be served upon the owner or owners resident in the
Municipality in person, or by leaving it at their usual place of residence
with a member of their family above the age of 14 years. If any such owner
shall not reside in the municipality, such notice may be served upon him
personally, or be mailed to his last known post office address, or it may be
served upon the occupancy of the property, or upon the agent of the owner
in charge thereof. Notice to infant owners or owners of unsound mind shall
be served upon their guardians. When lands are held in trust, service shall
be made upon the trustee. When properties are held by two or more joint
tenants, tenants in common or tenants by the entirety, service upon one
shall be sufficient and shall be deemed and taken as notice to all.
§ 14-1.7. Publication of notice where service is not possible. [Ord.
No. 0-4-73; 1967 Code § 62A-7]
If the owner of any such property is unknown or service cannot for any
reason be made as above directed, notice shall be published at least once
not less than 30 days before the making of such connection by the Township
in the absence thereof, with such materials and sizes of pipe as may be
directed by the Township Municipal Utilities Authority.
§ 14-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-1.7
1:301
Municipal Utilities Authority, in a newspaper circulating in the Municipality.
There may be inserted in the advertisement, notice to the owner or owners
of several different properties.
§ 14-1.8. Proof of service to be filed. [Ord. No. 0-4-73; 1967 Code
§ 62A-8]
Proof of service or publication of such notices shall be filed within 10 days
after such service with the Tax Collector of the Township, but failure to file
the same shall not invalidate the proceedings if service has actually been
made as herein provided.
§ 14-1.9. Account and filing of cost. [Ord. No. 0-4-73; 1967 Code
§ 62A-9]
When any such water and/or sewer connection or toilet installation shall be
made, a true and accurate account of the cost and expense shall be kept
and apportioned to the property or properties thereby connected, and a
true statement of such costs under oath shall be forthwith filed with the
Township Clerk by the Township Municipal Utilities Authority Director, or
the designated officer of the Authority in charge of such connection or
installation. The Township Council shall examine the same, and if properly
made, shall confirm it and file such statement with the Tax Collector. The
Tax Collector shall record the connection or installation charge in the same
book in which the local and other assessments are record.
§ 14-1.10. Costs: interest and penalties; lien against property. [Ord.
No. 0-4-73; 1967 Code § 62A-10]
Such connection or installation charge shall bear interest and penalties
from the same time and at the same rate as assessments for local
improvements, and from time of confirmation, shall be a first and
paramount lien against the respective property or properties so connected
with the Township or Township Municipal Utilities Authority's Utilities
System, to the same extent as assessments for local improvements, to be
collected and enforced in the same manner.
§ 14-1.11. Payment in installments. [Ord. No. 0-4-73; 1967 Code
§ 62A-11]
The Township Municipal Utilities Authority may, with the consent of the
Township Council, provide for the payment of any sewer or water
connection or toilet installation charges in installments in the same manner
as assessments for local improvements, to bear the same rate of interest,
and be collected and enforced in the same manner as are installments for
assessments on local improvements.
§ 14-1.7 § 14-1.12
1:302
§ 14-1.12. Rules and regulations. [Ord. No. 0-4-73; 1967 Code
§ 62A-12]
The Township Municipal Utilities Authority may promulgate such rules
and regulations as may be necessary in furtherance of, and to effect the
purposes and objectives set forth in this section. Such rules and regulations
shall not be of effect unless notice of the proposed adoption is advertised at
least five days prior to the date set by the Authority for public hearing.
§ 14-1.13. Reimbursement of costs. [Ord. No. 0-4-73; 1967 Code
§ 62A-13]
Upon collection by the Tax Collector of those water and sewer connection
or toilet installation charges expended by the Township Municipal Utilities
Authority, as assessed in accordance with the provisions of this section,
such sum(s) shall be reimbursed, including accrued interest, by the
Township Municipal Utilities Authority.
§ 14-1.14. Alternate procedure; enforcement by Council. [Ord. No.
0-4-73; 1967 Code § 62A-14]
Notwithstanding the express delegation to the Township Municipal Utilities
Authority, to effect the provisions of this section, in furtherance of those
powers, express and implied, to effect such purpose as enumerated in
N.J.S.A. 40:14b-1 et seq., the Township by such delegation of authority to the
Township Municipal Utilities Authority, and the designated public officers
herein, does not expressly waive any power and it does hereby reserve to
itself all powers to take those actions granted it in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:63-52 through 40:63-64, which are incorporated
herein by reference, and herein reserves the right to enforce the mandatory
connection of water, sewer and toilet connections and or installations, in
accordance with the following provisions.
a. Failure to make connection. If, after the passage of this section, the
owner of any properties affected thereby shall neglect, after lawful
notice is provided, to make any water and/or sewer connection or
installation of toilet, the Township may cause such connection or
installation to be made under the direction and supervision of its
Township Manager, or such other designated officer of the Township, or
may award one or more contracts for the making such improvements.
b. Notice of intention to do work. Before proceeding to make any such
connection or installation or awarding any contract for the making
thereof, the Township shall cause notice of such contemplated
connection or installation to be given to the owner of any properties
affected thereby. The notice shall contain a description of the required
connection or installation, and notice that unless the connection or
installation shall be completed within 30 days after the service thereof,
the Township will proceed to make such connection, or cause the same
to be done, pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 40:63-54, and also
pursuant to the authority of this section.
§ 14-1.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-1.14
1:303
c. Service of notice. The notice may be served upon the owner or owners
resident in the municipality in person, or by leaving it at their usual
place of residence with a member of their family above the age of 14
years. If any such owner shall not reside in the municipality, such notice
may be served upon him personally, or be mailed to his last known post
office address, or it may be served upon the occupancy of the property,
or upon the agent of the owner in charge thereof. Notice to infant
owners or owners of unsound mind shall be served upon their
guardians. When lands are held in trust, service shall be made upon the
trustee. When properties are held by two or more joint tenants, tenants
in common or tenants by the entirety, service upon one shall be
sufficient and shall be deemed and taken as notice to all.
d. Publication of notice where service is impossible. If the owner of any
such property is unknown or service cannot, for any reason, be made as
above directed, notice shall be published at least once not less than 30
days before the making of such connection by the Township, in a
newspaper circulating in the municipality. There may be inserted in the
advertisement, notice to the owner or owners of several different
properties.
e. Proof of service. Proof of service of publication of such notices shall be
filed within 10 days after such service, with the Tax Collector of the
Township, but failure to file the same shall not invalidate the
proceedings if service has actually been made as herein provided.
f. Cost; certification and collection. When any such water and/or sewer
connection or toilet installation shall be made, a sure and accurate
account of the cost and expense shall be kept and apportioned to the
property or properties thereby connected, and a true statement of such
costs under oath shall be forthwith filed with the Township Clerk by the
Township Manager or the designated officer of the Township in charge
of such connection or installation. The Township Council shall examine
the same, and if properly made, shall confirm it and file such statement
with the Tax Collector. The Tax Collector shall record the connection or
installation charge in the same book in which the local and other
assessments are recorded.
g. Assessments; interest and penalties; assessments a lien. Such
connection or installation charge shall bear interest and penalties from
the same time, and at the same rate, as assessments for local
improvements, and from the time of confirmation, shall be a first and
paramount lien against the respective property or properties so
connected with the Township or Township Municipal Utilities
Authority's utilities system, to the same extent as assessments for local
improvements, to be collected and enforced in the same manner.
h. Payment in installations. The Township Manager or the designated
officer of the Township may, with the consent of the Township Council,
provide for the payment of any sewer or water connection or toilet
installation charges in installments in the same manner as assessments
§ 14-1.14 § 14-1.14
1:304
§ 14-1.15. Violations and penalties. [Ord. No. 0-4-73; 1967 Code
§ 62A-15; New]
Any person or persons, firm or corporation failing to obey the provisions of
this section, or the orders of the Public Officer, the Township or Township
Municipal Utilities Authority issued pursuant to this section, shall be subject
to the General Penalty established in Section 1-5 of this Code. The penalties
provided therein shall not be deemed to bar or exclude any other power
of enforcement which the Township and/or Township Municipal Utilities
Authority by and through its public officers shall have in order to enforce
compliance with the provisions of this section.
§ 14-2. WATER AND SEWER LATERAL MAINTENANCE.
§ 14-2.1. Maintenance of sewerage, water mains and trunk lines.
[Ord. No. 4-28-69; 1967 Code § 78-1]
The repair, maintenance, replacement and general upkeep of sewerage
and water mains and trunk lines shall be repaired, maintained, replaced
and generally kept up by the person, corporation, entity or municipal
subdivision or subagency operating any and all sewage-collection or
treatment facilities or water supply or system within the Township utilizing
the main or trunk lines situate in any roadway, cartway, right-of-way or
lands dedicated unto the public for the purpose of public travel at the
expense of the person, corporation or municipal subdivision or subagency
operating the same.
§ 14-2.2. Maintenance of laterals. [Ord. No. 4-28-69; 1967 Code
§ 78-2]
Laterals shall be maintained by the operator of any sewage-collection
system or water supply or system or such portions thereof as shall be situate
in any roadway, cartway, right-of-way or lands dedicated unto the public
for the purpose of public travel. The maintenance of laterals not within the
previously described area shall be at the expense and liability of the users
of the laterals.
§ 14-2.3. Method of enforcement. [Ord. No. 4-28-69; Ord. No.
0-1-71; 1967 Code § 78-3; New]
for local improvements, to bear the same rate of interest, and be
collected and enforced in the same manner as are installments for
assessments on local improvements.
i. Rules and regulations. The Township Manager or the designated officer
of the Township may promulgate such rules and regulations as may be
necessary in furtherance of, and to effect the purpose and objectives set
forth in this section. Such rules and regulations shall not be of effect
unless notice of the proposed adoption is advertised at least five days
prior to the date set by the Township Manager or the designated officer.
§ 14-1.14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-2.3
1:305
§ 14-3. SEWER CHARGES.
§ 14-3.1. County Club Estates. [Ord. No. 2-13-56; Ord. No. 5-14-62;
Ord. No. 0-4-74; 1967 Code §§ 63-13—63-16]
a. For any and all violations of the duty to keep in good repair by a person,
corporation, entity or municipal subagency operating all sewagecollection
or treatment facilities or water supply systems within the
Township which utilize mains or trunk lines situated in any roadway,
cartway, right-of-way or land dedicated unto the public for the purpose
of public travel, the Mayor is hereby authorized and vested with the
power to sign and file a complaint, in his official capacity as Mayor, with
the Superior Court of the State of New Jersey, citing such violation, to
enforce compliance with the provisions of this section. The same
remedy shall be available for violation of the duty to maintain laterals
heretofore described in this section or any other provisions hereof.
b. Exclusive of the remedy described in paragraph a., any person, firm or
corporation violating the provisions of this section may, upon
conviction, be subject to the general penalty established in Section 1-5
of this Code.
a. Rents and charges. All persons, firms, corporations, associations and
organizations whose houses, buildings or properties are connected or
which may hereafter be connected with the sanitary sewer of Country
Club Estates, shall pay the rents hereinafter prescribed as follows:
1. The annual sewer rental for each house or other building
connected with the sewers shall be the sum of $85 per annum,
payable in quarterly installments of $21.25 each on the 15th-day of
March, June, September and December.
2. In any special cases not contemplated in the above schedule of
rates or not clearly defined therein, the Township Council is hereby
authorized to establish special rates or rentals under such
schedules or formulas as the Township Council may deem
necessary to keep and maintain its sewage system on a selfliquidating
basis and to make, execute and deliver such contracts
or agreements with such special consumers as the circumstances
may required.
3. All unpaid sewer rentals or installments thereof shall be subject to
interest of 3% for any payment made after its due date.
b. Collection of rentals. The collection of rentals shall be made by the
Township Tax Collector, or such other persons as the Township Council
shall designate, of the Township who shall have powers to make such
regulations and establish such systems of billing and collection as may
be in the best interests of the proper management of the sewage
system.
§ 14-2.3 § 14-3.1
1:306
§ 14-4. MUNICIPAL UTILITIES AUTHORITY.
§ 14-4.1. Creation. [Ord. No. 6-30-60; 1967 Code § 40-1]
Pursuant to the provisions of the County and Municipal Water and Sewage
Disposal Authorities Law, P.L. 1957, c.183, p. 634 § 1 (N.J.S.A. 40:14B-1), of
the State of New Jersey, there is hereby created a public body corporate and
politic under the name and style of "Township Municipal Utilities Authority."
§ 14-4.2. Powers and duties. [Ord. No. 6-30-60; 1967 Code § 40-2]
The Township Municipal Utilities Authority hereby created is a utilities
authority as contemplated and provided by the County and Municipal Water
and Sewage Disposal Authorities Law and shall have and exercise all of
the powers and perform all of the duties provided for by the County and
Municipal Water and Sewage Disposal Authorities Law and any other
statutes heretofore enacted and applicable thereto.
§ 14-4.3. Membership. [Ord. No. 6-30-60; Ord. No. 12-29-60; 1967
Code § 40-3A; Ord. No. 0-23-83; Ord. No. 0-2-87]
The Township Municipal Utilities Authority shall consist of five members
and two alternates, and the members and alternate members shall be
appointed by the Township Council. The terms of the members shall be for
periods set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:14B-4.
§ 14-4.4. Compensation. [Ord. No. 6-30-60; Ord. No. 12-29-60; Ord.
No. 0-5-74; Ord. No. 0-10-78; 1967 Code § 40-38; Ord. No. 0-23-83]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:14B-17, the members and alternate members of the
Township Municipal Utilities Authority shall receive as compensation for
their services such sums as the Township Municipal Utilities Authority may
determine, but the compensation shall not exceed the annual sums below
mentioned for the various members:
c. Payment; charges to become lien. That all rates, rentals and charges
established herein shall be payable to the Township Clerk or such other
person as the Township Council shall designate as specified herein and
shall be and remain until paid a lien upon the premises served by such
connection the same as all other taxes and municipal charges upon the
real estate and the Township shall have the same remedy for the
collection of the rates, rentals and other charges with interest, costs
and penalties as fixed by the Township, as the Township has under the
laws of this State for the collection of taxes and other municipal liens
upon real estate.
d. Subject to payment. The owners of all lands and premises served by the
sanitary sewer system aforesaid shall be liable for the payment of such
rates, rentals and charges regardless of the fact that the lands and
premises may be occupied by some other persons, films, corporations,
associations or organizations.
§ 14-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-4.4
1:307
Position Compensation
Chairman $2,000
Vice Chairman $1,600
Secretary-
Treasurer
$1,650
Authority
Members
$1,500
Authority alternate members may receive the sum of $50 per meeting for
any meeting in which they are required to act on behalf of a regular
authority member.
§ 14-4.5. Appointing of employees. [Ord. No. 6-30-60; Ord. No.
12-29-60; 1967 Code § 40-3C; Ord. No. 0-23-83]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:14B-18, the Township Municipal Utilities Authority
may appoint a Secretary, an Executive Director, a Chief Engineer, a Solicitor
and such agents and employees as it may require, and the Township
Municipal Utilities Authority in making appointments and employments
shall determine the qualifications, terms of office, duties, retainers and/or
compensations of all such appointees or employees.
§ 14-4.6. Alternate members. [Ord. No. 0-23-83 § 1]
"Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2" shall serve during the absence or
disqualification of any regular member or members. In the event of any
absence of disqualification of any regular member or members, "Alternate
No. 1" during the months of February through July, shall be initially
designated to serve and vote during any such absence or disqualification;
"Alternate No. 2" shall be initially designated to serve and vote during the
absence or disqualification of any regular member or members during the
months of August through January; provided however, that in the event
more than one regular member is absent or disqualified for any meeting or
meetings, "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2" may act in their stead and
vote.
The terms of appointments and the powers of alternate members shall be as
set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:14B-4.
§ 14-4.7. Copy filed with secretary of state. [Ord. No. 6-30-60; 1967
Code § 40-4]
A copy of this chapter, duly certified by the Township Clerk, shall forthwith
be filed by the Township Clerk in the office of the Secretary of State of the
State of New Jersey.
Chapter 15
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
§ 14-4.4 § 15-1
1:308
§ 15-1. PURPOSE. [Ord. No. 0-19-82 § 1]
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designated to:
§ 15-2. METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES. [Ord. No.
0-19-82 § 2]
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
a. To protect human life and health;
b. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
c. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
d. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
e. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges
located in floodplains;
f. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize
future flood blight areas;
g. To ensure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in an
area of special flood hazard; and
h. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
a. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
b. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
c. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of
flood waters;
d. Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage; and
e. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 15-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-3
1:309
§ 15-3. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 0-19-82 § 3; Ord. No. 0-12-88 § 1]
As used in this section:
APPEAL — A request for a review of the interpretation of any provision of
this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO zone on a Community's
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three
feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist; or the path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate; and where velocity flow may be evident.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building where its floor subgrade is below
level on all sides.
BREAK AWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support
of the building and is intended through its design and construction to
collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the
elevation portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings and other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations located
within the area of special flood hazard.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building (i) built in the case of a
building in an area of special flood hazard to have the top of the elevated
floor wherein the case of the building in a coastal high hazard area to have
the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the elevated floor
elevated above the ground level by means of piling, columns (posted and
piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water and (ii) adequate
anchoring as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a
flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In an area of special flood
hazard "elevated building" also includes a building otherwise meeting the
definition of "elevated building" even though the lower area is enclosed by
means of break away walls.
FLOOD OR FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation or normally dry land areas from:
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the Township.
a. The overflow of inland or tidal waters or
The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff or surface waters from
any source.
b.
§ 15-3 § 15-3
1:310
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — The official report provided to the Township
in which the Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles,
as well as the Flood Boundary-Floodway Map and the water surface
elevation of the base flood.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevations more than 0.2
feet.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area including
basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure useable solely for
the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than
a basement is not considered a building lowest floor provided that such
enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation in other
applicable nonelevation design requirements.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure transportable in one or more
sections which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation, then connected to the required utilities.
For floodplain management purposes the term "manufactured homes" also
includes park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on
a site for greater than 180 consecutive days. For insurance purposes the
term "manufactured home" does not include park trailers, travel trailers
and other similar vehicles.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME
SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two
or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the "start of construction"
commenced on or after the effective date of this chapter.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — A first placement of permanent construction
of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings or any work
beyond the state of excavation. Permanent construction does not include
land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling, nor does it include
the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation
for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary
forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory
buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not
as part of the main structure. For a structure without a basement or poured
footings, the "start of construction" includes the first permanent framing or
assembly of the structure or any part thereof on its piling or foundation.
START OF CONSTRUCTION (FOR OTHER THAN NEW CONSTRUCTION
OR SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENTS UNDER THE COASTAL BARRIER
RESOURCES ACT. (P.L. 97-248)) — Includes substantial improvement and
means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start
of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site such as
the pouring of a slab or footing, the installation of piles, the construction
§ 15-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-3
1:311
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or sidewalks, nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footing, piers, or foundations or the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building that is principally above
ground.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the
market value of the structure either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this
chapter which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by
this chapter where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary
hardship.
§ 15-4. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
§ 15-4.1. Land to which this chapter applies. [Ord. No. 0-19-82 § 4A]
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction and boundaries of the Township.
§ 15-4.2. Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
[Ord. No. 0-19-82 § 4B]
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance
Administration as shown in Flood Boundary and Floodway Map and Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated November 17, 1982 and the Flood
Insurance Study dated May 17, 982 are hereby adopted by reference and
a. Before the improvement or repair is started, or
If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the
damage occurred.
For purposes of this definition "substantial improvement" is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor,
or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not
the alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.
The term does not, however, include either:
a. Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with
existing State or local health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living
conditions, or
b. Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
b.
§ 15-3 § 15-4.2
1:312
declared to be a part of this chapter. The Map and Study are on file at the
Township Building, 1011 Cooper Street, Deptford, New Jersey.
§ 15-4.3. Penalties for noncompliance. [Ord. No. 0-19-82 § 4C: New]
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Any person who violates this chapter or
fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof,
be subject to the General Penalty established in Section 1-5 of this Code.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Township from obtaining
injunctive relief or, any other relief allowed pursuant to law to prevent or
remedy any violation.
§ 15-4.4. Abrogation and greater restrictions. [Ord. No. 0-19-82
§ 4D]
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where these
regulations and other ordinances, easements, covenants or deed
restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.
§ 15-4.5. Interpretation. [Ord. No. 0-19-82 § 4E]
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
§ 15-4.6. Warning and disclaimer of liability. [Ord. No. 0-19-82 § 4F]
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special flood
hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding
or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of
the Township, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance
Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 15-5. ADMINISTRATION.
a. Considered as minimum requirements;
b. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body;
c. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
State Statutes.
§ 15-4.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-5.1
1:313
§ 15-5.1. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 0-19-82 § 5A; Ord. No. 0-12-88 § 2]
The Construction Code Officer, as provided in Section 5-6 hereof, shall be
responsible for the administration of this chapter. A development permit
shall be obtained before any construction or development begins within
any area of special flood hazard. Applications for permit for construction or
development within any area of special flood hazard shall be made on forms
furnished by the Township, and shall be accompanied by the following:
§ 15-6. CONSTRUCTION CODE OFFICIAL.
§ 15-6.1. Designation. [Ord. No. 0-19-82 § 6]
The Construction Code Official is hereby appointed to administer and
implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit
applications in accordance with its provisions.
§ 15-6.2. Duties and responsibilities. [Ord. No. 0-19-82 § 7]
In review of application and plans, the duties of the Construction Code
Official shall include, but are not limited to the following:
a. Five copies of a true and accurate plot plan, drawn to a scale not less
than one inch equaling 100 feet, with contour lines at intervals of not
more than two feet, showing the exact size, shape, location and
elevation of existing and proposed building and structures and any
proposed fill or regradings; the exact dimensions and acreage of each
lot or plot to be built upon or otherwise used; the location of the
floodway and flood hazard area limits; the locations, layout and
elevation of existing and proposed parking areas, driveway drainage,
sewer and water facilities and connections, plantings, seedings,
screenings, fences, signs, streets and curbings, elevation in relation to
mean sea level to the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures;
and elevations in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has
been floodproofed, shall be shown. Such other information as shall be
reasonably required for an elevation of the effect of the development
under flood control shall be submitted;
b. Certification by a professional engineer or architect registered in New
Jersey that the floodproofing method for any nonresidential structure
meet the floodproofing criteria herein established;
c. Description to the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
a. Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of the Township have been satisfied.
b. Review all development permits to determine that all necessary permits
have been obtained from those Federal, State or local government
agencies from which prior approval is required.
§ 15-5.1 § 15-6.2
1:314
c. Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway,
assure that the encroachment provisions are met.
d. When base flood elevation floodway data has not been provided in
accordance with subsection 15-4.2, Basis for Establishing the Areas of
Special Flood Hazard, the Construction Official shall obtain, review and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available
from any Federal, State or other source in order to administer
specification standards, residential construction and specification
standards, and nonresidential construction included in this chapter.
e. Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of
the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially
improved structures, and whether or not the structure contains a
basement.
f. For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures verify and
record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level); and maintain
the flood-proofing certifications required herein.
g. Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of
this chapter.
h. If plans involve the alteration of watercourses, notify adjacent
communities and the New Jersey State Department of Environmental
Protection prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and
submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance
Administration, and require that maintenance is provided within the
altered or relocated portion of the watercourse so that the flood
carrying capacity is not diminished.
i. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where
there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual
field conditions).
In cases of doubt or uncertainty as to the exact limit of the floodway
or flood hazard area in a proposed development, the Township
Engineer may, upon the application and with the consent of the
landowner and at the expense of the landowner determine the precise
location of a floodway or a flood hazard limit by close inspection, field
survey or other appropriate methods and cause the scene to be
marked on the ground, notifying the landowner, the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, the Construction Code
Official, and the Planning Board of the results thereof. The person
contesting the location of the boundaries shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided herein.
§ 15-6.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-6.3
1:315
§ 15-6.3. Permit issuance. [Ord. No. 0-19-82 § 8]
After a review of plans and upon review of any recommendations and
comments from the Township Engineer or the Environmental Commission,
the Construction Code Official shall:
§ 15-7. VARIANCES AND APPEALS.
§ 15-7.1. Variances. [Ord. No. 0-19-82 § 9A]
The Deptford Township Planning Board as established by the Township shall
hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements
of this chapter. The Planning Board shall hear and decide appeals when it
is alleged there is an error in any requirements, decision or determination
made by the Construction Code Official in the enforcement and
administration of this chapter.
§ 15-7.2. Standards of variances. [Ord. No. 0-19-82 § 9B]
In passing upon such applications, the Planning Board shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors and standards specified in other
sections of this chapter, and:
a. Approve the application and issue the development permit if all
Township, County, State and Federal requirements have been met.
b. Advise the applicant in writing that the permits can be issued only upon
revision of plans to comply with specified requirements.
c. Advise the applicant in writing that a variance from special specified
requirements must be obtained, in accordance with Section 15-7
hereof, or
d. Disapprove the plans for reasons of noncompliance specified in writing.
a. The danger that materials may be swept into other lands to the injury of
others;
b. The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
c. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
d. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the
community;
e. The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
f. The availability of alternate locations, not subject to flooding or erosion
damage, for the proposed use;
g. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
§ 15-6.3 § 15-7.2
1:316
§ 15-7.3. Conditions for variances. [Ord. No. 0-19-82 § 9C]
h. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
i. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and
emergency vehicles;
j. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate or rise and sediment
transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and
k. The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets
and bridges.
Upon consideration of the above factors and the purposes of this
chapter, the Planning Board may attach such conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of
this chapter.
The Planning Board shall maintain the records of all appeal actions,
including technical information, and report all variances to the
Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
a. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, provided items 1 through 11
enumerated in subsection 15-7.2, have been fully considered. As the lot
size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification required
for issuing the variance increases.
b. Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic
Places of the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the
procedures set forth in the remainder of this section.
c. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if the
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result in
more than 0.2 of a foot.
d. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
e. Variances shall only be issued upon:
1. A showing of good and sufficient cause;
2. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant, and
3. A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
§ 15-7.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-7.3
1:317
§ 15-7.4. Appeals. [Ord. No. 0-19-82 § 9D]
If any person shall be aggrieved by the action of the Planning Board
or the Construction Code Official, an appeal in writing to the Township
Council may be taken within 10 days after the date of such final action.
The Township Council shall fix and notify the applicant of a time and place
for a public hearing on an appeal, and the applicant shall cause notice of
such hearing to be published in a newspaper circulating in the Township at
least 10 days prior to the hearing. All parties of interest shall be afforded
an opportunity to be heard. After such hearing, the Township Council may
affirm or reverse the action of the Planning Board or the Construction Code
Official and shall state its findings and reasonings for its actions, a written
copy of such Council action shall be given to the applicant.
§ 15-8. STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.
§ 15-8.1. General standards. [Ord. No. 0-19-82 § 10A]
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.
f. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest flood
elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from
the reduced lowest floor elevation.
a. Anchoring.
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure.
2. All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include,
but are not limited to, use of over the top or frame ties to ground
anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable State and
local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
b. Construction materials and methods. All new construction and
substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and
utility equipment resistant to flood damage, and by methods and
practices which minimize flood damage.
c. Utilities.
1. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems.
§ 15-7.3 § 15-8.1
1:318
§ 15-8.2. Specific standards. [Ord. No. 0-19-82 § 10B; Ord. No.
0-12-88 § 6]
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in subsection 15-4.2 (Basis for Establishing the
Areas of Special Flood Hazard) or in subsection 15-6.2d, the following
standards are required:
2. New and replacement sanitary sewer systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into flood waters.
3. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
4. Electrical, heating, ventilations, plumbing and air conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within
the components during conditions of flooding.
d. Subdivision proposals.
1. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
2. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;
3. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage; and
4. Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development which contain at least
50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
a. Residential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated to or above base flood elevation.
b. Nonresidential construction. New construction or substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential
structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated one foot above the base flood elevation; or, together with
attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be floodproofed so that below
the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components
having the capacity of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads
and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect
shall certify that the standards of this paragraph are satisfied. Such
certification shall be provided to the Construction Code Official.
§ 15-8.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-8.2
1:319
§ 15-8.3. Floodways. [Ord. No. 0-19-82 § 10C; Ord. No. 0-12-88 § 7]
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in subsection
15-4.2 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an
extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry
debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions
apply:
§ 15-9. ELEVATION REFERENCE MARKS.
The reference of bench names for this chapter as shown on the Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map, along with Insurance Rate Map, shall be:
c. For all new construction and substantial improvements, fully enclosed
areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall be
designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for
meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings having a total net area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall
be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped
with screens, louvers, or other covering or devices provided that they
permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
a. The prohibition of encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other development unless a technical
evaluation demonstrates that encroachment shall not result in any
increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood
discharge.
b. If paragraph a. above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction
provisions of this section.
c. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data
has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than 0.2 of a foot at any
point.
d. Mobilehomes except within a mobilehome park or an existing
mobilehome subdivision are expressly prohibited.
§ 15-8.2 § 15-9
1:320
Reference
Mark
Elevation in Feet
(NGVD)1 Description of Location
RM 1 23.08 Chiseled square out in corner of
north wall of east abutment on
New Jersey Turnpike bridge over
Big Timber Creek.
RM 2 11.76 PK nail set in top of timber
walkway at northeast corner of
abutment of Almonesson Road
Bridge over South Branch Big
Timber Creek.
RM 3 18.11 PK nail set in top of north end of
timber walkway at northwest
corner of north abutment of
Lower Landing Road over South
Branch Big Timber Creek.
NOTE:
1 National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929.
Chapter 16
RESERVED
Chapter 17
SOIL AND SOIL REMOVAL
§ 17-1. SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL.
§ 17-1.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 0-24-74; Ord. No. 0-31-76; 1967
Code § 67-1]
As used in this section:
APPLICANT — A person, partnership, corporation, public agency or other
entity requesting permission to engage in land disturbance activity.
APPROVED PLAN — Plan to control soil erosion and sedimentation which
has been approved by the Township Engineer.
CRITICAL AREA — A sediment-producing area severely eroded or
endangered by severe erosion.
EROSION — Detachment and movement of soil, rock or other mineral or
organic fragments by water, wind, ice and gravity.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A detailed plan in
accordance with subsection 17-1.4 hereof indicating necessary land
§ 15-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-1.1
1:321
treatment measures, including a schedule of the timing for their installation
or application, which will effectively minimize erosion and sedimentation.
Such measures shall be at least equivalent to the standards and regulations
contained herein, or established by the Gloucester County Soil Conservation
District if not covered specifically by this section.
EXCAVATION OR CUT — The result of any act by which soil or rock is cut
into, excavated, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced or relocated.
FARM CONSERVATION PLAN — A plan which provides for use of land
for agricultural purposes, which plan includes consideration of methods to
prevent further deterioration of soil and water resources.
GLOUCESTER COUNTY SOIL CONSERVATION DISTRICT — A
governmental subdivision of this State, which encompasses this
municipality, organized in accordance with the provisions of Title 4 of the
New Jersey Revised Statutes.
LAND — Any soil-bearing ground structure, including marshes, swamps,
drainageways and areas not permanently covered by water within the
municipality.
LAND DISTURBANCE — Any activity, including but not limited to clearing,
grading, transporting or filling, which causes land to be exposed to or
endangered by erosion.
MULCHING — The application of plant residue or other organic materials
to the land surface to conserve moisture, hold soil in place and aid in
establishing plant cover.
PERMIT — A certificate issued to perform work under this section.
SEDIMENT — Soil, rock or other mineral or organic fragments being or
having been removed from their site of origin by air, water, ice or gravity as
a product of erosion.
SEDIMENT BASIN — A pond or other retention facility built at suitable
locations to retain sediment.
SITE — Any plot parcel or tract of land.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and/or organic material of any origin.
STANDARDS — The Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in
New Jersey, as promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee.
STRIPPING — Any land use activity which significantly disturbs vegetated
or otherwise stabilized soil surface including but not limited to clearing and
grubbing operations.
§ 17-1.2. Site plan required; permit. [Ord. No. 0-24-74; Ord. No.
0-3-76; 1967 Code 67-2]
a. No site shall be disturbed by any person, partnership, corporation,
public agency or entity within this municipality unless an application
has been submitted to the Township Planning Board, Township
Environmental Commission and Township Engineer together with a
§ 17-1.1 § 17-1.2
1:322
§ 17-1.3. Subdivisions. [Ord. No. 0-24-74; 1967 Code § 67-3]
All applications for preliminary, or final if no application is made for
preliminary, subdivision approval shall be accompanied by an application
for a land disturbance permit pursuant to the terms hereof, which permit, if
granted shall be conditioned upon final approval of the subdivision.
§ 17-1.4. Data required. [Ord No. 0-24-74; 1967 Code § 67-4]
The applicant must submit a separate soil erosion and sediment control plan
for each site and, in the event that the application is made in conjunction
with an application for a subdivision, there shall be a separate plan for each
proposed final section shown on the tentative plot. The plan shall contain
the following:
plan to provide for soil erosion and sediment control for such site
consistent with this section. A land disturbance permit will be issued
by the Township Department of Public Works, except as hereinafter
exempted, after site plan or subdivision approval by the Planning
Board.
b. Such review and approval shall be made within a period or 30 days of
submission of a complete application unless by mutual agreement in
writing between the municipality and the applicant, this period is
extended for an additional 30 days. Failure of the municipality to make
a decision within such a period or such extension thereof shall
constitute certification.
c. The applicant shall be provided with written notice of such decision by
the Township Engineer or other authorized municipal agent. A copy of
such decision, including the name of the applicant, the site location by
street address and block and lot number and the proposed land use,
shall be sent to the Gloucester County Soil Conservation District. The
Township shall also make available such other information as may be
required by the District.
a. Location and description of existing natural and man-made features on
and surrounding the site, including general topography and soil
characteristics and a copy of the Soil Conservation District soil survey,
where available.
b. Location and description of proposed changes to the site.
c. Measures for soil erosion and sediment control, which must meet or
exceed standards and specifications set forth herein or, in the absence
of such standards, in the standards and specifications for soil erosion
and sediment control adopted by the Gloucester County Soil
Conservation District. Such standards and specifications shall be on file
at the office of the Township Clerk.
§ 17-1.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-1.4
1:323
§ 17-1.5. Issuance of permit. [x Ord. No. 0-24-74; 1967 Code § 67-5]
Upon a determination by the Planning Board, Environmental Commission
and the Township Engineer that all requirements of this section have been
complied with and upon payment of all fees to be paid hereunder, the
Township Engineer shall issue a permit to the applicant, with or without
conditions. Each permit shall contain a reasonable time limit for all work to
be performed thereunder to be completed.
§ 17-1.6. Regulations and standards. [Ord. No. 0-24-74; Ord. No.
0-31-76; 1967 Code § 67-6]
d. A schedule of the sequence of installation or application of planned
erosion and sediment control measures as related to the progress of the
project, including starting and completion dates.
e. All proposed revisions of data required shall be submitted for approval.
f. A map showing the contours (at two-foot intervals, except where slopes
are 3% or less and then one-foot intervals are required) of the land prior
to disturbance and the proposed contours to be created, prepared in
accordance with the standard engineering practices, now can be
completed.
a. Control measures shall apply to all aspects of the proposed site
development involving land disturbance and shall be in operation
during all stages of the disturbance activity.
b. The following principles shall apply to the soil erosion and sediment
control plan:
1. Stripping of vegetation, grading of other land disturbing activities
shall be done in a manner which will minimize soil erosion.
2. Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained and
protected.
3. The extent of the disturbed area and the duration of its exposure
shall be kept insofar as reasonable within narrow limits.
4. Either temporary seeding, mulching or other suitable stabilization
measures shall be used to protect exposed critical areas during
construction or other types of land disturbance.
5. Satisfactory provisions shall be made for drainage to accommodate
increased runoff resulting from modified soil and surface
conditions, during and after development or disturbance.
6. Water runoff shall be minimized and retained on site wherever
possible to facilitate groundwater recharge.
7. Sediment shall be retained on site to the maximum extent feasible.
§ 17-1.4 § 17-1.6
1:324
§ 17-1.7. Maintenance of control measures. [Ord. No. 0-24-74; 1967
Code § 67-1]
All necessary soil erosion and sediment control measures installed or
applied under this section shall be adequately maintained for two years
after completion of the requirements of the approved plan. The Township
Engineer shall give the applicant, upon request, a certificate indicating
the date on which the measures called for in the approved plans were
completed.
§ 17-1.8. Bonds. [Ord. No. 0-24-74; 1967 Code § 67-8]
8. Diversions, sediment basins and similar required structures shall
be installed prior to any on-site grading or disturbance, except as
necessary to the construction of said structures.
9. In order to provide suitable conditions for growth of vegetation and
to prevent the acidifying of drainage water in those areas underlain
with acid formations with a pH below 4.0 the following
requirements shall be met:
(a) Grading shall be such that a minimum of acid formation shall
be exposed.
(b) All exposed material shall be covered with a minimum of one
foot of nonacid soil suitable for plant growth plus six inches of
topsoil.
(c) Brooks and ditches with acid formation exposed shall be
surfaced with traprock or other suitable material to prevent
water from flowing in contact with the acid material.
(d) Ponds with exposed underwater acid formation shall be treated
with lime and phosphate as needed to establish pH, and
provisions shall be made for neutralization maintenance as
required.
10. In order to provide suitable conditions for the growth and
maintenance of suitable vegetation and to avoid unstable
conditions and other undesirable effects on buildings and grounds
in those areas of a high-water table, proper drainage shall be
provided to ensure that cyclic high-water-table levels will be
eliminated or the undesirable effects on the buildings and grounds
avoided.
a. In the event that certain work required under the permit cannot be
performed within the time set for completion in the permit due to
inclement weather or other temporary conditions and if the Township
Engineer determines that such work reasonably may or should be
postponed until a later date in order to prevent hardship and to carry
out the purposes of this section, a cash bond in form approved by the
Municipal Attorney in an amount equal to the cost of the work as
§ 17-1.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-1.8
1:325
§ 17-1.9. Fees. [Ord. No. 0-24-74; Ord. No. 0-7-80; 1967 Code
§ 67-9]
§ 17-1.10. Violations and penalties; abatement of violation. [Ord.
No. 0-24-74; Ord. No. 0-31-76; 1967 Code § 67-10]
determined by the Township Engineer may be deposited with the
Township to guarantee performance. Permission to postpone the
required work shall set forth the date by which the work shall be
completed, which shall in no event exceed six months from the date
permission to postpone is granted. Failure to complete the required
work within the specified time shall entitle the Township to use the
money deposited to complete the work, returning any unused portion
to the applicant when maintenance bonds have been posted.
b. Prior to acceptance by the Township Engineer of the work performed
under the permit, the applicant shall submit a cash maintenance bond
in form approved by the Township Attorney in an amount equal to 15%
of the cost of the work as determined by the Township Engineer, which
the bond shall guarantee proper maintenance for a period of two years.
a. The applicant shall pay to the Township at the same time the application
is submitted a fee of $85 per acre for each acre or part thereof up to five
acres; $70 per acre for each additional acre or part thereof in excess of
five acres and up to 25 acres; $60 per acre for each additional acre or
part thereof in excess of 25 acres and up to 100 acres; and $50 per acre
for each additional acre or part thereof in excess of 100 acres.
b. All fees received shall be placed in an escrow account to be established
and administered by the Planning Board. Sums not utilized in review
and inspection processes shall be returned to the applicant. If
additional sums, are deemed necessary, the applicant shall be notified
of the required additional amount and shall add such sum to the escrow.
a. No Certificate of Occupancy for a project shall be issued unless there
has been compliance with the provisions of a certified plan for
permanent measures to control soil erosion and sedimentation. A
formal report of such compliance must be filed with the municipal agent
authorized to issue Certificates of Occupancy. A copy of this report shall
be sent to the local Soil Conservation District.
b. If any person violates any of the provisions of this section or any
standard promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this section or fails
to comply with the provisions of a certified plan, the municipality or the
district may institute a civil action in the Superior Court for injunctive
relief to prohibit and prevent such violation or violations, and the Court
may proceed in a summary manner. Any person who violates any of the
provisions of this section of fails to comply with the provisions of a
certified plan shall be liable to a penalty of not less than $25 nor more
than $3,000 to be collected in a summary proceeding pursuant to the
Penalty Enforcement Law (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-1 et seq.). The Superior Court,
§ 17-1.8 § 17-1.10
1:326
§ 17-1.11. Exempt activities. [Ord. No. 0-24-74; Ord. No. 0-31-76;
1967 Code § 67-11]
The following activities are specifically exempt from this section:
§ 17-1.12. Inspection and enforcement. [Ord. No. 0-24-74; 1967
Code § 67-12]
The requirements of this section shall be enforced by the Township
Engineer, who shall also inspect or require adequate inspection of the work.
If the Engineer finds existing conditions not as stated in the applicant's
erosion and sediment control plan, he may refuse to approve further work
and may require necessary erosion and sedimentation control measures to
be promptly installed or applied and/or may seek other penalties as herein
provided.
§ 17-1.13. Appeals. [Ord. No. 0-24-74; 1967 Code § 67-13]
Appeals from decisions under this section may be made to the Township
Council in writing within 10 days from the date of such decision. The
appellant shall be entitled to a hearing before the Township Council within
45 days after the date of its next regular meeting following the filing of the
appeal.
§ 17-2. SOIL REMOVAL.
§ 17-2.1. Permission required. [Ord. No. 9-9-57; 1967 Code § 66-1]
No person shall excavate or otherwise remove soil or earth for sale or use
other than on the premises from which the soil or earth shall be taken
in connection with the construction or alteration of a building on such
premises and excavation or grading incidental thereto, without first having
procured permission therefor from the Mayor and Township Council.
§ 17-2.2. Filing of application and map. [Ord. No. 9-9-57; 1967 Code
§ 66-2]
The Mayor and Township Council shall not consider any application for
removal of soil or earth from the premises, for sale or otherwise, unless
and until the owner of the premises shall first file with the Township
Clerk an application requesting such permission, together with a map of
the premises showing the contour lines and proposed contour lines and
County Court, County District Court and Municipal Court shall have
jurisdiction to enforce the Penalty Enforcement Law. If the violation
is of a continuing nature, each day during which it continues shall
constitute an additional separate and distinct offense.
a. Land Disturbance occurring upon any site not requiring any submission
or application to the Planning Board for subdivision approval, site plan
approval or any other required approval.
§ 17-1.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-2.2
1:327
proposed contour grades resulting from such intended removal of soil or
earth in relation to the topography of the premises. The proposed contour
lines and proposed grades shall be subject to the inspection and approval
of the Mayor and Township Council. No such permission for soil or earth
removal shall be issued until such map has been approved by the Mayor and
Township Council.
§ 17-2.3. Hearing; factors to be considered. [Ord. No. 9-9-57; Ord.
No. 0-8-72; Ord. No. 0-15-74; 1967 Code § 66-3]
a. Request for hearing.
1. Upon written request for a hearing made by the applicant to the
Mayor and Township Council, an opportunity to be heard shall be
granted within 30 days thereafter. The Mayor and Township
Council in considering and reviewing the application and in
arriving at its decision, shall be guided by and take into
consideration the public health, safety and general welfare, and
particular consideration shall be given to the following factors:
(a) Soil erosion by water and wind.
(b) Drainage.
(c) Soil fertility.
(d) Lateral support slopes and grades of abutting streets and
lands.
(e) Land values and uses.
(f) Such other factors as may bear upon or relate to the
coordinated, adjusted and harmonious physical development of
the Township.
2. The Township Council may, where it deems necessary in order to
evaluate the aforesaid factors, require the applicant to perform onsite
test borings and such other related testing as may be required
and to make such modifications of the plan or map to be filed as
required pursuant to subsection 17-2.2 hereof.
b. If after examining the application and the map provided for in
subsection 17-2.2, and after the hearing in the event a hearing is
requested by the applicant, the Mayor and Township Council shall be of
the opinion that the proposed soil removal will not create conditions
inimical to the public health, welfare and safety, and will not result in
the creating of any sharp declivities, pits or depressions, soil erosion or
fertility problems, depressed land values, nor create any drainage,
sewerage problems or other conditions of danger, permission to remove
the soil shall be granted, for a period not to exceed one year. Any
conditions of approval shall be duly noted in the permit.
§ 17-2.2 § 17-2.4
1:328
§ 17-2.4. Conduct of operations. [Ord. No. 9-9-57; 1967 Code § 66-4]
If permission to remove the soil shall be granted, the owner person in
charge shall so conduct the operations that there shall be no sharp
declivities, pits or depressions, and in such a manner that the area shall
be properly leveled off, cleared of debris, and graded to conform with the
contour lines and grades as approved by the Mayor and Township Council.
§ 17-2.5. Performance bond; cash surety; liability insurance. [Ord.
No. 9-9-57; Ord. No. 0-15-74; 1967 Code § 66-5]
§ 17-2.6. Conformance required. [Ord. No. 9-9-57; Ord. No. 0-8-72;
Ord. No. 0-15-74; 1967 Code § 66-6]
a. Before any permit or permission for soil or earth removal shall be
granted or issued, the owner or applicant shall file with the Mayor and
Township Council a bond, in form and with surety acceptable to the
Township, in such amount as in the opinion of the Mayor and Township
Council shall be sufficient to ensure the faithful performance of the
work to be undertaken pursuant to the permission granted by the
Mayor and Township Council pursuant to the provisions of this section.
b. In the event that the surety bond shall not encompass terms and
provisions to assure highway safety cleanup by the applicant during the
course of each operation, the applicant shall be required to post with
the Township Comptroller the sum of $500 to be held in escrow by the
Township for the purpose of guaranteeing appropriate surety to effect
such cleanup in the event of the applicant's noncompliance or failure to
maintain reasonable maintenance of the highway from debris
emanating from the site. The cash surety shall be maintained during the
term of the soil removal permit.
c. The applicant shall evidence liability insurance in sums not less than
$100,000/$300,000 per accident. Such insurance shall indemnify the
Township from the operations of the applicant. A certificate or copy of
the policy shall be delivered to the Township Clerk for filing.
a. No excavation shall be made and no soil shall be removed under the
provisions of this section unless a permit therefor shall have been first
obtained as provided herein, and no excavation shall be made and no
soil shall be removed except in conformity with the provisions of this
section. The permit shall contain the name and address of a person
residing within the State of New Jersey upon whom lawful process may
be served.
b. Subsequent to the issuance of the soil removal permit, the applicant,
prior to the commencing of each soil removal operation in accordance
with the permit, shall be required to submit the following to the
Township Engineer for approval:
§ 17-2.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-2.6
1:329
§ 17-2.7. Violations and penalties. [New]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the General Penalty
established in Section 1-5 of this Code.
Chapter 18
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
§ 18-1. GARBAGE COLLECTION.
§ 18-1.1. Title. [Ord. No. 0-12-72; 1967 Code § 55-1]
This section shall be known as the "Refuse and Garbage Collection
Regulation of the Township."
§ 18-1.2. Definitions and word usage. [Ord. No. 0-12-72; 1967 Code
§ 55-2; Ord. 14-98 § 55-3]
For the purpose of this section, the terms used herein are defined as follows:
BULKY AND INDUSTRIAL WASTE — All waste generated by any industrial
or manufacturing concern of any kind whatsoever and all bulky waste
as defined by N.J.A.C. 7:26-1.4, which shall include but not be limited to
the following: all items which exceed the size or weight requirements of
subsection 18-1.4b, tree trunks or large limbs or stumps, auto bodies or any
part thereof, demolition or construction materials, appliances, furniture and
drums.
DWELLING UNIT — A structure, or an entirely self-contained portion
thereof, which is designed for and occupied principally as a place of
residence for one housekeeping unit. A dwelling unit must be suitable for
year round occupancy and must contain facilities for cooking, sleeping,
1. An operation schedule which shall set forth the approximate length
and hours of operation and the section of the site to be excavated,
as well as an appropriate schedule of repair and restoration work
(such as grading, seeding and fertilizing) in reference to this
operation.
2. A highway traffic plan which shall delineate the proposed
entrances and exits, the approximate number and use of personnel
to be utilized for the purpose of highway safety and traffic
direction, as well as the highway cleanup.
c. Without the express written approval of the Township Engineer, no
fertile top layer (topsoil) shall be removed from the site. All such
material shall be appropriately stockpiled for use in restoration and
repair of the site.
§ 17-2.6 § 18-1.2
1:330
bathing, and human sanitation which are for the exclusive use of the
occupants of the dwelling.
GARBAGE — All refuse, entrails and waste of animals and fish and all
vegetable matter which has been or was intended to be used as food; all
clam, oyster, crab and lobster shells; and all other material so specified by
the State of New Jersey.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — All waste which is deemed to be chemical waste,
hazardous waste or infectious waste as defined by N.J.A.C. 7:26-1.4, and
which are flammable, corrosive or explosive or which by themselves or in
combination with other waste could be hazardous to life or property.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — Any apartment building, garden apartment
building or complex or rental housing complex containing more than four
dwelling units.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
REFUSE OR RUBBISH — All solid wastes, both combustible and
noncombustible, such as paper, wrappings, cardboard, tin cans, yard
clippings, leaves, glass, rags, waste wood or cardboard, and other
combustible solids of a nonvolatile or explosive nature, bedding, crockery
and similar materials, ashes, street cleaning and dead animals, except bulky
and industrial waste and hazardous waste, as defined in this section.
SINGLE FAMILY DWELLING — Any single family home, or any housing
complex containing four or less dwelling units, plus any housing complex
consisting of five or more dwelling units in which the majority of such units
are separately owned in fee or as condominiums. The ownership of 50% of
more of the dwelling units in any such complex by a single individual, a
group of individuals or entity(s) shall disqualify such complex from being a
single-family dwelling for purposes of this section.
§ 18-1.3. Collection of garbage and refuse. [Ord. No. 0-12-72; Ord.
No. 0-3-79; 1967 Code § 55-3; Ord. 14-98 § 55-3]
a. The Township of Deptford through its Public Works Department or
through a duly authorized contractor hereinafter referred to as the
"collector" may collect and remove garbage and refuse except bulky
and industrial and hazardous waste from single-family dwellings which
refuse and garbage is generated within the Township of Deptford by
such dwelling. Nothing contained herein shall required such collector
to enter on private property to collect such garbage or refuse.
b. This section shall not prohibit the actual producers of refuse, or the
owners of premises upon which refuse has accumulated, from
personally collecting, conveying and disposing of such refuse or from
contracting with rubbish contractors, provided that such producers or
owners comply with the provisions of this section and with any other
applicable statute, rule or ordinance of the State of New Jersey and/or
the Township of Deptford.
§ 18-1.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-1.3
1:331
§ 18-1.4. Garbage and refuse containers. [Ord. No. 0-12-72; Ord.
No. 0-3-79; Ord. 14-98 § 55-4]
c. Pickup location for garbage and refuse shall be at the roadside adjacent
to the property being serviced; however, where the interest of the
public safety and/or convenience of collection requires a redesignation
of a pickup area, the Township Manager may designate such location
upon seven days' written notice to the affected property owner. Service
of notice may be made by ordinary mail or by personal service to the
occupant of the premises, if any. Any affected resident contesting the
redesignation of the trash and rubbish collection side may appeal the
decision of the Township Manager within seven days to the Township
Council, who shall be required to hold a hearing to determine the
reasonableness of the Manager's decision within 30 days after receipt
of notice of appeal.
a. Containers shall be provided by the owner, tenant, lessee or occupant of
the premises. Refuse contains shall be maintained in a clean, safe and
good condition. Any container that does not conform to the provisions
of this section or that may have ragged or sharp edges or any other
defect liable to hamper or injure the person collecting the contents
thereof shall not be utilized. The collector shall have the authority to
refuse collection services for failure to comply herewith.
b. Requirements.
1. The containers shall be of galvanized or plastic composition, shall
not exceed 30 gallons in capacity, shall be no heavier than 60
pounds when filled, shall have a lid or cover and shall have two
sturdy handles.
2. Plastic bags not less than two mils thick not larger than 40 gallons
may be used if properly tied. Substitute containers may be used in
place of approved containers, such as another bag, water repellent
and animal repellent, treated paper garbage and refuse bag or a
bag of similar nature. These bags shall be not less than two mils
thick, not larger than 40 gallons. All bags used shall be properly
tied and secured.
c. Wooden, cardboard, composition paper, fiber or similar containers are
specifically prohibited for use as refuse containers. The collector may,
at his election, refuse to collect refuse in such container or remove it
from site.
d. Any garbage or refuse that emits a foul, pungent or offensive odor shall
be secured in an approved bag.
e. Tree trimmings, hedge clippings and other such clippings or materials
need not be placed to a container, but all such items shall be cut to
length not to exceed five feet, shall not exceed 60 pounds in weight and
shall be securely tied in bundles before being deposited for collection.
§ 18-1.3 § 18-1.4
1:332
§ 18-1.5. Placement of garbage, refuse or industrial waste. [Ord.
No. 0-12-72; Ord. No. 0-3-79; 1967 Code § 55-5; Ord. No. 0-3-00 § 1;
Ord. No. 0-6-00 § 1]
§ 18-1.6. Time limits. [Ord. No. 0-12-72; 1967 Code § 55-6]
No owner or occupant of premises shall place garbage and/or refuse
containers for collection before 6:00 p.m. of the day prior to collection. All
garbage and/or refuse containers shall be placed at the pickup site no later
than 6:00 a.m. of the day of collection. Each owner or occupant of premises
placing garbage and/or refuse for collection shall remove all containers
from the collection site during the periods of noncollection to an area within
or adjacent to the home or building. All garbage and refuse containers shall
be stored and maintained in a manner consistent with the provisions of this
section.
§ 18-1.7. Materials and wastes not to be collected. [Ord. No.
0-12-72; Ord. No. 0-3-79; 1967 Code § 55-7; Ord. 14-98 § 55-7]
f. All garbage and refuse, intended for collection shall be placed in an
approved container.
g. All rubbish and garbage shall be drained of excessive liquid before
placing it into a container for collection, or it must be secured in an
approved bag.
a. No person shall place any garbage, refuse or industrial or bulky wastes
in any street, alley or other public place or upon any private property,
whether owned by such person or not, except in an approved container;
neither shall any person throw or deposit any garbage, refuse or
industrial or bulky waste in any stream or storm drain.
b. Accumulation of refuse; failure to remove.
1. Any accumulation of refuse on any premises, except in the manner
herein provided, is prohibited.
2. Failure to remove any existing accumulation of refuse within 30
days after the effective date of this section shall be deemed a
violation of this section.
c. No person shall cast, place, sweep or deposit any grass clippings,
brush, sod or other refuse upon any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer,
parkway or other public place within the Township hereafter, except at
such times as designated by the Township Manager or the Township
Council for leaf collection.
d. All refuse and garbage placed for collection shall be placed within the
boundaries of one's own property and no less than 15 feet from the
property line.
§ 18-1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-1.7
1:333
§ 18-1.8. Collections per week. [Ord. No. 0-12-72; Ord. No. 0-3-79;
1967 Code § 55-8; Ord. 14-98 § 55-8]
Collections shall be made once per week in accordance with a schedule to
be determined by the Township Manager except those days of the week
which are approved employee or national holidays for which the Manager
may make appropriate pick up scheduling accommodations.
§ 18-1.9. Township Manager; rules and regulations. [Ord. No.
0-12-72; Ord. No. 0-3-79; 1967 Code § 55-9]
a. Bulky and industrial wastes and hazardous wastes, as defined in this
section, shall not be placed in containers for collection but shall be
disposed of by the owner at the expense of the owner or possessor
thereof.
b. The actual producers of refuse or the owners of premises upon which
refuse is accumulated who desire personally to collect and dispose of
such refuse, and persons who desire to dispose of waste material not
included in the definition of refuse, and collectors of refuse from
outside of the Township who desire to haul over the streets of the
Township shall use a watertight vehicle provided with a tight cover and
so operated as to prevent offensive odors escaping therefrom and
refuse or waste material from being blown, dropped or spilled
therefrom.
c. Disposal of bulky waste items, including but not limited to automobiles,
vehicles, parts of vehicles, building materials, sod, soil, concrete, large
tree limbs, tree stumps, tree trunks and commercial and industrial
wastes shall be the responsibility of the producers or owners thereof.
d. Disposal of all garbage, refuse or rubbish, bulky and industrial waste,
hazardous waste, construction debris and any and all waste generated
by multiple-family dwellings shall be the sole responsibility of the
owners of such multiple-family dwellings.
a. Garbage and refuse collected in the Township shall be collected,
conveyed and disposed of by the collector under the supervision of the
Township Manager. The Manager shall have the authority to make
necessary and reasonable rules and regulations implementing the day
and time of collection, type and location of waste containers and such
other matters pertaining to the collection, conveyance and disposal of
refuse and other materials as he shall find necessary in the public
interest.
b. The Township Manager is hereby authorized and directed to
promulgate rules and regulations for the disposal of bulky and
industrial waste and hazardous waste, as defined in this section, and all
other waste material not included within the definition of refuse, where
such waste material originates within the Township, such as for the
collection of large items of garbage and refuse produced by the
§ 18-1.7 § 18-1.9
1:334
§ 18-1.10. Violations and penalties. [New]
Any violator of any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction,
be subject to the General Penalty established in Section 1-5 of this Code.
§ 18-2. MANDATORY RECYCLING PROGRAM.
§ 18-2.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 0-4-85 § 2; Ord. No. 0-13-87 § 2; Ord.
No. 0-4-88 § 1]
As used in this section:
CANS — All containers comprised of aluminum, metal, tin, steel or a
combination thereof which contain or formerly contained only non-aerosol
compatible substances or such other substances as have been approved for
recycling by the New Jersey Office of Recycling.
GLASS — All products made of silica or sand, soda ash and limestone; the
product being transparent or translucent and being used for packaging or
bottling of substances, and all other material commonly known as glass.
USED ALUMINUM MATERIALS — And shall be deemed to include beverage
cans, containers and materials constructed and consisting solely of
aluminum.
USED NEWSPAPER — And include paper of the type commonly referred
to as newsprint and distributed at stated intervals, usually daily or weekly,
having printed thereon news and opinions and containing advertisements
and other matters of public interest.
§ 18-2.2. Mandatory program for separation of used newspaper.
[Ord. No. 0-4-85 §§ 3-5]
household which cannot be picked up during the course of regular
trash collection by the standard equipment used. Any person desiring
to dispose of such waste shall do so in accordance with such statutes,
ordinances and regulations of the State of New Jersey and the Township
as established.
a. Program established. There is hereby established a program for the
mandatory separation of used newspaper within the Township. The
occupant or owner of any building within the Township who shall place
for disposal, removal or collection of the following named item shall do
so in strict conformity within the following added regulations:
b. Used newspaper shall be bundled separately and received in bundles
not to exceed 50 pounds and shall not be contained in plastic bags.
c. Collection by unauthorized person. From time of placement at the curb
by any one of the categories described herein for collection by the
Township in accordance with the terms hereof, items shall become the
property of the Township or its authorized agent. It shall be a violation
of this section for any person unauthorized by the Township to collect or
§ 18-1.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-2.2
1:335
§ 18-2.3. Mandatory separation of aluminum materials. [Ord. No.
0-13-87 §§ 3-5]
§ 18-2.4. Mandatory recycling and separation of cans and glass
products. [Ord. No. 0-4-88 § II-IV]
§ 18-3. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [Ord. No. 0-4-88 § V]
Any violator of any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction,
be liable to the General Penalty established in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
Chapter 19
pick-up or cause to be collected or picked up any such items. Any and
each such collection in violation hereof from one or more residences
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable as
hereinafter provided.
a. Program established. There is hereby established a program for the
mandatory separation of used aluminum materials within the Township.
b. Method of placing used aluminum materials.
1. The occupant or owner of any building within the Township who
shall place for disposal, removal or collection of the following
named item shall do so in strict conformity within the following
added regulations:
2. Used aluminum materials shall be placed in galvanized or plastic
containers not exceeding 30 gallons in capacity and shall be no
heavier than 60 pounds when filled, and shall have a lid or cover
and two sturdy handles.
c. Collection by unauthorized person. From time of placement at the curb
by any one of the categories described herein for collection by the
Township in accordance with the terms hereof, items shall be and
become the property of the Township of Deptford or its authorized
agent. It shall be a violation of this section for any person unauthorized
by the Township to collect or pick-up or cause to be collected or pickedup
any such items. Any and each such collection in violation hereof from
one or more residences shall constitute a separate and distinct offense
punishable as hereinafter provided.
a. Materials to be separated. All materials set forth in subsection 18-2.1
shall be separated from other trash and newspapers and shall be placed
in containers, galvanized or plastic composition not exceeding 30
gallons or 60 pounds when filled. The containers shall have two sturdy
handles.
b. Mandatory compliance. The recycling of used newspaper, aluminum,
metal, tin or glass or products thereof as more specifically set forth in
this section shall be mandatory and not discretionary.
§ 18-2.2 § 18-3
1:336
PERSONNEL POLICIES
§ 19-1. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
§ 19-1.1. Declaration of policy. [Ord. No. 0-21-71; 1967 Code
§ 47B-1; New]
The Township Council does hereby declare the following principles to
constitute the personnel policy of the Township:
§ 19-1.2. Power of appointment. [Ord. No. 0-27-71; 1967 Code
§ 47B-2]
All employees, officers and Department Heads of the Township shall be
appointed and promoted by the Township Manager, except where the power
to appoint rests with other Township boards or bodies as provided for herein
or as provided by general law or ordinance.
§ 19-1.3. Allocation of offices and positions. [Ord. No. 0-21-71; 1967
Code § 47B-3; New]
a. The New Jersey State Civil Service Law and the Civil Service Rules of
the State of New Jersey which shall be applicable to municipalities in
the State provide the basic framework for employment in the Township
government.
b. Employment in the Township Government shall be based on merit and
fitness free of personal and political considerations.
c. Just and equitable incentives and conditions shall be established and
maintained in order to promote efficiency and economy in the operation
of the Township Government.
d. Positions with similar duties and responsibilities shall be classified and
compensated within a uniform salary range. The Township Manager
may consider qualifications, education, length of employment and other
relevant factors in setting compensation within the applicable salary
range.
e. Appointments, promotions and other personnel actions shall be carried
out pursuant to statutes and regulation governing the New Jersey Civil
Service System.
f. Every effort shall be made to stimulate high morale by fair
administration of this chapter, and by consideration of the rights and
interests of employees, consistent with the best interest of the public
and the Township.
g. Continuity of employment shall be subject to good behavior, satisfactory
performance of work, necessity for the performance of work and
availability of funds.
§ 18-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-1.3
1:337
§ 19-1.4. Scope. [Ord. No. 0-21-71; 1967 Code § 47B-4]
The provisions of this chapter hereafter set forth shall apply only to the
classified service unless otherwise specifically provided therein.
§ 19-1.5. Administrative authority. [Ord. No. 0-21-71; 1967 Code
§ 47B-5; New]
The Township Manager shall be the administrative authority. In his absence,
or during the period in which a Manager has not been appointed, his
administrative duties shall be assumed by the Township Clerk.
§ 19-2. POSITION CLASSIFICATION.
§ 19-2.1. Establishment. [New]
The Township Manager shall be responsible for classification of Township
employees.
§ 19-2.2. Basis of position classification. [Ord. No. 0-21-71; 1967
Code § 47B-7; New]
Each position shall be assigned or allocated to an appropriate job
classification on the basis of the kind and level of its duties and
responsibilities to the end that all positions in the same classification shall
a. General allocation. All offices and positions of the Township shall be and
are hereby allocated to the classified service and unclassified service.
b. Unclassified service. The unclassified service shall include the
following:
1. All elected officials and members of citizen boards and committees.
2. The Township's Manager, Township Clerk, Township Attorney,
Township Auditor, Director of Community Development, Chief
Financial Officer, Assessor, Tax Collector, Prosecutor, Judge, Public
Officer and the Township Engineer.
3. Volunteer personnel and personnel appointed to service without
compensation.
4. Consultants and counsel rendering temporary professional service.
5. All other offices or positions that are so classified by the Civil
Service Rules of the State of New Jersey.
c. Classified service. The classified service shall include all other positions
in the Township service that are not specifically placed in the
unclassified service by the above provisions of this chapter, or which
are excluded from the classified service by the Civil Service Rules of the
State of New Jersey.
§ 19-1.3 § 19-2.2
1:338
be sufficiently alike to permit the use of a single descriptive title, the
same tests of competence and the same salary range, thus carrying out
the basic principle of classification which is equal pay for equal work. A
job classification may contain one position or a number of positions. The
Township Manager shall submit a report to the Township Council of any
modifications or changes in classifications.
§ 19-2.3. Change in classification. [Ord. No. 0-21-71; 1967 Code
§ 47B-8]
§ 19-2.4. Abolishing the positions; effect. [Ord. No. 0-21-71; 1967
Code § 47B-9]
A position may be abolished or the number of personnel reduced by the
Township Council for reasons of economy or a reorganization within a
department or departments. A permanent employee must receive written
notice of such action 45 days prior to its effective date. In the Police
Department such events shall be governed by the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:11-10 et seq. Every effort shall be made by the Township Council, in
cooperation with the Civil Service Commission of the State of New Jersey,
to reassign any affected permanent employee to another position in the
Township service for which the employee may be qualified. If no such
position is available immediately, the name of the affected employee shall be
a. The Township Manager shall review all requests for creation of new
positions, the abolition or consolidation of present positions,
reclassification of positions to different job classes or the reallocation of
positions to new salary ranges. In such review, he shall study the
current duties and responsibilities of the position concerned and
recommend to the Township Council appropriate action necessary to
ensure the correct classification and allocation of the position.
b. Each Department Head shall report to the Township Council any
changes in his organization or assignment of duties and responsibilities
to a given employee which would result in changes in the positionclassification
plan or in the classification of any of the positions in his
department.
c. An employee may submit a request in writing to the Township Manager
at any time for a review of the duties and responsibilities of his position.
Such a request shall be submitted through his Department Head and
shall include the employee's own description of his current duties and
responsibilities. The Township Manager shall then make an
investigation of the position to determine its correct allocation. He shall
report his findings in writing to the Township Council and shall furnish
a copy to the employee requesting the review and to his Department
Head.
d. An employee may submit a request for a review of the duties and
responsibilities of his position directly to the Civil Service Commission
of the State of New Jersey.
§ 19-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-2.4
1:339
kept on file and he must be offered employment should a vacancy occur in
a position for which he is qualified, prior to respective departments taking
applications for the vacancy. If an employee is demoted because of economy
or departmental reorganization, he shall be placed in the new salary range
in the same stop he held in his prior position before demotion.
§ 19-3. PAY PLAN.
§ 19-3.1. Notice of rate of pay; increases. [Ord. No. 0-21-71; 1967
Code § 47B-11; New]
Each class of position shall be assigned to a salary range by the Salary
Ordinance. When an employee attains the maximum rate of the salary range
for his position, he shall not receive further salary increases unless:
§ 19-3.2. New appointments. [Ord. No. 0-21-71; 1967 Code
§ 47B-11; New]
A new employee shall be paid at the minimum of the approved salary range
for the position to which he is appointed. In exceptional cases the Township
Manager may appoint at a rate above the minimum.
§ 19-3.3. Demotions. [Ord. No. 0-21-71; 1967 Code § 47B-12; New]
An employee demoted for disciplinary reasons to a classification having a
lower salary range, shall receive such salary as the Township Manager shall
specify, and which salary shall not exceed the maximum step of the new
range.
§ 19-3.4. Temporary appointments. [Ord. No. 0-21-71; 1967 Code
§ 47B-13; New]
When a vacancy is filled by a temporary appointment, the employee shall
be paid at the minimum of the approved salary range for the position.
In exceptional cases, the Township Manager may set a rate above the
minimum.
§ 19-3.5. Transfers. [Ord. No. 0-21-71; 1967 Code § 47B-16]
If an employee transfers into another classification within the Township, he
will not lose any vacation or sick leave credits.
§ 19-4. APPOINTMENTS TO EMPLOYMENT.
a. His position is reclassified;
b. He is promoted to another position having a higher range;
c. His position's salary is increased; or
d. A general salary increase is granted to all employees.
§ 19-2.4 § 19-4.1
1:340
§ 19-4.1. Basis for original appointments; qualifications. [Ord. No.
0-21-71; 1967 Code § 47B-17; New]
§ 19-4.2. Temporary appointments. [Ord. No. 0-21-71; 1967 Code
§ 47B-18; New]
In the absence of an appropriate list or for the filling of temporary or
seasonal positions, or temporarily in the case of emergencies, vacancies
may be filled by temporary appointments by the Township Manager.
§ 19-4.3. Physical examinations. [Ord. No. 0-21-71; 1967 Code
§ 47B-19]
The Township Manager may require every job applicant to submit to a
physical examination by the Township Physician or a designated alternate,
and each applicant shall be required to furnish a complete medical history
upon a form to be prepared by the Township Manager for use in conjunction
with the physical examination. Where necessary, the Township Manager
may, in his discretion, require that a job applicant submit to a psychiatric
examination. Thereafter, the Township Manager may schedule such
examinations for all Township employees as provided in subsection 19-8.2f.
§ 19-4.4. Probationary period. [Ord. No. 0-21-71; 1967 Code
§ 47B-20; New]
a. All candidates for probationary or permanent employment by the
Township shall be citizens of the United States at the time of filing their
applications and at the time of their appointment, unless such
requirement is specifically waived by the Township Council.
b. Original appointments by the Township Manager to vacancies in the
Township service shall be based upon merit, fitness, ability, and
competitive examinations insofar as practicable and which shall be in
accordance with the Civil Service Rules of the State of New Jersey.
a. All employees appointed permanently to the classified service shall
serve a probationary period of 90 days, except for Police Officers which
shall be one year. At the expiration of the probationary period, the
Township Manager, may discontinue the service of any such employee
if, in its opinion, the employee is unwilling or unable to perform the
duties of his position in a satisfactory manner or if the employee is of
such reputation and habits as not to merit continuance in the service of
the Township. In every case, the Township Manager shall notify the
employee in writing of the discontinuance and of the reasons for the
same, and shall also forward a copy of the notice to the Department of
Civil Service of the State of New Jersey.
b. A 90 days' probationary period shall also pertain to an employee
promoted to a higher classification. Such probationary status will in no
way affect the rights and status in the original or lower classification.
§ 19-4.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-4.4
1:341
§ 19-4.5. Granting of permanent employment status. [Ord. No.
0-21-71; 1967 Code § 47B-21]
Classified employees who satisfactorily complete their probationary period
shall have permanent employment status, conditioned upon good behavior
and satisfactory job performance. They shall be subject to removal by the
appointing authority only for cause or for reason of economy, after proper
notice and the opportunity to be heard, as set forth under the Civil Service
Rules of the State of New Jersey.
§ 19-5. PROMOTIONS.
§ 19-5.1. Term defined. [Ord. No. 0-21-71; 1967 Code § 47B-22]
§ 19-5.2. Permanent promotions. [Ord. No. 0-21-71; 1967 Code
§ 47B-23; New]
c. Each new Police Officer shall be required to satisfactorily complete a
basic Police training program recognized by the New Jersey Police
Training Commission during the first year and prior to receiving a
permanent appointment. The opportunity for this training must be
provided by the Township. The one year probationary period does not
commence for a Police Officer until he has completed such recognized
Police training program.28
a. The term "promotion" as used in this chapter shall mean an
advancement in classification having:
1. New duties of greater difficulty or responsibility; and
2. A salary range having a greater maximum.
b. When there is a major change in the duties or responsibilities of a job
title resulting in its reallocation to a higher classification, the job title
shall be considered vacant and subject to filling under promotional
procedures.
a. Vacancies shall be filled by utilizing competitive promotional
examinations and other permissible considerations, in accordance with
the Civil Service Rules of the State of New Jersey.
b. Where the Township Manager finds that no employee is qualified for
promotion to the vacancy, he may order an open competitive
examination open to candidates outside the Township's employ. In postexamination
selection, promotions shall be given with appropriate
consideration to the applicant's qualifications, record of past
performance and the length and quality of his service.
28.Editor's Note: For additional regulations concerning the Police Department, see Section
2-20, Division of Police.
§ 19-4.4 § 19-5.3
1:342
§ 19-5.3. Temporary promotions. [Ord. No. 0-21-71; 1967 Code
§ 47B-24; New]
Pending the availability of a suitable eligibility list, the Township Manager
may fill vacancies by a temporary promotion.
§ 19-6. COMPENSATION AND SALARY INCREMENTS.
§ 19-6.1. Pay periods; daily and hourly rate. [Ord. No. 0-21-71; 1967
Code § 47B-25; New]
§ 19-6.2. Computation of overtime. [Ord. No. 0-21-71; 1967 Code
§ 47B-26; New]
§ 19-6.3. Leave without pay. [Ord. No. 0-21-71; 1967 Code § 47B-27]
Deductions in salary for leave without pay shall be computed on the basis of
the hourly rate as prescribed in subsection 19-6.1b.
a. The Township normally shall pay its employees on a bi-weekly payroll
schedule, that is, once in every two weeks, or a total of 26 times
annually. Each payroll period shall consist of 10 working days, so that
the daily rate of pay of each employee normally shall be 1/360 of his
annual salary. In order to avoid the possibility of a year in which twentyseven-
day periods could occur, an adjustment may be made as to the
particular day of the week in which pay shall be received.
b. The hourly rate shall be computed by dividing the weekly rate by the
number of hours in the employee's prescribed workweek.
a. Employees, including members of the Police Department, unless
otherwise covered by a collective bargaining agreement, may be
compensated for overtime work when such compensation has been
recommended by the Department Head and its payment authorized by
the Township Manager. However, in all instances, overtime
compensation shall commence only after the employee has worked the
full 40 hours during the workweek for which overtime compensation is
sought. Holidays and vacation days may be counted toward the 40
hours for overtime, but not sick days. Authorized overtime
compensation shall be computed at an hourly rate equal to 1 1/2 times
the equivalent hourly rate prescribed in subsection 19-6.1b.
b. When an employee works a prescribed workweek of less than 40 hours,
overtime pay shall be computed at the normal equivalent hourly rate up
to 40 hours, after which the time-and-a-half provisions would take
effect.
§ 19-5.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-6.4
1:343
§ 19-6.4. Salary increments. [Ord. No. 0-21-71; 1967 Code § 47B-28]
Salary increments may be granted to each employee effective January 1
of each year until the employee's salary shall have reached the maximum
salary provided for his position title by Township ordinance.
§ 19-7. HOURS OF WORK; HOLIDAYS; LONGEVITY PAY.
§ 19-7.1. Working hours. [Ord. No. 0-21-71; 1967 Code § 47B-29;
New]
The official workweek of the Township shall be as follows:
§ 19-7.2. Holidays. [Ord. No. 0-21-71; Ord. No. 0-19-78; Ord. No.
0-12-79; Ord. No. 0-8-80; Ord. No. 0-10-81; Ord. No. 0-11-83; 1967
Code § 47B-30; New]
§ 19-7.3. Longevity compensation. [Ord. No. 0-21-71; Ord. No.
0-11-83; 1967 Code § 47B-30B; New]
a. Forty hours for Police, 40 hours for public works and 35 hours for all
other departments unless prescribed otherwise by collective bargaining
agreement.
b. The Township Manager shall set forth the hours of work for each
department, including the amount of time that shall be allowed for
lunch.
a. Due to the emergency nature of the work of the Police Department, the
provisions of this subsection shall not be applicable to the members of
that Department.
b. All other Municipal employees and officers shall be entitled to the
following holidays: New Year's Day, Washington's Birthday, Good Friday,
Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veteran's
Day, Election Day, Thanksgiving Day, the date after Thanksgiving,
Christmas Day and Martin Luther King's Birthday.
c. If a holiday falls on a Sunday, it shall be observed on the following
Monday. In the event that a holiday falls on a Saturday, it shall be
observed on the preceding Friday.
d. In the event that an official holiday is observed during an employee's
vacation, he shall be entitled to an additional vacation day.
e. In order to be eligible to receive holiday pay, the employee or officer
must work his scheduled day before and day after the holiday.
a. All officers and employees hired prior to January 1, 1986 shall continue
to receive longevity payments. Longevity payments shall be
discontinued for all employees hired after January 1, 1986 unless
prescribed by collective bargaining agreement.
§ 19-6.4 § 19-7.3
1:344
§ 19-8. VACATIONS AND LEAVES.
§ 19-8.1. Number of vacation days. [Ord. No. 0-21-71; 1967 Code
§ 47B-31; New]
Vacation shall be granted to full-time classified and full-time unclassified
employees pursuant to a collective bargaining agreement or Ordinance
0.13.98 as applicable.
§ 19-8.2. Basis for vacation leave; accumulation. [Ord. No. 0-21-71;
1967 Code § 47B-32; New]
§ 19-8.3. Sick leave; definition; accumulation. [Ord. No. 0-21-71;
Ord. No. 0-4-77; 1967 Code § 47B-33; New]
Year of Service Percent of Base Pay
During 5th year 2%
During 6th year 3%
During 7th year 4%
During 8th year 5%
During 9th year 6%
During 10th year 7%
During 15th year 8%
b. "Year of service" shall be defined as commencing on the employee's
date of hiring to the date preceding of the following year.
a. Vacation leave shall be considered to be on a calendar year basis.
b. Full-time and permanent part-time employees shall not be eligible for
vacation leave unless they have been so employed for six consecutive
months or more unless prescribed otherwise by a collective bargaining
agreement. Permanent part-time employees are eligible for vacation
leave on a prorated basis. Temporary part-time employees shall not be
eligible for vacation leave.
c. At the time of separation from service, an employee shall be entitled to
any full day's vacation pay accumulated and not previously used.
d. Employees may not be paid for vacation leave earned and not used.
a. As used in this subsection, the term "sick leave" shall mean paid leave
that may be granted to each full-time classified and full-time
unclassified Township employee who through sickness or injury
becomes incapacitated to a degree that makes it impossible for him to
perform the duties of his position or who is quarantined by a physician
because he has been exposed to a contagious disease. Part-time
permanent employees are eligible for sick leave on a prorated basis.
§ 19-7.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-8.3
1:345
§ 19-8.4. Leaves for injury in line of duly. [Ord. No. 0-21-71; 1967
Code § 47B-34]
Part-time and full-time temporary employees are not eligible for sick
leave.
b. A certificate from the Township Physician or the employee's own
physician may be required as sufficient proof of the need for sick leave.
In case of sick leave due to a contagious disease or exposure to same, a
certificate from the Department of Health may be required. All other
requests for sick leave and certificates required thereunder shall be in
accordance with subsection 19-8.9.
c. Full-time employees shall accumulate prorated sick leave on the basis
of 15 days of sick leave per year. In the first year of employment,
employees shall be entitled to one day of sick leave for each month of
employment or unless otherwise prescribed by a collective bargaining
agreement.
d. Sick leave can be accumulated without limit during each employee's
length of service.
e. Accumulated sick leave may be used by an employee for personal
illness, illness to his immediate family which requires his attendance
upon the ill person, death in the immediate family, quarantine
restrictions, pregnancy or disabling injuries. The term "immediate
family" shall be as prescribed by collective bargaining agreement or
Ordinance 0.13.98 as applicable.
f. The Township Manager may schedule medical examinations for all
Township employees annually, or more frequently if required.
a. When a full-time Township employee is injured in the line of duty, the
Township Council shall, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:11-8, and subject to the
terms and conditions hereinafter set forth, pass a resolution giving the
employee up to one year's leave of absence with pay, except those
injuries which result from employee activities which would give rise to
cause for either suspension or removal as enumerated in this chapter or
as provided in N.J.S.A. 40:11-1 et seq. and Rule 4:16 of the Civil Service
Regulations.
b. In the event that the employee shall receive any temporary disability
pursuant to the statutes governing the Workmen's Compensation Laws
of the State of New Jersey, or elsewhere, or shall receive income
benefits arising out of any policy of insurance paid for or contributed to
by the Township, such amounts received shall be deducted from the
employee's weekly pay in order to determine the entitlement of that
employee pursuant to the terms of the resolution. In the event that such
benefits accrue subsequent to the passage of the resolution, the
Township Council may modify the resolution to conform to the
provisions of this paragraph.
§ 19-8.3 § 19-8.4
1:346
§ 19-8.5. Maternity leave. [Ord. No. 0-21-71; 1967 Code § 47B-35;
New]
Maternity leave may be granted pursuant to the Family Leave Act or a
collective bargaining agreement.
§ 19-8.6. Military leave; jury duty. [Ord. No. 0-21-71; 1967 Code
§ 47B-36; New]
c. The resolution shall contain specific provision requiring that the
Township shall be subrogated to the extent of any recovery received by
the employee as a result of this injury from a third party (excepting
therefrom workmen's compensation award for permanent disability) or
other policies of insurance, of any nature whatsoever, which in effect
duplicate any payments made by the Township to the employee during
the period of this injury.
d. Prior to the passage of a resolution referred to in paragraph a. hereof, a
contract shall be executed between the employee and the Township,
setting forth that the employee shall reimburse the Township from
moneys he may receive in the form of workmen's compensation
temporary benefits for a period of time which the Township may have
already compensated him for, or from possible legal settlement from a
judgment against the person or persons responsible for the injury, and
for any other recovery as outlined in paragraphs b. and c. hereof.
a. Any employee who is a member of the National Guard, Naval Militia, Air
National Guard, or a reserve component of any of the Armed Forces of
the United States and is required to engage in field training, shall be
granted a military leave of absence for a period of two weeks or as
authorized by law. This leave of absence shall be in addition to his
vacation. Part-time employees may receive such leave on a prorated
basis as follows. Each employee required to take such leave, shall be
paid by the Township any difference resulting in that employee's
present rate of pay from that amount received as a result of such
military leave. The employee shall be required, upon making an
application for the difference in pay, to evidence sufficient proof as to
the amount of pay received while on military leave.
b. When an employee is required to serve on jury duty, that employee shall
be paid his salary and any jury duty pay shall be returned to the
Township.
c. When an employee, not on probation, has been called to active duty or
inducted into the military or naval forces of the United States, he shall
automatically be granted an indefinite leave of absence without pay for
the duration of such active military service. Each employee must be
reinstated without loss of privileges or seniority, provided that he
reports for duty with the Township within 60 days following his
honorable discharge from military service, and provided he has notified
§ 19-8.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-8.6
1:347
§ 19-8.7. Compensatory leave. [Ord. No. 0-21-71; 1967 Code
§ 47B-37; New]
§ 19-8.8. Leave without pay. [Ord. No. 0-21-71; 1967 Code § 47B-38;
New]
Leave without pay may be granted to full-time and part-time permanent
employees and to full-time unclassified employees. Normally, it shall be
granted only when the employee has used his accumulated sick and
vacation leave in the case of illness, or his vacation leave if leave without
pay is requested for reasons other than illness. The written request for
leave without pay must be initiated by the employee, favorably endorsed
by his Department Head and the Township Manager. Such leave, except for
military leave without pay, shall not be approved for a period longer than
six months at one time. The Township Manager may extend such leave for
an additional six months or any portion thereof.
§ 19-8.9. Requests for leave. [Ord. No. 0-21-71; 1967 Code
§ 47B-39]
A request for any type of leave shall be made on a form prescribed by
the Township Manager. Such request, whenever possible, shall be made
far enough in advance to permit approval, and at the same time, permit
coverage for the particular employment so that Municipal services shall not
suffer. In the case of sick leave, the employee shall notify his Department
Head immediately within the first hour of the shift if he is unable to report
for work. When an employee is absent from work because of illness for
the Township or his intent to report for duty 30 days prior to his
discharge from military service.
a. In lieu of overtime compensation, an employee may be granted leave
with pay as compensation for overtime work. The Township Manager
shall determine whether overtime shall be compensated for by the
granting of compensatory leave or by payment in cash. Compensatory
leave, when granted, must be scheduled and used within 30 days from
the time earned, unless otherwise approved by the Township Manager.
b. Compensatory leave shall be granted on the same basis as overtime
compensation, namely for that time worked in excess of the regular 40
hours during one week, or in the case of special employees regularly
scheduled on an eighty-hour, two-week period, compensatory time shall
be granted for time worked in excess of the prescribed 80 hours within
a two-week period.
c. When an employee works a prescribed workweek of less than 40 hours,
compensatory leave shall be granted on an hour-to-hour basis up to 40
hours, at which time the regular overtime compensatory policy shall
take effect unless prescribed otherwise by a collective bargaining
agreement. (See subsection 19-6.2 for computation of overtime
compensation.)
§ 19-8.6 § 19-8.9
1:348
more than three days, the Department Head shall require the employee to
submit a certificate from his physician relating to his illness. The Township
Manager, in his discretion, may require the employee to submit a
physician's certificate for absences of two or three days. In a case of illness
of a chronic or recurring nature causing an employee's periodic or repeated
absence of one day or less, the Township Manager may require one medical
certificate for every six-month period.
§ 19-9. EMPLOYEE BENEFITS FOR EMPLOYEES NOT COVERED BY
A COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT.
§ 19-9.1. Applicability. [Ord. No. 0.13.98]
The following personnel policies shall apply to those full-time Township
employees not covered by a collective bargaining agreement.
§ 19-9.2. Vacations. [Ord. No. 0.13.98 § 1]
a. Full-time employees holding the positions of Township Manager, Chief
Finance Officer, Tax Collector, Township Clerk, Tax Assessor, Chief of
Police, Court Administrator, Construction Official, Head of the
Department of Community Development and Public Works Director
shall be credited with vacation leave with pay in accordance with the
following schedule:
1. _____
6 months to 1 year 5 days
Start of 1st year thru 4
years
12 days
Start of 5th year thru 6
years
15 days
7 years thru 12 years 20 days
13 years thru 19 years 25 days
20 years and thereafter 30 days
2. All other full-time employees shall be credited with vacation leave
comparable to those employees covered by the Collective
Bargaining Agreement in effect for Clerical/Administrative
Personnel.
b. Unused vacation time may be carried over for one year. Additional time
may be carried over with permission of the Department Head and
Township Manager.
c. Vacation time shall be approved by the Department Head or Township
Manager.
d. Permanent part-time employees shall receive pro-rated vacation leave.
§ 19-8.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-9.2
1:349
§ 19-9.3. Sick leave. [Ord. No. 0.13.98 § 2]
§ 19-9.4. Bereavement. [Ord. No. 0.13.98 § 3]
§ 19-9.5. Medical benefits. [Ord. No. 0.13.98 § 4; Ord. No. 0.15.00
§ 4]
e. The Township Manager may set standards for the pro-rating of leave for
an employee's last year of employment
a. Employees shall earn one day sick leave per month, during their first
year of employment and credited with 15 days per year of employment
thereafter. Unused sick leave shall be cumulative from year to year.
Permanent part-time employees shall receive pro-rated sick leave.
b. An employee who resigns in good standing shall receive payment for
65% of accumulated sick leave.
c. An employee who retires may take payment for 65% of accumulated
sick leave in one lump sum or may take payment for 70% of
accumulated sick leave as terminal leave with pay.
d. An employee may take payment for up to 50% of annual sick leave. Such
payment shall be scheduled at the discretion of the Township Manager.
e. The Township Manager may set standards for the pro-rating of leave for
an employee's last year of employment.
a. All employees shall be entitled to five days off with full pay in the event
of death in the immediate family. The "immediate family" shall mean
father, mother, wife, husband, child, brother, sister, stepmother,
stepfather, stepsister, stepbrother, and stepchildren or any member of
the employee's immediate household. All employees shall be entitled to
three days off with full pay in the event of each death of grandparents,
nephews, nieces, aunts, father-in-law, mother-in-law, brother-in-law and
sister-in-law.
b. Permanent part-time employees shall receive pro-rated bereavement
leave.
a. Full-time employees holding the positions of Township Manager, Chief
Finance Officer, Tax Collector, Township Clerk, Tax Assessor, Chief of
Police, Court Administrator, Construction Official, Head of the
Department of Community Development, Public Works Director and the
Director of any other Department created by the Township Council shall
receive medical benefits pursuant to subsection 19-9.5d.
b. All other employees not mentioned in paragraph a. and not covered by a
collective bargaining agreement who are on the Township payroll as of
October 2, 2000 shall receive medical benefits pursuant to paragraph
d.
§ 19-9.2 § 19-9.5
1:350
§ 19-9.6. Holidays. [Ord. No. 0.13.98 § 5]
§ 19-9.7. Personal days. [Ord. No. 0.13.98 § 6]
§ 19-9.8. Overtime, family leave, compensatory time. [Ord. No.
0.13.98 § 7]
§ 19-9.9. Travel expenses. [Ord. No. 0.13.98 § 8]
c. All employees not mentioned in paragraphs a. and b. who are on the
payroll after October 2, 2000 shall receive medical benefits after
retirement the same as those negotiated in the collective bargaining
agreement between Deptford Township and the Clerical/Administrative
bargaining unit.
d. Full time employees shall receive those medical benefits as determined
by general Township policy. They shall include as a minimum,
hospitalization, dental and prescriptions.
Medical benefits described in paragraph d. shall continue for the
employee and spouse, upon retirement, who has met at least one of
the following conditions:
1. The employee retired under a disability pension;
2. The employee has at least 25 years of service credit in P.E.R.S. or
P.F.R.S. and has worked with the Township for at least five years;
3. The employee has reached the age of 62 years or older and has
worked with the Township for at least 15 years.
a. Employees shall receive those holidays as provided by general
Township policy.
a. Employees shall receive four personal days per year. Personal days are
not cumulative and must be used in the year earned. Personal days shall
be pro-rated for an employee's last year of employment.
b. Permanent part-time employees shall receive two days per year.
a. Overtime payments and compensatory time shall be approved by the
Department Head and Township Manager and shall be governed by the
Fair Labor Standards Act (F.L.S.A.).
b. Family leave shall be governed by the Family Leave Act.
a. All travel expenses shall first be approved by the Township Manager.
b. Employees using their personal vehicles shall be reimbursed at the rate
established by the U.S. Internal Revenue Service (I.R.S.) and for all
related tolls.
§ 19-9.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-9.9
1:351
§ 19-9.10. Township Council appointments. [Ord. No. 0.13.98 § 9]
The Township Council may negotiate benefits greater than those identified
in this section for employees appointed by the Township Council.
§ 19-10. MISCELLANEOUS RULES AND REGULATIONS.
§ 19-10.1. Reporting accidents. [Ord. No. 0-21-71; 1967 Code
§ 47B-41]
An employee who is injured in the performance of his duties shall
immediately report the accident to his supervisor, who shall then complete
a form provided for such reports. The complete accident report shall then
be submitted to the Township Manager.
§ 19-10.2. Outside employment. [Ord. No. 0-21-71; 1967 Code
§ 47B-42]
§ 19-10.3. Departmental regulations. [Ord. No. 0-21-71; 1967 Code
§ 47B-43]
c. Room rates for overnight travel related to meetings and conferences
shall be the minimum established for the area traveled.
d. Meal expenses related to overnight travel shall be up to $35 per day or
those expenses covered in the registration.
e. Transportation by mass transit shall be by minimum category.
f. Employees shall be reimbursed meals for attendance at professional
organization meetings or official business.
g. Employees must present receipts for payments and reimbursements.
a. Employees shall not accept outside employment or engage in outside
business activities without the prior approval of the Township Manager.
Applications for permission to accept outside employment shall be
made in writing to the Township Manager. The application shall set
forth pertinent information concerning the type of work to be engaged
in, the name and address of the prospective employer, and the hours of
such employment.
b. No application for permission to accept outside employment shall be
approved by the Township Manager if, in his judgment, there is any
reasonable probability that such outside employment will interfere with
an employee's performance or compromise an employee's position with
the Township through a conflict of interest.
a. Subject to the approval of the Township Council, the Township Manager
may establish, amend and supplement rules and regulations for
governing the internal operations of any department and the conduct
and deportment of its personnel. Such departmental rules and
§ 19-9.9 § 19-10.3
1:352
§ 19-10.4. Maintenance of personnel records. [Ord. No. 0-21-71;
1967 Code § 47B-44; New]
The Township Manager shall maintain the official personnel records for
each employee of the Township. Such records should include dates of
appointments and promotions, job titles, salaries, commendations,
disciplinary actions, leave of any type taken and accumulated, merit ratings
and the like.
§ 19-11. SEPARATION FROM SERVICE; DISCIPLINARY ACTION.
§ 19-11.1. Types of separation. [Ord. No. 0-21-71; 1967 Code
§ 47B-45]
Classified employees who have acquired permanent employment status as
provided in subsection 19-4.4, may be temporarily suspended from the
Township's employ by layoff or suspension, or permanently separated by
resignation or dismissal, as more particularly set forth in this section,
subject at all times to the rules and regulations of the Civil Service
Commission of the State of New Jersey.
§ 19-11.2. Layoff. [Ord. No. 0-21-71; 1967 Code § 47B-46; New]
Whenever there is a lack of funds requiring a reduction in the number
of employees in a department of the Township Government, the required
reductions shall be made in such job classification or classifications as
the Township Manager may designate in consultation with the Township
Council. Employees shall be laid off in the inverse order of their length
of service. Within each affected job class, all temporary employees shall
be laid off before probationary employees, and all probationary employees
shall be laid off before any permanent employee. Permanent (including
probationary) employees so affected shall be given a minimum of 45 days'
notice or pay in lieu thereof. Temporary employees so affected shall be given
a minimum of two weeks' notice, or two weeks' pay in lieu thereof.
§ 19-11.3. Retirement. [Ord. No. 0-21-71; 1967 Code § 47B-47]
regulations shall not be inconsistent or in conflict with the provisions
of any statute of this State, this chapter or other ordinance of the
Township.
b. The rules and regulations shall be in writing, signed by the Township
Manager, and approved by the Township Council and shall be filed in
the office of the Township Clerk. They shall be binding on all persons
subject to the jurisdiction of the department. A written copy of the rules
and regulations shall be distributed to the personnel of the department
affected thereby and shall be posted in the headquarters of the
department. Copies shall also be available to the personnel of the
department upon request.
§ 19-10.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-11.3
1:353
§ 19-11.4. Resignation. [Ord. No. 0-21-71; 1967 Code § 47B-48]
An employee may resign from his position by tendering a written
resignation to his Department Head, who, in turn, shall forward it to the
Township Manager. Unless there are disciplinary charges pending against
the employee, the Township Manager shall notify the employee in writing
of acceptance of his resignation in good standing. An employee shall give a
minimum of two weeks' notice before the effective date of this resignation.
§ 19-11.5. Dismissal or demotion. [Ord. No. 0-21-71; 1967 Code
§ 47B-49]
A permanent employee may be dismissed from the service or demoted for
cause. The causes sufficient for removal from the service shall include the
following:
§ 19-11.6. Suspension. [Ord. No. 0-21-71; 1967 Code § 47B-50;
New]
When, in the opinion of the Township Manager, an employee's performance
or conduct justifies disciplinary action short of dismissal, the Township
Manager may suspend the employee without pay, or with reduced pay or by
fine.
a. Employees enrolled in the Public Employees Retirement System of the
State of New Jersey are subject to the requirements and provisions of
that plan.
b. Police Officers are eligible to retire subject to the rules of the Police and
Fire Retirement System.
a. Neglect of duty.
b. Absence without leave or failure to report, after authorized leave has
expired or after such leave has been disapproved or revoked.
c. Incompetency, inefficiency or incapacity due to mental or physical
disability.
d. Insubordination or serious breach of discipline.
e. Intoxication while on duty.
f. Conviction of a criminal act.
g. Disobedience of the departmental rules and regulations established
pursuant to subsection 19-10.3 of this chapter.
h. Disobedience or violation of the causes for removal as set forth by Civil
Service Regulation 4:16.
§ 19-11.3 § 19-12
1:354
§ 19-12. GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE.
Grievance procedure shall be as prescribed by collective bargaining
agreement or by the following procedures:
§ 19-12.1. General policy. [Ord. No. 0-21-71; 1967 Code § 47B-51]
It is the policy of the Township that every employee at all times be treated
fairly, courteously and with respect. Conversely, each employee is expected
to accord the same treatment to his associates, supervisors and to the
public.
§ 19-12.2. Verbal grievance. [Ord. No. 0-21-71; 1967 Code § 47B-52]
§ 19-12.3. Formal written grievance. [Ord. No. 0-21-71; 1967 Code
§ 47B-53; New]
§ 19-13. CIVIL SERVICE.
a. Whenever an employee has a grievance, he should first present it
verbally to his supervisor. It is the responsibility of the supervisor to
arrange a mutually satisfactory settlement of the grievance within
seven calendar days of the time when it is first presented to him, or
failing in that, must within that time advise the employee of his inability
to do so.
b. When an employee is informed by his supervisor that he is unable,
within the discretion permitted him, to arrange a mutually satisfactory
solution to the grievance the employee must, if he wishes to present the
grievance to a higher authority, do so in writing in the following
manner.
a. The employee will prepare the grievance in writing. The grievance
should be stated as completely and as clearly as possible in order to
permit prompt handling. One copy of the grievance shall be
immediately placed in the hands of the Township Manager.
b. A copy of the grievance shall be presented by the employee to his
immediate supervisor (to whom the grievance was made verbally), the
employee to retain one copy. The supervisor will report the facts and
events which led up to its presentation in writing, including in his
written report any verbal answer he may have previously given to the
employee concerning this grievance. Within three days after receipt of
the written grievance the supervisor must present it with the
information required from him, to the Township Manager.
c. The Township Manager will then consider and formally act on the
complaint within 14 calendar days.
d. All papers and documents relating to a grievance and its disposition will
be placed in the employee's personnel history file.
§ 19-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-13.1
1:355
§ 19-13.1. Applicability of civil service rules. [Ord. No. 0-21-71;
1967 Code § 47B-54; New]
This chapter and all of its provisions shall at all times be subject to the Civil
Service Rules of the State of New Jersey. In the event of a conflict, Civil
Services Rules shall apply.
§ 19-14. RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS.
§ 19-14.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 0-17-81; 1967 Code § 55A-1]
As used in this section:
BONAFIDE RESIDENT — A person having a permanent domicile within
the Township and one which has not been adopted with the intention of
again taking up or claiming a previous residence acquired outside of the
Township.
OFFICE AND EMPLOYEE — All persons hired by the Township with the
exception of Municipal Police Officers.
§ 19-14.2. Residency required. [Ord. No. 0-17-81; 1967 Code
§ 55A-2]
All employees and officers employed by the Township after the effective
date of this section are required to be bona fide residents therein.
§ 19-14.3. Nonresidents to become residents. [Ord. No. 0-17-81;
1967 Code § 55A-3]
§ 19-14.4. Availability of qualified residents. [Ord. No. 0-17-81;
1967 Code § 55A-4]
a. Any nonresident subsequently appointed to positions of employment by
the Township pursuant to this section must become bona fide residents
of the Township within one year of their appointments, except as
otherwise provided by subsection 19-14.5.
b. Failure of any such employee to maintain residency in the Township
shall be cause for removal or discharge from service. In the event such
employee does not maintain bona fide residency, the Township shall
notify the employee that failure to again take up bona fide residency in
the Township within six months of such notification will result in
removal or discharge from service. Such removal or discharge shall
take effect on the date specified in such notice but any employee so
removed or discharged shall have the right to such appeals as are
available pursuant to law.
a. Whenever the Township Council or its designated hiring agent shall
determine that there cannot be recruited a sufficient number of
qualified residents for available specific positions or employments, the
Township shall be authorized to advertise for other qualified applicants.
§ 19-13.1 § 19-14.4
1:356
§ 19-14.5. Special positions not requiring residency. [Ord. No.
0-17-81; 1967 Code § 55A-5]
Whenever the Township Council or its designated hiring agent shall
determine that there are certain specific positions and employment
requiring special skill or skills which are necessary for the operation of
the Township and which are not likely to be found among the residents
of the Township, such positions or employments so determined shall be
filled without reference to residency. The Township Council has determined
that specific positions requiring special skills which are to be filled without
reference to residency include, but are not limited to, the following:
Township Auditor, Township Engineer, Municipal Court Judge, Township
Prosecutor and Township Solicitor.
§ 19-14.6. Promotion preference. [Ord. No. 0-17-81; 1967 Code
§ 55A-6]
The Township shall give preference in promotion to officers and employees
who are bona fide residents therein. When promotions are based upon merit
as determined by suitable promotion tests or other objective criteria, a
resident shall be given preference over a nonresident in any instance when
all other measurable criteria are equal. The preference granted by this
subsection shall in no way diminish, reduce or affect the preference granted
pursuant to any other provisions of law.
The Township shall thereupon classify all qualified applicants for such
positions of employments so determined in the following manner:
1. Other residents of Gloucester County.
2. Other residents of counties contiguous to the County in which the
Municipality is situate.
3. Other residents of the State.
4. All other applicants.
b. The Township shall first appoint all those in Class 1 and then those in
each succeeding class in the order above listed and shall appoint a
person or persons in any such class only to a position or positions of
employment or employments remaining after all qualified applicants in
the preceding class or classes have been appointed or have declined an
offer of appointment. The preference established by this subsection
shall in no way diminish, reduce or affect the preferences granted
pursuant to any other provisions of the law. Any nonresident recruited
and hired as an officer or employee of the Township by this subsection
shall be required, as a condition to their continued employment, to
become a bona fide resident of the Township pursuant to subsection
19-14.3.
§ 19-14.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-14.7
1:357
§ 19-14.7. Discrimination elimination. [Ord. No. 0-17-81; 1967 Code
§ 55A-7]
Any requirements concerning eligibility, appointment or promotion
contained in this chapter shall be subject to any order issued by any
court or by any State or Federal agency pursuant to law, with respect to
a requirement of action to eliminate discrimination in employment based
upon race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry, marital status or sex,
except that any requirement contained in this chapter pursuant to
subsection 19-14.3 shall continue to apply notwithstanding any such order.
§ 19-15. POLITICAL ACTIVITY.
§ 19-15.1. Certain political activities prohibited. [Ord. No. 0-21-71;
1967 Code § 55A-40; New]
§ 19-16. PARTICIPATION IN THE VOLUNTEER TUITION CREDIT
PROGRAM (P.L. 1977, C. 145)
§ 19-16.1. Findings. [Ord. No. 0.4.00]
The Township Council deems it appropriate to enhance the recruitment and
retention of volunteer fire fighters and emergency medical volunteers in the
Township and the State of New Jersey has enacted P.L. 1998 c. 145 which
permits Municipal governments to allow their firefighting and emergency
medical volunteers to take advantage of the Volunteer Credit Program as no
cost to the Municipal government.
§ 19-16.2. Adoption of program. [Ord. No. 0.4.00]
a. It shall be the declared policy of the Township to appoint all employees,
either classified or unclassified without regard to political
consideration. For the purpose of this subsection "Township employee"
is defined to include full-time, temporary, probationary, seasonal or
part-time personnel appointed by the Township Manager and receiving
an annual or hourly reimbursement for their services.
b. Township employees shall not engage in any political activities during
working hours or on Municipal property, nor seek or accept nomination
or election to any Municipal office without first obtaining a leave of
absence.
c. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prevent Township
employees from becoming or continuing to be members of any political
party, club or organization; attending political meetings; expressing
their views in private on political matters outside of working hours and
off Township premises; or voting with complete freedom in any election.
a. The Volunteer Tuition Credit Program as set forth in P.L. 1988, c. 145 is
herewith adopted for the volunteer fire fighters and emergency medical
volunteers in the Municipality nunc pro tunc to January 1, 2000.
§ 19-14.7 § 19-16.2
1:358
Chapter 20
SERVICE STATIONS
§ 20-1. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 5-26-69; 1967 Code § 31-1]
GASOLINE-SELLING or SERVICE STATIONS — Any establishment, other
than a public garage, supplying or selling motor fuel from a pump or pumps
and oil from a container or containers direct to motor vehicles.
PERSON — And include partnerships, corporations and associations as well
as individuals.
§ 20-2. PERMIT REQUIRED; STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS.
[Ord. No. 5-26-69; 1967 Code § 31-2]
Gasoline-selling or service stations shall be allowed only by special permit in
Retail-Commercial and General-Commercial Highway Districts and subject
to the following standards and regulations.
b. The Township Manager or his designee is hereby designated the
responsibility to administer the program and is authorized to enter into
all agreement and to maintain files of all documents as may be required
under the P.L. 1998, c. 145.
a. Lot shall be at least 20,000 square feet in area, with a minimum lot
width of 100 feet.
b. All fuel pumps, car lifts and service appliances, except the free-air
pump, shall be located at least 25 feet away from the side and rear
property lines so as to permit all services to be performed within the lot
lines.
c. All fuel tanks shall be installed underground.
d. Driveways.
1. Driveways shall cross the sidewalk at right angles, which shall not
be more than 25 feet wide at any point thereof.
2. There shall be a twenty-five-foot safety zone minimum between
driveways. Driveways shall be at least 10 feet from the adjoining
property line and at least 20 feet from the corner of intersecting
right-of-way line.
3. There shall be a maximum of two driveways on any street.
e. The entire area of the station or garage or sales area traversed by
motor vehicles shall be macadam or concrete.
f. No gasoline-selling or service stations, or area so utilized, shall be
located within 300 of any property upon which a church, hospital,
public or parochial school, private school college, institution or theater
§ 19-16.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-2
1:359
shall be located. Nor shall the gasoline-selling or service station be
located within 2,500 feet of another gasoline-selling or service station.
The distance shall be measured on a straight or air line from the
nearest boundary or property line in the one instance to the nearest
point or boundary line of the use being measured.
g. Various building and lot requirements.
1. A buffer yard of not less than 50 feet in width shall be provided on
any special use included wherein this section shall be located
within 50 feet of any residential zone. The distance shall be
measured as indicated in paragraph f. of this subsection. This
buffer yard shall be used only as a planting strip on which hedge,
evergreens, shrubbery or other suitable planting shall be provided
and maintained.
2. The walls of any building are set back at least 25 feet from every
adjoining property line and at least 50 feet from a street right-ofway
line.
3. Canopies or roof overhangs attached to or extended from the
building shall not extend more than five feet from the building.
4. Building area. Not more than 10% of the area of each lot may be
occupied by buildings. No building shall exceed one story in height.
h. All lubrication, repair, painting or similar activities shall be performed
within a completely enclosed building. In addition thereto all displays
and sale of merchandise shall be made or sold within a completely
enclosed building, except as specifically provided or allowed under the
terms of this chapter.
i. Sufficient parking space for all vehicles of employees and patrons shall
be provided, with a minimum of five spaces.
j. No automobile, truck, trailer or boat shall be allowed to stand on any
gasoline-selling or service station, publicly advertising it being for sale,
namely, the automobile, truck, trailer or boat.
k. No gasoline-selling or service station shall be permitted within 50 feet
of the nearest lot line of any other building.
l. No part of any gasoline-selling or service station may be used for
residence or sleeping purposes except by a watchman.
m. Signs shall be erected in accordance with the requirements
enumerated in the Zoning Ordinance of the Township, except that no
sign shall exceed 25 feet in height; nor shall the sign be erected less
than 15 feet from any curb or property line.
n. All electric, gas, telephone and other utility lines and uses shall be
installed underground.
§ 20-2 § 20-2
1:360
§ 20-3. PROCEDURE. [Ord. No. 5-26-69; 1967 Code § 31-3]
o. All alterations or additions to gasoline-selling or service stations,
irrespective of the district in which the same may be located, shall be
made in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
a. An applicant for special-exception-use permit under this chapter shall
make application to the Board of Adjustment in the manner provided by
law for an application of use variance and procedure to be followed by
the Board of Adjustment, and the Township Council shall be the same as
that prescribed by law for the granting of a use variance. Each
applicant for such special-exception-use permit shall, at the time of the
filing of such application, pay to the Township Clerk a filing fee, which
fee shall be in addition to the fees for building permit otherwise
prescribed by the applicable ordinance of the Township. No
applications shall be considered by the Board of Adjustment until such
time as the fee is paid.
b. Upon application, the applicant shall submit with the application to the
Board of Adjustment in triplicate a set of plans, specifications and site
plans which shall show the location and dimensions of boundary streets
and easements, the location of any existing and all proposed buildings,
parking areas, driveways and signs, with dimensions and areas of all
the same, together with such other information as may be necessary for
determining the application of any and all of the regulations set forth in
this chapter, and which shall further show in detail the exact location of
such filling station, the number of gasoline tanks to be installed, the
dimensions and capacity of each tank, the depth at which the tanks will
be placed below ground, the number of pumps to be installed, the type
of structure and accessory buildings to be constructed, the number of
automobiles to be garaged, and description of the nature and extent of
the proposed use. In addition, a drainage plan providing for the
correction, storage and disposal of stormwater runoff from the site shall
be submitted in triplicate. All surveys, plans, specifications or drawings
submitted shall be prepared by a duly licensed surveyor, architect and
engineer.
c. Then the Board of Adjustment shall conduct a public hearing, of which
notice shall be given to the Planning Board, and shall recommend in
writing to the governing body that a special exception be granted and a
permit be issued, if, in its judgment, such use at the proposed location
would not be detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of
the community, and is reasonably necessary for the convenience
thereof. The Board of Adjustment, in each case, shall apply the
standards as provided herein and may, in addition require such other
features or design in keeping with the intent thereof that will further
the purpose of the standards and regulations. Such features shall be
provided and maintained as a condition of the establishment and they
are a condition of approval. In the event a favorable recommendation is
made by the Board of Adjustment, the governing body, by resolution,
§ 20-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-3
1:361
§ 20-4. SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS. [Ord No. 5-26-69; 1967 Code
§ 31-4]
shall approve or disapprove such recommendation. In making its
determination, the governing body shall be guided by the same
standards as those used by the Board of Adjustment.
d. If the Board of Adjustment shall recommend that a special exception be
granted and permit be issued, the applications and plans shall be
forwarded to the Planning Board for recommendations, which
recommendations shall be advisory only. The Planning Board shall then
forward their recommendations together with the application and plans
to the governing body. In no event shall the governing body approve or
disapprove the recommendation of the Board of Adjustment prior to the
receipt of recommendations of the Planning Board.
e. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to waive, or give to
any board or agency of the Township the power to waive any provisions
of the Construction Code29 of the Township.
a. Make a specific finding supported by evidence produced at a public
hearing in the manner provided by law, that such use will not be
prejudicial to the character of the neighborhood.
b. Determine that there is appropriate provision for access facilities
adequate for the estimated traffic from public streets and sidewalks so
as to assure the public safety and to avoid traffic congestion.
c. Require suitable planting not less than six feet high alongside lot lines
and rear lot lines adjacent to residential uses or zones.
d. Where the installation of outdoor flood or spot lighting is intended,
determine that such lighting will not shine directly on any abutting
property. No unshielded lights shall be permitted.
e. Give full consideration to the request for this special exception use and
the Board shall assure itself that such request is consistent with the
plan for future land use in the Township, and with the spirit, purpose
and intent of the Zoning Ordinance. The Board shall also take into
consideration the character and type of development in the area
surrounding the location for which the special exception use is
requested, determine that the use will constitute an appropriate use in
the area, and will not substantially injure or detract from the use of
surrounding property or from the character of the neighborhood.
f. The erection and use of such station shall in no way cause traffic
congestion on highway or create hazardous driving conditions.
g. Drainage plan provided for the collection, storage and disposal of
stormwater runoff from the site is adequate.
29.Editor's Note: See Chapter 10, Building and Housing.
§ 20-3 § 20-5
1:362
§ 20-5. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [New]
Any person that shall violate this chapter, or do any act or thing prohibited,
or refuse to do any act or thing required to be done, or refuse or fail to
comply with an order of the Zoning Administrative Officer, or an order of
the Board of Adjustment or Township Council, such person shall be subject
to the General Penalty established in Section 1-5 of this Code.
Chapter 21
RESERVED
Chapter 22
RESERVED
Chapter 23
RESERVED
Chapter 24
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
§ 24-1. COST RECOVERY FOR THE CLEANUP OF IMMINENT
HAZARDS AND UNUSUAL OCCURRENCE IN THE TOWNSHIP.
§ 24-1.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 0.20.94 § 1; Ord. No. 0.5.01 § 1]
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COST RECOVERY AND CLEANUP — All cost recovery associated with
any imminent hazard or unusual occurrences within the boundaries of
the Township of Deptford, which shall include labor and material for the
removal of any imminent hazard or unusual occurrences or taking of
reasonable measures to prevent or mitigate damages to the public health,
safety or welfare of the residents of the Township of Deptford, including the
lands, private or public therein.
DISCHARGE — Any intentional or unintentional action or omission resulting
in creating an imminent hazard or unusual occurrence into the waters
or lands within the Township of Deptford or outside the Township when
damage may result to the water or lands inside the Township.
PERSON — Any individual, public or private corporation, companies,
association societies, firms, partnerships or joint-stock companies.
§ 20-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-1.2
1:363
§ 24-1.2. Assignment of liability. [Ord. No. 0.20.94 § 2; Ord. No.
0.5.01 § 2]
Any person who shall create an imminent hazard for unusual occurrences
within the Township shall be strictly liable for all cleanup and removal costs
incurred by the Township of Deptford or agencies and employees thereon.
§ 24-1.3. Hearing upon reasonableness of assessment. [Ord. No.
0.20.94 § 3; Ord. No. 0.5.01 § 3]
Upon assessment of cleanup and removal costs, the person assessed may,
within 10 days of receipt of such assessment, make a written request for a
hearing before the Township Council exclusively upon the reasonableness
of the amount assessed.
§ 24-1.4. Liability for attorneys' fees and collection costs. [Ord. No.
0.20.94 § 4; Ord. No. 0.5.01 § 4]
The individual responsible for creating the imminent hazard occurrence
shall be liable for all reasonable attorneys' fees and costs incurred in the
collection of cleanup and removal costs.
Chapter 25
RESERVED
Chapter 26
RESERVED
Chapter 27
RESERVED
Chapter 28
RESERVED
Chapter 29
RESERVED
Chapter BH:1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 24-1.2 § BH:1-1
1:364
§ BH:1-1. TITLE. [New]
The title of the Board of Health Code shall be the "Revised General
Ordinances of the Board of Health of the Township of Deptford, 2004" and
may be referred to as the "Health Code."
§ BH:1-2. DEFINITIONS AND CONSTRUCTION. [New]
The provisions of Chapter 1 of the Revised General Ordinances of the
Township of Deptford in the County of Gloucester concerning definitions
and construction shall apply to all chapters adopted by the Board of Health.
§ BH:1-3. PENALTY.
§ BH:1-3.1. Maximum penalty. [New]
Any person violating any of the provisions of any chapter adopted by the
Board of Health of the Township shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable for
a penalty not to exceed $500 for each offense or serve a term of 90 days in
jail or both, at the discretion of the Court. Complaint shall be made in the
Municipal Court of the Township or before another judicial officer having
authority under the laws of the State of New Jersey. The court shall have the
power to impose other and additional penalties provided by N.J.S.A. 26:3-77
and N.J.S.A. 26:3-78.
§ BH:1-3.2. Separate violations. [New]
Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in which a violation of
any of the provisions of any chapter adopted by the Board of Health exists
shall constitute a separate violation.
§ BH:1-3.3. Collection of fees and penalties. [New]
All fees and penalties collected under any provision of any chapter adopted
by the Board of Health shall be paid to the Chief Financial Officer.
§ BH:1-4. HEALTH OFFICER. [Ord. No. 9-4-73; 1967 Code § 44A-1]
The position of Health Officer of the Board of Health is created. The Health
Officer shall, subject to the superior authority of the Board of Health, be the
general agent for the enforcement of the ordinances and regulations of the
Board of Health and the sanitary laws of the State of New Jersey.
§ BH:1-5. SEVERABILITY. [New]
If any chapter, section, subsection or paragraph of the "Revised General
Ordinances of the Board of Health of the Township of Deptford, 2004" shall
be declared to be unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative, in whole or in
part, by a court of competent jurisdiction, such chapter, section, subsection
or paragraph shall, to the extent that it is not unconstitutional, invalid or
inoperative, remain in full force and effect, and no such determination shall
§ BH:1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § BH:1-5
1:365
be deemed to invalidate the remaining chapters, sections, subsections or
paragraphs of this Revision.
Chapter BH:2
REGULATION OF RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS AND
FOOD AND BEVERAGE VENDING MACHINES
§ BH:2-1. SANITATION IN RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS AND
FOOD AND BEVERAGE VENDING MACHINES.
§ BH:2-1.1. Adoption of Code by reference. [New]
A Code regulating retail food handling establishments and food and
beverage vending machines providing for the inspection of such
establishments and fixing penalties for violations, is hereby established
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:1A-9. A copy of the Code is made a part hereof
without the inclusion of the text thereof herein.
§ BH:2-1.2. Title of Code. [New]
The Code established and adopted by this chapter is the New Jersey
Sanitary Code, Chapter 12, "Sanitation in Retail Food Establishments and
Food and Beverage Vending Machines," as well as N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.1 et seq.
as may be amended from time to time.
§ BH:2-1.3. State Code on file. [New]
A copy of the State of New Jersey Sanitary Code, Chapter 7, has been placed
on file in the office of the Board of Health and will remain on file there for
the use and examination of the public.
§ BH:2-2. LICENSING.
§ BH:2-2.1. License required. [Ord. No. 12-2-69; 1967 Code § 56-8;
New]
a. It shall be unlawful for any person or any body corporate to conduct a
retail food establishment, as defined in N.J.S.A. 24:1-1 et seq. without
first having procured a license from the local Board of Health so to do
or without complying with any or all of the provisions concerning
operation and maintenance of the same as contained in Chapter 12 of
the New Jersey Sanitary Code.
b. The license referred to herein shall expire annually on October 31. Each
application for a new license shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable
application fee of $10. Any person or body corporate holding a valid
license may make application for renewal of same for which there shall
be no fee. All applications referred to herein shall be made on or before
October 1 of each year.
§ BH:1-5 § BH:2-2.2
1:366
§ BH:2-2.2. Fees established. [Ord. No. 12-2-69; 1967 Code § 56-10;
New]
§ BH:2-2.3. Suspension or revocation. [Ord. No. 12-2-69; 1967 Code
§ 56-10]
Any license issued under the terms and provisions of this section may be
suspended or revoked by the Board of Health of the Township for the
violation by the licensee of any provision of this section or for any violation
of Chapter 12 of the State Sanitary Code or whenever it shall appear that
the business, trade, calling, profession or occupation of the person, firm or
corporation to whom such license was issued is conducted in a disorderly or
improper manner or in violation of any law of the United States, the State
of New Jersey, or any ordinance of this Municipality, or that the person or
persons conducting the retail food establishment is of an unfit character to
conduct the same, or that the purpose for which the license has been issued
is being abused to the detriment of the public, or is being used for a purpose
foreign to that for which the license was issued.
A license issued under the terms and provisions of this section shall not
be revoked, canceled or suspended until a hearing thereon shall have been
held by the Board of Health. Written notice of the time and place of such
hearing shall be served upon the licensee at least three days prior to the
date set for such hearing. The notice shall also contain a brief statement
a. The license fees for retail food establishments, payable upon the
issuance of such license, are hereby established as follows:
1. Retail food establishments, permanent locale:
(a) Supermarkets: $250. "Supermarkets" shall be defined as any
and all establishments that offer to consumers meats,
groceries, fruits, produce and sundry items.
(b) Restaurants, nursing and boarding homes with a seating or
serving capacity greater than 20 persons, taverns and fast-food
establishments: $125.
(c) Luncheonettes, nursing and boarding homes with a seating or
serving capacity of 20 or fewer persons, convenience
groceries, meat markets, delicatessens and roadside stands:
$75.
(d) Barbecues, soda fountains (pharmacies), exclusively take-out
establishments and bingo places: $50.
(e) Nonprofit institutional establishments: $50.
2. The fee for any license issued prior to May 1 of any year shall be the
full fee as stated herein. The fee for any license issued on or after
May 1 of any year shall be 50% of the amount stated herein.
b. Temporary retail food establishments, per diem: $20.
§ BH:2-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § BH:2-2.3
1:367
of the grounds for revoking, canceling or suspending such license. Notice
may be given either by personal delivery to the person to be notified or
be deposited in the United States Post Office in a sealed envelope, postage
prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified at the business address
appearing upon the license. At the hearing before the Board of Health, the
person aggrieved shall have an opportunity to answer and may thereafter
be heard, and upon due consideration and deliberation by the Board of
Health the complaint may be dismissed, or, if the Board of Health concludes
that the charges have been sustained and substantiated, it may revoke,
cancel or suspend the license held by the licensee.
If any such license shall have been revoked, neither the holder thereof nor
any person acting for him, directly or indirectly, shall be entitled to another
license to carry on the business within the Township unless the application
for such license shall be approved by the Board of Health.
§ BH:2-2.4. Exception for state or federal legislation. [Ord. No.
12-2-69; 1967 Code § 56-11]
No provision of this section shall be applied so as to impose any unlawful
burden on either interstate commerce or any activity of the State or Federal
government.
§ BH:2-2.5. Waiver of fees for certain organizations. [Ord. No.
12-6-69; 1967 Code § 56-12]
The Board of Health, upon application to the same, may waive the fees
required by this section for and in behalf of any religious, charitable, civic
or other like organizations.
§ BH:2-2.6. Penalties for violation. [New]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this section shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalty established in
Section BH:1-3 of this Code.
§ BH:2-3. FOOD HANDLERS' AND FOOD MANAGERS' COURSES.
[New]
a. It is recommended that all existing retail food establishments, including
restaurants, diners and any other establishment selling, preparing or
serving food excluding prepackaged food in the Township of Deptford
should meet the following requirements to obtain a food handlers
license. The owner, manager or employee in charge of other employees
serving food should successfully complete a course prescribed by the
Board of Health. There are two such courses, an eighteen-hour food
managers course and a three-hour food handlers course.
b. These food handlers' courses pertain to food safety health education,
sanitization, personal hygiene, foodborne illness, dishwashing and
sanitizing procedures, microorganisms, insects and rodents, and other
§ BH:2-2.3 § BH:2-3
1:368
Chapter BH:3
SALE OF FROZEN DESSERTS FROM MOBILE UNITS
§ BH:3-1. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 5-16-67; 1967 Code § 30-1]
As used in this chapter:
ADULTERATED — That a frozen dessert shall be considered adulterated
when it is in a state or condition as described in N.J.S.A. 24:5-8.
FROZEN DESSERTS — Includes: ice cream, frozen custard, French ice
cream, French custard ice cream, sherbet, fruit sherbet, ice milk, ice, water
ice, quiescently frozen confection, quiescently frozen dairy confection,
whipped cream confection, bisque tortoni, artificially sweetened ice milk
as defined in the definitions and standards of identity adopted and
promulgated as rules and regulations of the New Jersey State Department
of Health.
MISBRANDING — That a frozen dessert shall be considered misbranded
when it fails to meet the conditions described in N.J.S.A. 24:5-8.
MOBILE UNIT — Any vehicle on which frozen desserts are manufactured,
prepared, processed or converted in form and which is used in selling and
dispensing such products to the consuming public.
§ BH:3-2. ENFORCING OFFICIAL. [Ord. No. 5-16-67; 1967 Code
§ 30-2]
The Board of Health or the Health Officer shall enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
§ BH:3-3. REGULATIONS GOVERNING LICENSES.
§ BH:3-3.1. Application. [Ord. No. 5-16-67; 1967 Code § 30-3A]
Applicants for a license under this chapter shall file an application with the
Board of Health for each mobile unit used or operated in the Township.
Application forms shall be supplied by the Board of Health. Licenses under
the provisions of this chapter shall be in lieu of the requirements of licenses
required by Section 4-2, Peddlers, Hawkers, Vendors, etc.
§ BH:3-3.2. Duration. [Ord. No. 5-16-67; 1967 Code § 30-3B]
All licenses issued under this chapter shall expire on April 15 in each year,
and there shall be no abatement for the issuance of a license under this
health related matters. The certificate of satisfactory completion of the
three-hour food handlers course is valid for three years from the date
of issuance, and the eighteen-hour certificate of satisfactory completion
for the food managers course is effective for four years from the date of
issuance.
§ BH:2-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § BH:3-3.2
1:369
chapter for nonuse, surrender and/or cancellation. Licenses shall not be
transferable and must be surrendered after expiration before a renewal
license can be issued.
§ BH:3-3.3. Special license. [Ord. No. 5-16-67; 1967 Code § 30-3C]
A temporary special license for short periods of time not exceeding a total of
seven days may be issued to circus groups, carnivals and other like groups
when sponsored by local nonprofit, religious, charitable, educational, civic,
veterans' organization, society, association, service group, volunteer First
Aid and/or Fire Company, at a permit fee of $5 for the license.
§ BH:3-3.4. Display of license. [Ord. No. 5-16-67; 1967 Code
§ 30-3D]
Licenses shall be conspicuously displayed on the licensed mobile unit.
§ BH:3-3.5. Fee. [Ord. No. 5-16-67; Ord. No. 3-80; 1967 Code § 30-4;
New]
A fee of $175 shall be paid by each applicant upon the issuance of each
license. A license and fee shall be required for each mobile unit.
§ BH:3-4. HOURS OF SALE. [Ord. No. 5-16-67; 1967 Code § 30-5]
The hours of sale for frozen desserts by mobile units shall be between 10:00
a.m. and 8:00 p.m., local time.
§ BH:3-5. HEALTH CERTIFICATE REQUIRED. [Ord. No. 5-16-67;
1967 Code § 30-6]
A health certificate from a physician shall be required for operators and
handlers of frozen desserts on mobile units to certify the operators and
handlers are free of communicable diseases.
§ BH:3-6. INSPECTION.
§ BH:3-6.1. Compliance with regulations required. [Ord. No.
5-16-67; 1967 Code § 30-7]
A mobile unit used in the sale of frozen desserts shall be maintained in
a clean and sanitary manner and shall be subject to inspection prior to
licensing and at any other time deemed necessary by the Board of Health
or the Health Officer and shall fully comply with the laws of the State of
New Jersey, the rules and regulations of the State Department of Health,
the ordinances of the Township and the rules and regulations of the Board
of Health.
§ BH:3-7. PREPARATION AND HANDLING OF FROZEN DESSERTS.
§ BH:3-3.2 § BH:3-7.1
1:370
§ BH:3-7.1. Temperature. [Ord. No. 5-16-67; 1967 Code § 30-8A]
An adequate temperature to prevent the thawing and spoilage of frozen
desserts shall be maintained at all times. Storage compartments for the
various items carried shall be maintained at a temperature of 45° F. or
below.
§ BH:3-7.2. Refuse disposal. [Ord. No. 5-16-67; 1967 Code § 30-8B]
A refuse container with a tight-fitting cover must be available for the deposit
of papers and other solid wastes by customers and operators which is
constructed, designed and placed so it can be readily used, cleaned and
kept clean and located so it does not create a nuisance or allow litter.
§ BH:3-7.3. Water supply. [Ord. No. 5-16-67; 1967 Code § 30-8C]
A potable water supply tank with a minimum capacity of 30 gallons, heated
electrically or otherwise, and tilted toward a capped drain cock shall be
provided. Water inlet pipe shall be of removable flexible copper or other
tubing approved by the Health Official with the nozzle for hose connection
capped when not being used. A hose for connection to potable water supply
shall be provided and be equipped with an approved vacuum breaker and
check valve.
§ BH:3-7.4. Wash area. [Ord. No. 5-16-67; 1967 Code § 30-8D]
A hand wash sink, seamless, with running hot and cold water, soap and
single service of individual towels or mechanical hand dryer shall be
provided.
§ BH:3-7.5. Waste tank. [Ord. No. 5-16-67; 1967 Code § 30-8E]
A suitable waste tank with capacity of at least equal to the water supply tank
shall be provided, tilted toward a drain cock with an adequate method of
gauging the contents. It shall be emptied and flushed as often as necessary
in a sanitary manner in order to maintain sanitary conditions.
§ BH:3-7.6. Uniforms. [Ord. No. 5-16-67; 1967 Code § 30-8F]
Persons handling frozen desserts shall be clothed in white, clean, washable
uniforms.
§ BH:3-7.7. Lighting. [Ord. No. 5-16-67; 1967 Code § 30-8G]
The mobile unit shall be well-lighted with at least thirty-footcandles of light
intensity on all working surfaces.
§ BH:3-7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § BH:3-7.8
1:371
§ BH:3-7.8. Dessert wrappers. [Ord. No. 5-16-67; 1967 Code
§ 30-8H]
All frozen desserts shall be dispensed in individual paper wrappers or by
single-service containers properly labeled.
§ BH:3-7.9. Exemption for other use. [Ord. No. 5-16-67; 1967 Code
§ 30-81]
A mobile unit shall be used only for the sale of frozen desserts unless
specific exemption is applied for in writing and granted by the Board of
Health for the sale on such unit of other food products. Such permission
shall appear on the license granted to such mobile unit.
§ BH:3-7.10. Glass windows and doors. [Ord. No. 5-16-67; 1967
Code § 30-8J]
Serving windows and doors shall be made of glass and shall be kept closed
at all times except when being used to serve customers.
§ BH:3-7.11. Operation from depot. [Ord. No. 5-16-67; 1967 Code
§ 30-8K]
All mobile units other than those operating exclusively at fairs, outings, and
carnivals of short duration shall operate from a depot and shall report to
their respective depots for sanitizing at least once a day.
§ BH:3-7.12. Containers. [Ord. No. 5-16-67; 1967 Code § 30-8L]
Flavors for use in making sundaes, shakes, etc., shall be kept in singleservice
containers or other type of container acceptable to the Health
Official.
§ BH:3-7.13. Posting of instruction notice. [Ord. No. 5-16-67; 1967
Code § 30-8M]
Notice shall be posted in service area of the mobile unit with instructions
as to proper handling of food materials and containers, proper cleaning of
equipment, utensils and appurtenances, and proper waste disposal.
§ BH:3-7.14. Compliance with state rules and regulations. [Ord. No.
5-16-67; 1967 Code § 30-8N]
All mobile units shall be in compliance with all rules and regulations
governing the preparation and handling of frozen desserts promulgated by
the New Jersey State Department of Health for mobile units, as amended
and/or supplemented and any other statutory provisions applicable thereto.
§ BH:3-7.8 § BH:3-8
1:372
§ BH:3-8. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [New]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions
of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable for the penalty
established in Section BH:1-3 of this Code.
Chapter BH:4
INDIVIDUAL AND SEMIPUBLIC WATER SUPPLIES
§ BH:4-1. CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE. [Ord. No. 12-1-77; 1967
Code § 77-1]
Any Code regulating the location, construction, alteration, use and
supervision of individual and semipublic water supplies, requiring certain
permits, providing for the inspection of such supplies, fixing fees and
prescribing penalties for violations is hereby adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A.
26:3-69.1 to 3-69.6. A copy of the Code is annexed hereto and made a part
hereof without inclusion of the text thereof herein.
§ BH:4-2. TITLE. [Ord. No. 12-1-77; 1967 Code § 77-2]
The Code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Individual and Semipublic Water Supply Code of
New Jersey (1966)."
§ BH:4-3. COPIES ON FILE. [Ord. No. 12-1-77; 1967 Code § 77-3]
Three copies of the Individual and Semipublic Water Supply Code of New
Jersey (1966) have been placed on file in the office of the Secretary, Clerk
or other similar officer of this Board of Health upon the introduction of this
chapter and will remain on file in the office for use and examination by the
public.
§ BH:4-4. PERMIT AND CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.
§ BH:4-4.1. Permit required; conditions for issuance. [Ord. No.
12-1-77; 1967 Code § 77-4]
§ BH:4-4.2. Certificate of compliance required; conditions for
issuance. [Ord. No. 12-1-77; 1967 Code § 77-5]
a. No person shall locate, construct or alter any water supply until a
permit for the location, construction or alteration of the water supply
shall have been issued by the Board of Health.
b. The Board of Health may issue a permit if an application for same is
accompanied by a certificate, made by an engineer licensed to practice
professional engineering in New Jersey, stating that the design of the
water supply as proposed is in compliance with the Code.
§ BH:3-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § BH:4-4.2
1:373
§ BH:4-4.3. Denial of permit or certificate; hearing. [Ord. No.
12-1-77; 1967 Code § 77-6]
In case any permit or certification required by this chapter is denied by the
Board of Health, a hearing shall be held thereon before the Board within 15
days after request therefor is made by the applicant, and upon such hearing
the Board of Health shall affirm, alter or rescind its previous determination
and take action accordingly within 15 days after the date of such hearing.
§ BH:4-5. STOP-WORK ORDERS FOR WORK IN VIOLATION. [Ord.
No. 12-1-77; 1967 Code § 77-7]
The Board of Health may order that all further work in and about any
water supply which is being erected or installed in violation of the Code be
stopped forthwith, except such work as shall be necessary to remedy such
violation, and that thereafter the work be continued without any violation of
any of the provisions of the Code; and after issuance of any such order and
the service of a copy thereof upon any person connected with or working in
and about the erection or installation of any such water supply or any part
thereof, no further work shall be done thereon except as aforesaid.
§ BH:4-6. FEES. [Ord. No. 12-1-77; 1967 Code § 77-8]
The following fees and charges are herewith established:
a. New water supplies shall not be placed in operation, nor shall new
dwellings or buildings or additions thereto be sold or occupied which
must rely on such a supply for water until the Board of Health shall
have issued a certificate indicating that the water supply has been
located and constructed in compliance with the terms of the permit
issued and the requirements of the aforesaid Code. Issuance of such
certificate shall not be required for alteration to an existing water
supply.
b. The Board of Health may issue such a certificate if an engineer licensed
to practice professional engineering in New Jersey submits a statement
in writing, signed by him, to the Board of Health that the water supply
has been located and constructed in accordance with the terms of the
permit and the requirements of the aforesaid Code.
a. For the filing of an application and plans for a permit to locate and
construct a water supply: $5.
b. For the filing of an application and plans for a permit to alter an existing
water supply: $5.
c. For the issuance of a permit to locate and construct a water supply:
$20.
d. For each reinspection of a water supply or part thereof caused by the
failure of the permittee to locate and construct or alter the same in
§ BH:4-4.2 § BH:4-6
1:374
§ BH:4-7. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [New]
Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions
of or any order promulgated under this chapter or the Individual and
Semipublic Water Supply code of New Jersey (1966) made a part hereof
shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable for the penalty established in
Section BH:1-3 of this Code.
Chapter BH:5
SEWER CONNECTIONS
§ BH:5-1. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 4-3-73; 1967 Code § 62B-1]
As used in this chapter:
BUILDING — Any building or structure heretofore or hereafter constructed
and designed or used for dwelling purposes, either temporary or
permanent, or other use or occupancy by persons.
CONNECTION DATE — When used with respect to a building constructed
prior to the date of the initial operation, as part of any sanitary sewage
treatment and disposal system in the Township owned or operated by the
Township or the Township Municipal Utilities Authority, of a sewer available
to serve the building "connection date" shall mean the 90th day after the
date of initial operation. When used with respect to a building constructed
after the date of initial operation as a part of any sanitary sewage treatment
and disposal system owned or operated by the Township or the Authority,
of a sewer available to serve the building "connection date" shall mean the
60th day after the date of completion of construction or the date of initial
occupancy of the building, whichever of the dates shall be earlier in point of
time.
SEWER — Any sewer or main designated or used for collection or disposal
of sanitary sewage within the Township.
§ BH:5-2. CONNECTION REQUIRED. [Ord. No. 4-3-73; 1967 Code
§ 62B-2]
The owner of each property along the line of any sewer now or hereafter
constructed in the Township by the Township or the Township Municipal
Utilities Authority shall connect each building on such property with a
sewer prior to the connection date with respect to the building.
§ BH:5-3. MATERIAL SPECIFICATIONS. [Ord. No. 4-3-73; 1967
Code § 62B-3]
Every connection required by this chapter shall be made with cast-iron soil
pipe from inside the building to a point not less than five feet outside the
accordance with the terms of the permit issued or the terms of the
aforesaid Code: an inspection fee of $5.
§ BH:4-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § BH:5-3
1:375
building. From this point to the sewer main, cast-iron pipe caulked and
leaded or asbestos cement pipe with slip-joint rubber gaskets may be used.
All pipes must be not less than four inches in diameter.
§ BH:5-4. ORDER BY BOARD OF HEALTH. [Ord. No. 4-3-73; 1967
Code § 62B-4]
Upon receipt by the Board of Health of notification from the Township
Municipal Utilities Authority or from the Township that any sewer is
available to serve buildings on any properties in the Township, the Board
of Health shall order such owner of property along the line of the sewer to
connect each building on such property with the sewer in accordance with
the terms of this chapter.
§ BH:5-5. SERVICE OF NOTICE. [Ord. No. 4-3-73; 1967 Code
§ 62B-5]
The Board of Health shall designate the Health Officers to give notice to the
owner of the property with respect to which an order is issued pursuant to
Section BH:5-4 of this chapter. Such notice shall be addressed to the owner
of the property as the name of the owner appears in the last tax duplicate
of the Township, shall describe the property by lot and block designation as
the same appears on the Tax Map of the Township and by the street address
if a street address exists and shall state that by order of the Board of Health,
the owner is required to connect each building on the property with a sewer
in accordance with the terms of this chapter on or before the connection
date with respect to such building or, if such connection date shall have
passed, within 30 days after service of such notice as hereinafter provided,
and the notice shall also describe the penalty which may be imposed for
failure to comply with the notice and order in accordance with the terms
of this chapter. The notice may be served on the owner personally or by
leaving it at his usual residence with a member of his family above the
age of 18 years or the notice may also be served within or without the
limits of the Township by mailing the same by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the last known post office address of the owner as the same
appears on the last tax duplicate of the Township.
§ BH:5-6. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [New]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions
of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty
established in Section BH: 1-3 of this Code.
Chapter BH:6
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM
§ BH:5-3 § BH:5-6
1:376
ARTICLE I
Standards for Individual Subsurface Sewage Disposal Systems
§ BH:6-1. ADOPTION OF CODE. [Ord. No. 11-17-64; 1967 Code
§ 64-1]
A Code regulating the location, construction, use, maintenance and method
of emptying or cleaning individual sewage disposal systems, the issuance
of permits to locate, construct, empty or clean the systems, and fixing
penalties for the violation thereof is adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1
to 69.6. A copy of the Code is on file in the Office of the Board of Health.
§ BH:6-2. TITLE. [1967 Code § 64-2; New]
The Code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as Chapter 9A of the State Sanitary Code: "Standards for
Individual Subsurface Sewage Disposal Systems."
§ BH:6-3. COPIES ON FILE. [Ord. No. 11-17-64; 1967 Code § 64-3]
Three copies of Chapter 9A of the State Sanitary Code: "Standards for
Individual Subsurface Sewage Disposal Systems" have been placed on file
in the office of the Secretary, Clerk or other similar officer of this Board of
Health upon the introduction of this chapter and will remain on file in the
office for the use and examination of the public.
§ BH:6-4. PERMIT.
§ BH:6-4.1. Required. [Ord. No. 11-17-64; 1967 Code § 64-4A]
No person shall locate, construct or alter any individual sewage disposal
system until a permit for the location, construction or alteration of the
sewage disposal system shall have been issued by the Board of Health.
§ BH:6-4.2. Application to be accompanied by certificate. [Ord. No.
11-17-64; 1967 Code § 64-4B]
The Board of Health may issue a permit if an application for the same
is accompanied by a certificate issued by an engineer who is licensed to
practice professional engineering in New Jersey stating that the design of
the individual sewage disposal system as proposed is in compliance with the
Code.
§ BH:6-5. CERTIFICATE STATING COMPLIANCE WITH CODE.
§ BH:6-5.1. Required. [Ord. No. 11-17-64; 1967 Code § 64-5A]
New individual disposal systems shall not be placed in operation, nor shall
new dwellings or buildings or additions thereto be sold or occupied which
must rely on such a system for sewage disposal until the Board of Health
shall have issued a certificate indicating that the disposal system has been
§ BH:6-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § BH:6-5.1
1:377
located and constructed in compliance with the terms of the permit issued
and the requirements of the aforesaid Code. Issuance of each certificate
shall not be required for alterations to an existing individual sewage
disposal system.
§ BH:6-5.2. Written statement from licensed engineer. [Ord. No.
11-17-64; 1967 Code § 64-5B]
The Board of Health may issue such a certificate if an engineer licensed
to practice professional engineering in New Jersey submits a statement in
writing signed by him to the Board of Health that the disposal system has
been located and constructed in accordance with the terms of the permit
issued and the requirements of the aforesaid Code.
§ BH:6-6. REGULATIONS GOVERNING LICENSES.
§ BH:6-6.1. Required. [Ord. No. 11-17-64; 1967 Code § 64-6A]
Persons shall not engage in the business of emptying or cleaning septic
tanks, cesspools, privies or any place used for the reception or storage of
human excrement who do not hold a license to engage in such business
issued by the Board of Health. Such licenses shall be valid for a period of
one year from the date of issuance but may be renewed by the Board of
Health. The license may be revoked for failure of the licensee to comply with
the provisions of the Code or any rule or ordinance of the Board of Health.
§ BH:6-6.2. Permit required. [Ord. No. 11-17-64; 1967 Code
§ 64-6B]
The contents of any septic tank, cesspool, privy or other receptacle
containing human excrement shall not be removed until a permit for such
removal has been obtained from the Board of Health.
§ BH:6-6.3. Denial of license; hearing. [Ord. No. 11-17-64; 1967
Code § 64-7]
In case any license, permit, or certification required by this chapter is
denied by the Board of Health, a hearing shall be held thereon before the
Board within 15 days after request therefor is made by the applicant and
upon such hearing the Board of Health shall affirm, alter or rescind its
previous determination and take action accordingly within 15 days after the
date of such hearing.
§ BH:6-7. FEES AND CHARGES. [Ord. No. 11-17-64; 1967 Code
§ 64-9; Ord. No. 3-16-71; Ord. No. 5-80; New]
The following fees and charges are herewith established:
a. For the filing of an application and plans for a permit to locate and
construct an individual sewage disposal system, a fee of $40 shall be
charged.
§ BH:6-5.1 § BH:6-7
1:378
§ BH:6-8. VIOLATIONS.
§ BH:6-8.1. Violation of Code. [Ord. No. 11-17-64; 1967 Code
§ 64-8]
The Board of Health may order all further work in and about any individual
sewage disposal system, which is being erected or installed in violation of
the Code, to be stopped forthwith, except such work as shall be necessary
to remedy such violation, and, thereafter, the work continued without any
violation of any of the provisions of the Code, and after issuance of any such
order and the service of a copy thereof upon any person connected with
or working in and about the erection or installation of any such disposal
system, or any part thereof, no further work shall be done thereon, except
as aforesaid.
§ BH:6-8.2. Penalties. [New]
§ BH:6-9. FEES PAID TO MUNICIPAL CLERK. [Ord. No. 11-17-64;
1967 Code § 64-11; New]
All fees, penalties and moneys collected under any provision of this chapter
or the Code established herein shall be paid to the Township Clerk.
§ BH:6-10. TERMINATION WHERE SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
AVAILABLE.
b. For the filing of an application and plans for a permit to alter an existing
individual sewage disposal system, a fee of $40 shall be charged.
c. For the issuance of a permit to locate and construct or alter an
individual sewage disposal system, a fee of $40 shall be charged.
d. For each reinspection of an individual sewage disposal system or part
thereof caused by the failure of the permittee to locate and construct or
alter the same in accordance with the terms of the permit issued or the
terms of the aforesaid Code, an inspection fee of $40 shall be charged.
e. For each inspection of an individual sewage disposal system or part
thereof made at the request of the permittee or any other person for the
purpose of obtaining Veterans' Administration, Federal Housing
Administration or conventional mortgage approval or for any other
purpose, an inspection fee of $50. shall be charged.
a. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of or any
order promulgated under this chapter or the Code made a part hereof
shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalty established in Section
BH: 1-3 of this Code.
b. Each day a particular violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ BH:6-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § BH:6-10.1
1:379
§ BH:6-10.1. Termination of use of individual disposal system. [Ord.
No. 11-17-64; 1967 Code § 64-11.1A]
When a sanitary sewer system becomes available for use to any property
which had theretofore been serviced by an individual disposal system, the
use of the individual disposal system shall be terminated, the contents of
the system shall be removed and the system shall be filled in to render the
area safe and sanitary in a manner approved by the Board of Health and
in compliance with this chapter and the Code herein adopted. Compliance
with this section shall be completed not later than six months after the
connection date provided for the sanitary sewer system as defined in
subsection 14-1.1 of the Revised General Ordinances of the Township of
Deptford (2001); provided, however, that where a safety or health hazard
exists, the Board of Health or its duly authorized agent may order
compliance within a shorter period of time.
§ BH:6-10.2. Notice of requirements. [Ord. No. 11-17-64; Ord. No.
7-5-72; 1967 Code § 64-11.10]
The Board of Health may include in the notice to property owners regarding
connection to a sanitary sewage system as required by Section 14-1 of the
Revised General Ordinances of the Township of Deptford (2001) a statement
of the requirements of this section and of the penalties for violation thereof.
§ BH:6-10.1 § BH:6-10.2
1:380
ARTICLE II
Privies and Cesspools
§ BH:6-11. REGULATIONS GOVERNING PRIVIES AND CESSPOOLS.
§ BH:6-11.1. Location. [Ord. No. 12-8-30; 1967 Code § 62-13]
Privies, cesspools or other receptacle for human excrement or household
drainage shall not be located within four feet of any party line nor within 20
feet of any building used as a dwelling or for the storage or preparation of
food for sale. Pipes or drains through which human excrement or materials
containing such excrement matter is permitted to flow shall be watertight
at all places where the pipes or drain is within 50 feet of any stream,
lake, spring, well or other body of water or within 20 feet of the cellar or
underground portion of any building.
§ BH:6-11.2. Disposal of contents of pits. [Ord. No. 12-8-30; 1967
Code § 62-14]
The contents of any privy pit, cesspool or other receptacle for human
excrement shall not be permitted to overflow therefrom, except into buried
drains provided for the purpose of disposal by percolation. The contents
of any privy pit, cesspool or other receptacle for human excrement shall
be removed therefrom when the pit, cesspool or other receptacle becomes
filled within six inches of the top or, in the case of a privy pit, the privy
building removed to another pit and the abandoned pit filled with clean
earth. The removal, transportation and final disposal of the contents of the
privy pit, cesspool or other receptacle shall be done in a clean, inoffensive
manner and disposed of by any method not in conflict with the provisions of
Section BH:6-1 of this Code. All implements and containers employed in the
removal of excremental matter shall be cleaned and disinfected immediately
after such use.
§ BH:6-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § BH:6-11.2
1:381
Chapter BH:7
SWIMMING POOLS
§ BH:7-1. CODE ESTABLISHED. [Ord. No. 5-7-74; 1967 Code § 69-1]
A Code regulating the construction and alteration of swimming pools,
wading pools and appurtenances thereto, including general layout and
design, recirculation systems, filtration systems, disinfection, wastewater
disposal, dressing rooms and bathhouses, showers, toilets and lavatories,
emergency equipment, bathing water quality, supervision and maintenance,
and declaring violations of the Code a nuisance and prescribing penalties
therefor is hereby established pursuant to Chapter 188, P.L. 1950 (N.J.S.A.
26:69.1 to 69.6). A copy of the Code is annexed hereto and made a part
hereof without the inclusion of the text thereof herein.
§ BH:7-2. TITLE. [Ord. No. 5-7-74; 1967 Code § 69-2]
The Code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Swimming Pool Code of New Jersey — 1970."
§ BH:7-3. COPIES ON FILE. [Ord. No. 5-7-74; 1967 Code § 69-3]
Three copies of the Swimming Pool Code of New Jersey — 1970 have been
placed on file in the office of the Health Officer of this local Board of Health
and will remain on file there for use and examination by the public.
§ BH:7-4. AMENDMENTS, ADDITIONS AND DELETIONS. [Ord. No.
5-7-74; Ord. No. 6-80; 1967 Code § 69-4]
The Code herein established and adopted is hereby supplemented by adding
the following section:
SECTION 2.7.1. FEE — A fee for licensure of swimming pools, as required
herein, in the amount of $100 shall be paid by the applicant upon the
issuance of such license.
§ BH:7-5. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [New]
Any person who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this
chapter or Code established herein or notice issued pursuant thereto shall,
upon conviction thereof, be liable for the penalty established in Section
BH:1-3 of this Code.
Chapter BH:8
EXCAVATIONS FOR PLUMBING WORK
§ BH:8-1. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 2-5-74; 1967 Code § 24-1]
As used in this chapter:
§ BH:6-11.2 § BH:8-1
1:382
EXCAVATOR — A licensed plumber, contractor or subcontractor who must
engage in excavation on private property in order to make a sewer
connection or perform plumbing work in the Township.
PERSON — And include person, persons, partnership, firm, association or
corporation.
§ BH:8-2. NOTICE OF INTENT TO EXCAVATE.
§ BH:8-2.1. Location of natural gas pipes. [Ord. No. 2-5-74; 1967
Code § 24-2A]
No person shall excavate on private property for the purpose of making
a sewer connection or performing plumbing work without having first
ascertained in the applicable manner prescribed herein whether any pipe
distributing or transmitting manufactured, mixed or natural gas is located
within the area to be excavated.
§ BH:8-2.2. Serving of notice by registered or certified mail. [Ord.
No. 2-5-74; 1967 Code § 24-2B]
Except as provided in subsection BH:8-2.3 hereof, the person responsible
for the excavation shall serve a written notice of intention on the person
engaged in the distribution or transmission of manufactured, mixed or
natural gas in the area at least three full working days (excluding
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays) prior to commencement of any
excavation. The written notice of intention shall be served personally or
by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, on the person so
engaged in the transmission of or distribution of the aforesaid gases and
shall contain the name of the person responsible and the date, place, and
type of excavation to be conducted.
§ BH:8-2.3. Emergency. [Ord. No. 2-5-74; 1967 Code § 24-2C]
In the event of an emergency involving danger to life, health or property, it
shall be lawful to excavate if such notice, in writing or otherwise, is given
as soon as reasonably possible.
§ BH:8-2.4. Damage to natural gas pipes. [Ord. No. 2-5-74; 1967
Code § 24-2D]
Any such excavation shall be performed in such manner as to avoid damage
to any pipe distributing or transmitting manufactured, mixed or natural gas.
In the event that damage does occur, the person distributing or transmitting
manufactured, mixed or natural gas in the area shall be notified
immediately.
§ BH:8-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § BH:8-2.5
1:383
§ BH:8-2.5. Written proof of notice required prior to issuance of
permit. [Ord. No. 2-5-74; 1967 Code § 24-2E]
No person shall be issued a sewer connection permit for a sewer connection
or a plumbing permit for plumbing work requiring excavation without first
having submitted written proof or prior notice of intent to excavate as
required herein. Such written proof shall be filed with the Plumbing
Subcode Official and attached to the filed sewer connection permit or
plumbing permit subsequently issued.
§ BH:8-2.6. Penalty for noncompliance. [New]
Any person who fails to give notice as required by this section shall be
in violation thereof and shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalty
established in Section BH: 1-3 of this Code.
§ BH:8-3. EVIDENCE OF INSURANCE.
§ BH:8-3.1. Submission to Plumbing Subcode Official. [Ord. No.
2-5-74; 1967 Code § 24-3A]
No excavator shall commence excavation on private property for the
purpose of making a sewer connection or performing plumbing work
requiring excavation without first having submitted to the Plumbing
Subcode Official evidence of insurance of the type described herein.
§ BH:8-3.2. Type of insurance required. [Ord. No. 2-5-74; 1967 Code
§ 24-3B]
The insurance required under this section shall be a mine-type multipleliability
insurance with minimum limits of $100,000 per person and
$300,000 per accident for personal injury and $300,000 for property
damage, and shall include an endorsement insuring against damage
resulting from excavation, collapse or underground damage.
§ BH:8-3.3. Emergency. [Ord. No. 2-5-74; 1967 Code § 24-3C]
In the event of an emergency involving danger to life, health or property,
it shall be lawful to excavate if such evidence of insurance, in writing or
otherwise, is given as soon as reasonably possible.
§ BH:8-3.4. Written proof of insurance prior to issuance of permits.
[Ord. No. 2-5-74; 1967 Code § 24-3D]
No excavator shall be issued a sewer connection permit for a sewer
connection or a permit for plumbing work requiring excavation without
first having submitted written proof of the insurance required herein. The
written proof required herein shall include the following information: name
of the insurance company, the policy number, limits of coverage,
endorsements required herein, and the name, address and phone number
of the agent or insurance representative who obtained the policy for the
§ BH:8-2.5 § BH:8-3.4
1:384
excavator insured. Such written proof shall be filed with the Plumbing
Subcode Official and attached to the filed sewer connection permit or
plumbing permit subsequently issued.
§ BH:8-3.5. Penalty for noncompliance. [New]
Any excavator who fails to give proof as required by this section shall be
in violation thereof and shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalty
established in Section BH:1-3 of this Code.
Chapter BH:9
RESERVED
Chapter BH:10
COMMUNICABLE DISEASES
§ BH:10-1. DEFINITIONS. [New]
For the purposes of this chapter, the terms used herein are defined as
follows:
CLEANSING — The thorough removal of dust and other contaminating
material in such a way as to prevent the entry thereof, as far as may be
possible, into other rooms or dwellings; washing with soap and hot water;
and scouring, airing, and exposure to sunlight.
DISINFECTION — The application of disinfecting substances to infected
materials in sufficient concentration and for a sufficient length of time
to destroy pathogenic bacteria. When gaseous disinfectants are used, all
cracks, crevices, and openings shall first be closed.
ISOLATION — The placing apart of infected persons for the purpose of
preventing contact with other persons and the establishment of restrictions
directly surrounding such persons.
QUARANTINE — The conditions resulting from restrictive measures which
are applied to household premises or areas of greater magnitude for the
prevention of the spread of communicable diseases to other areas.
§ BH:10-2. LIST OF COMMUNICABLE DISEASES. [New]
a. The diseases as set forth and revised in Chapter 2 of the State Sanitary
Code shall be reportable in the manner prescribed.
b. The following cases are also reportable by State law: All animal bites.
§ BH:8-3.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § BH:10-3
1:385
§ BH:10-3. REPORTS. [New]
All reports of cases or suspected cases of reportable diseases shall be
governed by the rules and regulations as set forth in N.J.S.A. 26:4-15 to
N.J.S.A. 26:4-26.
§ BH:10-4. QUARANTINE AND ISOLATION. [New]
§ BH:10-5. ILLEGAL EXPOSURE TO DISEASE. [New]
§ BH:10-6. ATTENDANCE AT SCHOOLS. [New]
The regulations covering this are covered in Title 26: Chapters 4 through 6
and governed thereby.
§ BH:10-7. EXAMINATION OF CARRIERS. [New]
This Board may, if it shall be deemed necessary, require a person believed
to be a carrier of disease germs to furnish specimens for examination.
It shall be the duty of such person to furnish the necessary specimens
a. Whenever a report of a communicable disease is received, the person
infected shall, at the discretion of this Board, be isolated or quarantined
as this Board may order or direct.
b. In establishing isolation or quarantine, the Board shall define the place
and the limits of the area within which the infected person shall be
isolated. No person except the attending physician or nurse shall enter
or leave the area of isolation without the permission of this Board.
Isolation or quarantine shall be continued until it is determined by
examination of a physician that the person no longer has the disease in
an infectious state.
c. After the isolation or quarantine of any person infected with or exposed
to a communicable disease shall have been established, such person
shall not leave the apartment or premises where he is isolated or
quarantined, nor shall any other person remove such person or permit
him to be removed unless a permit for such removal shall have been
issued first by this Board.
a. No person shall expose or permit the exposure of anyone to any
communicable disease or its causative agent.
b. No person suffering from a communicable disease or harboring the
causative organism of any communicable disease and no articles which
may tend to propagate or spread such disease shall be brought into the
Township without permission from the Health Officer. Whenever it shall
come to the knowledge of any person that such persons or articles have
been brought into this Township without the permission of the Board,
he shall immediately give notice thereof to this Board. No person shall
remove any such diseased person or infected article from any house or
place without a permit from the Board.
§ BH:10-3 § BH:10-7
1:386
for examination to permit the Board or its representative to collect such
specimens.
§ BH:10-8. EXAMINATION FOR DIAGNOSIS. [New]
Whenever this Board shall deem it necessary to establish the true character
of any disease which in its opinion may be communicable, a medical
examination of the person infected may be required and such specimens
of secretions or other material for examination shall be taken from such
person, and it shall be the duty of such person to submit to such
examination and furnish such necessary specimens. No person shall
interfere with or prevent the securing of such specimens. The Board may
cause any person suspected to be infected with a communicable disease to
be isolated or quarantined until medical or laboratory examinations show
that the person is free of the causative organisms of disease.
§ BH:10-9. ANIMAL DISEASES. [New]
§ BH:10-10. INDUSTRIAL AND OCCUPATIONAL DISEASE. [New]
This is covered under the rules and regulations of the Occupational Safety
& Health Act and governed thereby.
§ BH:10-11. DEATHS AND BURIALS. [New]
Whenever death has been caused by any communicable disease, the
transportation, care, disposal, and burial of the body shall be in accordance
with the regulations regarding same, as required by Chapter 5 of the State
Sanitary Code and in accordance with such further regulations as this Board
may direct.
Chapter BH:11
a. Every veterinarian who shall attend any animal within this Township
having or suspected of having rabies, glanders, anthrax or any other
communicable disease transmittable to humans shall, within 12 hours
thereafter, report in writing to this Board the location of such diseased
animal, the type and character of the disease, and the name and
address of the owner.
b. It shall be the duty of any person having knowledge of any dog, cat or
other animal infected with rabies or suspected of being infected with
rabies within this Township to forthwith notify the Board and, if
possible, give a description of the animal, the location where it may be
found, and the name and address of the owner or the person having
custody thereof.
c. Whenever a dog, cat or other animal shall have bitten any person, the
owner or person in charge thereof shall securely confine such animal
for the purpose of observation in such a manner and for such a period
as may be designated by this Board.
§ BH:10-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § BH:10-11
1:387
BODY ART AND TATTOOING
§ BH:11-1. ADOPTION OF STATE SANITARY CODE CHAPTER 8,
BODY ART PROCEDURES.
§ BH:11-1.1. Adoption by reference. [New]
This chapter regulates the business of body art and tattooing by providing
for the sanitation in the facility, personal hygiene of employees,
communicable and blood borne diseases, sterilization and disinfection for
all procedures involving body piercing, tattooing or ear piercing as
contained in N.J.A.C. 8:27-1 et seq.
§ BH:11-1.2. Public record. [New]
A copy of N.J.A.C. 8:27-1 et seq., New Jersey State Sanitary Code Chapter 8,
"Body Art Procedures" is on file in the office of the Board of Health.
Chapter BH:12
RODENT EXTERMINATION
§ BH:12-1. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 7-3-75; 1967 Code § 59-1]
As used in this chapter:
BUILDING — Any structure, whether public or private, that has been
adapted for occupancy, for transaction of business, for rendering of
professional service, for amusement, for display, sale or storage of goods,
wares or merchandise, for the housing of animals, storage of feed for
animals and lands used as a repository for animal wastes, and all outhouses,
sheds, barns and other structures on premises intended for demolition.
HEALTH INSPECTOR — The Health Officer of the Township or any duly
authorized agent or employee of the Board of Health.
PERSON — And include person, persons, partnership, firm, association,
corporation and the owner of buildings subject to demolition.
REPUTABLE PROFESSIONAL EXTERMINATING FIRM — Persons, sole
proprietorships, partnerships, firms, associations or other business entities
engaged in rodent elimination or eradication by use of rodenticides
approved by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
RODENT EXTERMINATION — The elimination or eradication of rats and
other rodents within buildings so that the buildings are completely freed of
such rodents or there is no evidence of rodent infestation remaining after
implementation of accepted measures, such as but not limited to poisoning,
trapping and other means approved by the Health Inspector.
§ BH:12-2. DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS.
§ BH:10-11 § BH:12-2.1
1:388
§ BH:12-2.1. Permission required. [Ord. No. 7-3-75; 1967 Code
§ 59-2A]
It shall be the duty of any person engaged in the demolition of any buildings
in the Township to first secure permission from the Health Inspector of the
Township before the commencement of such demolition.
§ BH:12-2.2. Inspection of premises for infestation. [Ord. No.
7-3-75; 1967 Code § 59-2B]
Before granting permission for demolition of any building, the Health
Inspector shall inspect the premises to determine whether evidence of
rodent infestation exists in or about the building or buildings to be
demolished.
§ BH:12-2.3. Program for rodent extermination. [Ord. No. 7-3-75;
1967 Code § 59-2C]
In the event inspection reveals evidence of rodent infestation, the Health
Inspector shall require a program of rodent extermination undertaken and
completed by a reputable professional exterminating firm. The program
for rodent extermination shall include the use of rat baiting, approved
rodenticides, trapping and other accepted means of extermination approved
by the Health Inspector.
§ BH:12-2.4. Time period for extermination. [Ord. No. 7-3-75; 1967
Code § 59-2D]
The rodent extermination program required herein shall be completed not
less than seven nor more than 30 days prior to the commencement date of
demolition, the exact period to be determined by the Health Inspector.
§ BH:12-2.5. Reinfestation of premises; issuance of certificate of
approval. [Ord. No. 7-3-75; 1967 Code § 59-2E]
After completion of the rodent extermination program as required herein,
the Health Inspector shall reinspect the premises and, upon a determination
that the extermination program has been effective, shall issue a certificate
from the Board of Health signifying its approval of the demolition.
§ BH:12-2.6. Reinfestation of building. [Ord. No. 7-3-75; 1967 Code
§ 59-2F]
Notwithstanding the issuance of a certificate of approval, in the event
evidence of reinsfestation of the building or buildings to be demolished are
discovered by the Health Inspector, then, prior to demolition, the foregoing
provisions of this chapter shall apply and a new request for permission to
demolish shall be made by the persons required herein.
§ BH:12-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § BH:12-3
1:389
§ BH:12-3. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [New]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the penalty established in Section BH: 1-3 of this
Code. The minimum penalty for violation of this chapter shall be $50.
Chapter BH:13
NUISANCES
§ BH:12-3 § BH:12-3
1:390
ARTICLE I
Nuisance Code30
§ BH:13-1. PUBLIC HEALTH NUISANCE CODE.
§ BH:13-1.1. Code established. [Ord. No. 9-9-63; 1967 Code § 42-1]
A Code defining and prohibiting certain matters, things, conditions or acts
and each of them, as a nuisance, prohibiting certain noises or sounds,
requiring the proper heating of apartments, prohibiting lease or rental
of certain buildings, prohibiting spitting in or upon public buildings,
conveyances or sidewalks, authorizing the inspection of premises by an
enforcing official, providing for the removal or abatement of certain
nuisances and recovery of expenses incurred by the Board of Health in
removing or abating such nuisances and prescribing penalties for violations
is hereby established pursuant to Chapter 188, Laws of 1950.
§ BH:13-1.2. Title. [Ord. No. 9-9-63; 1967 Code § 42-2]
The Code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey
(1953)."
§ BH:13-1.3. Copies on file. [Ord. No. 9-9-63; 1967 Code § 42-3]
Three copies of the "Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953)" are
on file in the office of the Health Officer, Secretary, Clerk or other similar
officer of this Board of Health and will remain on file there for the use and
examination of the public.
§ BH:13-1.4. Violations and penalties. [New]
Any person who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this
chapter or Code established herein or notice issued pursuant thereto shall,
upon conviction thereof, be liable for the penalty established in Section
BH:1-3 of this Code.
§ BH:13-1.5. Amendments, additions and deletions. [Ord. No.
9-9-63; 1967 Code § 42-8B; Ord. No. 10-5-71; Ord. No. 3-78]
a. Amendments. Section 311 of the Code herein established and adopted
shall be designated as follows: "Proper Heating of Apartments; Notice
Required Before Termination of Vital Services."
b. Additions. The code herein established and adopted is hereby
supplemented by adding the following sections:
1. Section 3.2. It shall be unlawful for the owner or owners who have
agreed to supply heat, electricity, gas, hot water or any other vital
30.Editor's Note: A copy of the "Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953)" is located
in the office of the Board of Health.
§ BH:13-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § BH:13-1.5
1:391
service to any building designed to be occupied, or occupied, as a
residence for more than two families, to terminate any such vital
service without first having given the residents of such building not
less than five days' written notice of such termination.
2. Section 2.1 paragraph j. The existence or presence of water in a
swimming pool which has been abandoned or otherwise neglected,
which water may breed mosquito larvae and be unhealthy,
detrimental or a menace to the health of the inhabitants of this
municipality.
§ BH:13-1.5 § BH:13-1.5
1:392
ARTICLE II
Nuisances Prohibited
§ BH:13-2. HEALTH NUISANCES.
§ BH:13-2.1. Definitions.
As used in this section:
NUISANCE — Anything which is detrimental or damaging to health or
which is potentially detrimental or damaging to health, as determined by
this Board.
§ BH:13-2.2. Specific nuisance prohibited. [Ord. No. 12-8-30; Ord.
No. 9-27-82; 1967 Code § 62-1; New]
The following specific acts, conditions, and things are each and all of them
declared to constitute public health nuisances and are prohibited:
a. Garbage.
1. Depositing, maintaining, or permitting to be deposited or
maintained, or to accumulate in or upon any public or private street
or thoroughfare or place, or in or upon any property or building,
any wastewater, sewage, garbage, offal, excrement. This does not
include properly constructed and maintained backyard composing
areas, as described by N.J.-D.E.P.
2. Allowing any garbage or excrement or any other offensive or
decomposed solid or fluid matter or substance to leak or escape
from any cart, wagon, vehicle, or other container in which the same
may be conveyed or contained.
b. Excremental material. Permitting any human excrement or material
containing human excrement to remain or flow upon the surface of the
ground or to remain or flow in any open ditch or stream; burying,
plowing under or otherwise disposing of such excrement or permitting
the same to be done within 100 feet of any stream, well, lake, spring, or
other source of water used for drinking or other domestic purposes; or
depositing or permitting to be deposited any such material in any place
where it is likely to gain access to such water or to appear again above
the surface of the ground.
c. Privy vaults and cesspools. Permitting any privy vault or cesspool to
become or remain filled to within one foot of the surface of the
surrounding ground.
d. Toilet accommodations. Any premises that are not provided with
suitable water closets in good working order or privy vaults for all
persons working thereon or living therein.
e. Buildings.
§ BH:13-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § BH:13-2.2
1:393
1. Permitting any building or portion thereof occupied by human
beings to be or remain in a state of uncleanliness detrimental to the
health of the occupants or of the public.
2. Permitting any building which is inhabited by human beings or
which is occupied by human beings for any purpose to be without
an adequate supply of running water at any time while being
occupied.
3. Permitting any filthy or unhealthful plumbing fixtures of or in a
building used or occupied by human beings for any purpose
regardless of whether such condition shall be the result of leakage,
stoppage, or any other cause.
f. Stables or kennels. Any stable or kennel that is not provided with
watertight floors properly graded, trapped and drained to a sewer or
septic system if no sewer is available.
g. Insects, larvae and pupae.
1. Maintaining or permitting to be maintained any pool, pond, ditch,
stream, or other body of water or any other cistern, privy vault,
cesspool, rain barrel or any other receptacle containing liquid in
which mosquito larvae or pupae may or do exist.
2. Maintaining or allowing to be maintained any condition which
causes or engenders the breeding of flies, mosquitoes, or other
vermin.
h. Vermin or insect exterminators. Regulations covering this term are
covered under N.J.A.C. 7:30-1 et seq.
i. Smoke. Emission from any premises; smoke, gases, soot, stench, or
other substance in quantity or strength sufficient to cause injury or
damage to health.
j. Slaughtering. Killing, skinning, or dressing of any animal intended for
food, to be sold for human consumption without permission from this
Board.
k. Animals. The keeping of horses, cows, goats, rabbits, guinea pigs, dogs,
cats or other animals under unsanitary conditions.
l. Cats and dogs. The keeping, maintenance, and/or feeding of stray cats.
The maintenance and/or feeding of privately owned cats and/or dogs in
such a manner as to create unsanitary conditions, attract vermin, or be
potentially detrimental to health or create a public nuisance is hereby
prohibited.
m. Curbing of dogs. No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog shall
permit feces from such dog to be deposited upon public streets, in any
public park, or other public place within the Township, or upon any
private property without the permission of the owner of the property.
§ BH:13-2.2 § BH:13-2.2
1:394
1. In the event that any dog shall defecate on any property, public or
private (without permission of owner), contrary to the foregoing
restrictions, the person in custody of the dog shall immediately
remove all feces deposited by such dog. Such excreta shall be
disposed of by placing same in a closed container and depositing
such in a covered trash receptacle or in any other sanitary manner
approved by the local Board of Health.
2. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to blind persons who
may use dogs as guides.
n. Spitting. Spitting upon the floor, steps, platform or upon the interior of
any street or railway car, bus, or other public conveyance or upon the
floors, staircases or any part of any building or upon the sidewalks or
crosswalks or any street, alley, lane or public place.
o. Obnoxious trades. The carrying on of any trade or business in such a
manner as to be obnoxious or offensive or which may be attended with
unhealthful odors or which may be attended by such conditions or
noises as may be detrimental to health.
p. Common towels. The supplying or furnishing of any roller towel (except
such roller towel which can be mechanically adjusted for individual use
or except individual paper towels), or of any towel for use by more than
one person without intermediate laundering, in any hotel, school, retail
food establishment, boarding house, bakery, clubhouse, washroom,
public lavatory, health club, or in any place where a number of people
congregate.
q. Food. Refer to Chapter 12 of the N.J. State Department of Health
Sanitary Code.
r. Plants. Permitting poison ivy, ragweed, or any other poisonous plant to
exist or to grow upon any public or private property within 25 feet of
any public sidewalk, public street or property line.
s. The depositing or maintaining, or permitting to be deposited or
maintained, in or to any place, public or private, of any animal or
vegetable substance of a decomposable nature, excepting that it be
buried in the ground and immediately covered with clean earth at a
depth of at least equal to the mass covered, and in no instance shall this
depth be less than 12 inches provided that this shall not apply to
manure being used for fertilizing purposes; and the maintaining or
permitting to be maintained, upon any street, lot or other place, public
or private, of any accumulation of animal or vegetable substance in
which fly larvae or pupae exist, or any water in which mosquito larvae
or pupae exist.
t. The discharging or permitting to be discharged, upon any street or
public place, of any household drainage, decomposable or putrescible
waste liquids or filth of any kind, unless previously filtered.
§ BH:13-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § BH:13-2.2
1:395
§ BH:13-2.3. Dumps prohibited. [Ord. No. 8-21-62; Ord. No. 7-7-70;
1967 Code §§ 21-5, 21-6; New]
§ BH:13-2.4. Additional prohibitions. [New]
In addition to the preceding section, whatever is detrimental to health or
whatever is potentially injurious or dangerous to health is hereby declared
to be a health nuisance.
§ BH:13-2.5. Abatement. [Ord. No. 12-8-30; 1967 Code § 62-2]
Any person causing, maintaining or permitting any nuisance as defined and
declared by this Board of Health Code shall, upon notice from the Board of
Health, cause the same to be abated within such time as specified in the
notice, and the expense of abating such nuisance shall be defrayed by the
owner or other person in charge of the premises upon which the nuisance
occurs or exists.
§ BH:13-2.6. Violations and penalties. [New]
Any person who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this
section shall, upon conviction, be liable for the penalty established in
Section BH:1-3 of this Code.
u. The depositing or discharging, or permitting to be deposited or
discharged, into any stream, lake, spring or other body of water, of any
sewage, excremental matter, domestic refuse or other polluting water.
a. Declaration of nuisance. Dumps are hereby declared to be nuisances
hazardous to public health and are prohibited in the Township.
b. Dumping prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation, whether a principal or an agent, servant, employee or
otherwise to dump or dispose of any trash, refuse, garbage or organic
or combustible matter of any nature except as provided in Chapter 18,
Solid Waste Management of the "Revised General Ordinances of the
Township of Deptford."
§ BH:13-2.2 § BH:13-2.6
1:396
Chapter BH:14
KEEPING OF SWINE AND HOGS
§ BH:14-1. KEEPING OF SWINE REGULATED.
§ BH:14-1.1. Permit required; fee. [Ord. No. 12-8-30; Ord. No.
2-24-54; Ord. No. 2-15-66; Ord. No. 4-80; 1967 Code § 62-15A]
No swine shall be kept in the Township without a permit therefor first
having been obtained from the Secretary of the Board of Health, which
permit shall be issued each year, and the person or persons desiring to
keep swine shall be compelled to procure a permit each year therefor, and
the permits issued under this Code shall expire on March 31 of each year.
Application for permits to keep swine shall be made on or before March 1 of
each year and shall be accompanied by a written statement setting forth the
place or places where it is desired to keep swine and the number of such
animals is desired to keep. The fee for the permit shall be $150, which shall
be paid at the time of the application.
§ BH:14-1.2. Regulations. [1967 Code § 62-15B; Ord. No. 2-27-84;
New]
For the protection of the health and laws of sanitation, the following rules
shall be observed by raisers of swine in the Township:
a. Shelter. Swine shall be provided with shelter consisting of a building
with a weathertight roof and solid flooring. The shelter shall be large
enough that each pig up to 100 pounds shall have five square feet of
floor space, and each pig 100 pounds to 150 pounds shall have 7 1/2
square feet of floor space, and each pig over 150 pounds shall have 10
square feet of floor space. Swine may be allowed access to pasture or
earthen floor pens only when a regular program of cleaning,
disinfecting and liming is followed.
b. Sanitation. All hog houses and pens shall be disinfected about the
interior and exterior at least once each four weeks and dry cleaned
each day. Manure shall be removed from pens and feeding area daily
and piled a sufficient distance from pens to insure that swine will not
have access to it. Manure piles shall be spread with hydrated lime daily.
Liquid waste, including wash water, shall be disposed of in such manner
as to avoid becoming a nuisance or health hazard.
c. Feeding. Swine shall not be fed on the ground, but on raised platforms.
Feeding platforms shall be dry cleaned daily in the same manner as
prescribed for hog houses.
d. Manure piles. There shall not be more than one manure pile on a hog
farm for each person holding a permit. The manure pile shall be that
which is used by the operator to pile manure during each week until
weekly removal as set forth under paragraph e. below. No manure pile
§ BH:13-2.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § BH:14-1.2
1:397
§ BH:14-1.3. Advisory board established. [1967 Code § 62-15B; Ord.
No. 2-27-84]
There is hereby established an Advisory Board of three members, each
appointed by the Board of Health, one of whom shall be a member of
the Board of Health, another shall be a member of the Deptford Township
Livestock Association and the third shall be a livestock farmer whose farm
is located within the Township. The purpose of the Advisory Board is to
advise the Board of Health of changing conditions in the swine industry and
to recommend legislation to improve sanitation and health in connection
therewith. Each member shall be appointed to serve a one year term.
§ BH:14-1.4. Inspections. [1967 Code § 62-15B; Ord. No. 2-27-84]
The Board of Health shall send a representative to inspect the buildings and
premises of each licensee as often as deemed necessary and at least once
during each license year. For the purpose of making such inspection, the
representative will have free access to all buildings and premises licensed
under this chapter.
shall be maintained within 300 feet of any public highway and shall
be completely screened from the public view. Fresh manure piles shall
be spread with hydrated lime or odor control spray so as to avoid a
nuisance or health hazard.
e. Removal of manure. Manure shall be removed from the farm at least
once a week in covered vehicles only and in a way that it will not spill on
public highways.
f. Rodent and pest control. Each licensee shall put into effect and
maintain an approved program of rodent and pest control.
g. Manure clean-up. Manure clean-up shall be done at least twice a year in
the Spring and Fall. Overage from screening (plastic, bones, glass &
metal) shall be disposed of by the date set forth in the license
application to operate a Swine Raising Farm.
h. Trucks. Garbage trucks will be kept painted, cleaned, water tight and
well covered when hauling garbage. They shall be disinfected at least
once a week.
i. Distance from public highway.
1. No swine shall be kept within 50 feet of any public highway unless
completely screened from public view.
2. No new hog pens or new hog lots shall be built unless they are at
least 300 feet from the public highway.
j. All new hog pens, hog buildings and feed lots or additions to present
buildings shall have at least a four-inch concrete subfloor.
§ BH:14-1.2 § BH:14-1.5
1:398
§ BH:14-1.5. Suspension or refusal of license. [1967 Code § 62-15B;
Ord. No. 2-27-84]
Upon determining that any person licensed under this chapter or who
has applied for a license hereunder has violated or failed to comply with
provisions of this chapter with any of the rules or regulations of the Board
made hereunder, after a hearing before the Board of Health, the Board
may suspend such person's license or may refuse to issue a license to such
person.
§ BH:14-1.6. Violations and penalties. [New]
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter or any order,
rule or regulation made by the Board under this chapter shall be subject,
upon conviction, to the penalty established in Section BH:1-3 of this Code.
Chapter BH:15
CONTROL OF LEAD-BASE PAINT DURING EXTERIOR HOUSE
PAINTING AND FOR CLEANUP AND DISPOSAL OF LEAD -
BASE CHIPS AND DUST
§ BH:15-1. DEFINITIONS. [New]
As used in this chapter:
CONFINED POWER SANDING — The use for the removal of lead paint
by electric or hydraulic powered sanding tools that have attachments that,
while sanding paint, simultaneously vacuums dust and chips into a HEPA
filtered vacuum device or otherwise contain and control chips and dust from
being released into the environment.
HEPA VACUUM — A high efficient filter that filters out fine particles of dust
at 99.7% of fine particles at 0.3 microns in size.
LEAD-BASE PAINT — Paint that contains more than 0.5% by dry weight of
lead, or contains more than one milligram of lead per square centimeter of
painted surface when measured by an X-ray fluorescence (XRF) analyzer.
PERMIT — A permit obtained through the Board of Health for the removal
of exterior lead paint, or paint suspected of containing lead. The fee for the
permit will be $10.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, employee, company, association,
firm or partnership.
UNCONFINED POWER SANDING — The use for the removal of paint by
electric or hydraulic powered sanding tools that do not have attachments
that, while sanding paint, simultaneously vacuum dust and chips into a
HEPA filtered vacuum device or otherwise contain and control chips and
dust from being released into the environment.
§ BH:15-2. PROHIBITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS. [New]
§ BH:14-1.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § BH:15-2
1:399
§ BH:15-3. ENFORCEMENT. [New]
§ BH:15-4. PENALTIES. [New]
Chapter BH:16
AIR POLLUTION CONTROL
a. No person shall remove lead-base paint, or paint suspected of
containing lead on the exterior surfaces of a house or other structure
without obtaining a permit from the Board of Health.
b. No person shall remove lead-base paint, or paint suspected of
containing lead on the exterior surfaces of a house or other structure by
the method of unconfined power sanding.
c. When exterior lead-base paint is removed by confined power sanding or
other methods such as scraping, manual sanding or power washing,
drop cloths or other ground cover shall be used to catch chips and dust
from the process of paint removal. Chips and dust that fall onto the
ground shall be cleaned to sight.
d. Prior to removal of exterior lead-base paint, windows of the structures
being painted shall be closed and sealed with tape or other barrier to
prevent entry of chips and dust into the interior of the house.
e. Following paint removal, cleanup of dust and chips on window surfaces,
driveways, sidewalks and other ground surfaces shall be done. Paint
dust and chips shall not be dispersed by blowers or hose water. Paint
chips and dust collected shall be placed in double plastic bags of not
less than three mils each of thickness and not weighing more than 20
pounds.
f. Collected paint chips and dust shall be left with the owner or resident
and shall be disposed of in the regular municipal household garbage
collection.
a. This chapter shall be enforceable by the Health Officer or his agent, the
Construction Official or his agent, the Police Department or other
designated Township Official(s) or person(s).
b. This chapter shall take effect after final passage and publication
according to law.
a. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be liable for,
upon conviction, the penalty stated in Section BH:1-3. Each day that the
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
b. In lieu of issuing a summons or complaint in Municipal Court, an order
to immediately cease unconfined power sanding and to clean and
remove leaded paint chips/dust within a reasonable time period may be
issued by the Enforcement Official.
§ BH:15-2 § BH:16-1
1:400
§ BH:16-1. TITLE. [Ord. No. 7-6-71; 1967 Code § 3-1]
This chapter shall be known, and may be cited as the "Air Pollution Control
Code of the Township."
§ BH:16-2. LEGISLATIVE INTENT. [Ord. No. 7-6-71; 1967 Code
§ 3-2]
It is hereby declared that pollution of the atmosphere by smoke, cinders,
soot, fly ash, gases, fumes, vapors, odors, dust and other contaminants
is a menace to the health, welfare and comfort of the residents of the
Township and a cause of substantial damage to property. For the purpose of
controlling and reducing atmospheric pollution, it is hereby declared to be
the policy of the Township to minimize air pollution as herein defined and
prohibit excessive emission of the same; to establish standards governing
the installation, maintenance and operation of equipment and
appurtenances relating to combustion which are a source or potential
source of air pollution; and in furtherance of this purpose to cooperate and
coordinate these efforts with the State Department of Health, Air Pollution
Control Program.
§ BH:16-3. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 7-6-71; 1967 Code § 3-3]
As used in this chapter:
AIR POLLUTION — The presence in the outdoor atmosphere of one or more
air contaminants in such quantities and duration as are, or tend to be,
injurious to human health or welfare, to animal or plant life, or to property,
or would unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property
throughout the Township as shall be affected thereby, and excludes all
aspects of employer-employee relationship as to health and safety hazards.
ECONOMIC POISONS — Those chemicals used as insecticides,
rodenticides, fungicides, herbicides, nematocides or defoliants.
FUEL-BURNING EQUIPMENT — Any furnace, boiler, water heater, device,
mechanism, stoker, burner, stack, oven, stove, kiln, still or other apparatus,
or a group of collection of such units in the process of fuel burning for the
generation of heat or power. Refuse-burning equipment shall be considered
incinerators as herein defined and not as "fuel-burning equipment" under
this definition. Ovens, stoves or ranges used exclusively for domestic
cooking purposes are not included herein.
INCINERATOR — Any device, apparatus, equipment or structure used for
destroying, reducing or salvaging by fire any material or substance,
including but not limited to refuse, rubbish, garbage, debris or scrap or
facilities for cremating human or animal remains.
ODOR — A property of a substance which affects the sense of smell.
OPEN BURNING — Any fire wherein the products of combustion are
emitted into the open air and are not directed thereto through a stack or
chimney.
§ BH:16-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § BH:16-3
1:401
OPERATOR — Any person who has care, custody or control of a building or
premises, or a portion thereof, whether with or without knowledge of the
owner thereof.
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, shall
have legal or equitable title to any premises, with or without accompanying
actual possession thereof; or who shall have charge, care or control of any
premises or part thereof, including but not limited to a dwelling or dwelling
unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or as a fiduciary, including but not
limited to a dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or
as a fiduciary, including but not limited to executor, administrator, trustee,
receiver, guardian or as a mortgagee in possession regardless of how such
possession was obtained. Any person who is a lessee or sublessee of all or
any part of any premises, including but not limited to a dwelling or dwelling
unit, shall be deemed to be a co-owner with the lessor and shall have joint
responsibility with the owner over the premises or portion thereof so leased
or subleased.
PERSON — And include corporations, companies, associations, societies,
firms, partnerships and joint-stock companies, as well as individuals.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible wastes (except body wastes),
and shall include but not be limited to garbage, rubbish, yard trimmings,
leaves, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and
solid market and industrial wastes.
RINGELMANN SMOKE CHART — A Ringelmann's Scale for Grading the
Density of Smoke, published by the United States Bureau of Mines, or any
chart, recorder, indicator or device for the measurement of smoke density
which is approved by the State Department of Health of the State of New
Jersey, as the equivalent of the Ringelmann's Scale.
RUBBISH — Solids not considered to be highly flammable or explosive, and
shall include but not be limited to rags, old clothes, leather, rubber, carpets,
wood, excelsior, paper, ashes, tree branches, yard trimmings, furniture, tin
cans, crockery, masonry and other similar materials.
SALVAGE OPERATIONS — Any business, trade or industry engaged in
whole or in part in salvaging or reclaiming any product or material,
including but not limited to metals, chemicals, shipping containers or
drums.
SMOKE — Small gas-borne and air-borne particles arising from a process of
combustion in sufficient number to be observable.
TRADE WASTE — All solid or liquid material or rubbish resulting from
construction, building operations or the prosecution of any business, trade
or industry, and shall include but not be limited to plastic products, cartons,
paint, grease, oil and other petroleum products, chemicals, cinders and
other forms of solid or liquid waste materials.
§ BH:16-4. PROHIBITION OF OPEN-AIR BURNING. [Ord. No.
7-6-71; 1967 Code § 3-4]
§ BH:16-3 § BH:16-4
1:402
§ BH:16-5. SMOKE EMISSIONS FROM FUEL-BURNING
EQUIPMENT. [Ord. No. 7-6-71; 1967 Code § 3-5; New]
§ BH:16-6. INCINERATOR REGULATION.
§ BH:16-6.1. Smoke emissions. [Ord. No. 7-6-71; 1967 Code § 3-6A]
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit, smoke from any incinerator,
the shade or appearance of which is darker than No. 1 of the Ringelmann
Smoke Chart, to be emitted into the open air; or emissions of such opacity
within a stack or chimney, or exclusive of water vapor, of such opacity
leaving a stack or chimney to a degree greater than the emission designated
as No. 1 of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart.
§ BH:16-6.2. New fires. [Ord. No. 7-6-71; 1967 Code § 3-6B]
The provisions of subsection BH:16-6.1 shall not apply to smoke emitted
during the building of a new fire, the shade or appearance of which is not
darker than No. 2 of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, for a period of no longer
than three consecutive minutes; or to emissions of such opacity within a
stack or chimney or exclusive of water vapor, of such opacity leaving a stack
or chimney to a degree which is not greater than the emissions designated
as No. 2 of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, for a period no longer than three
consecutive minutes.
a. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit open burning of refuse or
plant life nor conduct a salvage operation by open burning, except as
provided in paragraph b, below.
b. The open burning of trade waste is not prohibited where no other
known method of disposal can be used without hazard to health or
property and the required affidavit has been filed with and approved by
the Commissioner of the New Jersey State Department of Health in
accordance with Chapter 2, Section 1.4 of the New Jersey Air Pollution
Control Code.
a. All fuel-burning equipment or incinerators shall comply with the Air
Pollution Control Code and shall not be put into use or reconstructed
without the approval of the Plumbing Subcode Official.
b. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit smoke from any fuelburning
equipment, the shade or appearance of which is darker than
No. 1 of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, to be emitted into the open air.
c. The provisions of this section shall not apply to smoke emitted during
the cleaning of a fire box or the building of a new fire, the shade or
appearance of which is not darker than No. 2 of the Ringelmann Smoke
Chart, for a period or periods aggregating no more than three minutes
in any 15 consecutive minutes.
§ BH:16-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § BH:16-6.3
1:403
§ BH:16-6.3. Visible particles. [Ord. No. 7-6-71; 1967 Code § 3-6C]
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the emission of particles of
unburned waste or ash from any incinerator which are individually large
enough to be visible while suspended in the atmosphere.
§ BH:16-6.4. Odors. [Ord. No. 7-6-71; 1967 Code § 3-6D]
No person shall construct, install, use or cause to be used any incinerator
which will result in odors being detectable by sense of smell in any area of
human use or occupancy.
§ BH:16-6.5. Limitation on time of operation. [Ord. No. 7-6-71;
1967 Code § 3-6E]
No person shall operate, and no owner or operator of any building in the
Township shall permit the operation of, an incinerator prior to 7:00 a.m. or
after 5:00 p.m. of any day, and all operation shall be completely terminated
by 5:00 p.m., including complete extinction of the fire and removal of
material in a safe manner from the firebox to a noncombustible container;
provided, however, that by special permit, the Sanitary Inspector with the
approval of the Board of Health, may, because of exceptional circumstances,
permit different hours of operation under such conditions as he shall deem
necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the public or of persons in
the vicinity.
§ BH:16-7. PROHIBITION OF AIR POLLUTION. [Ord. No. 7-6-71;
1967 Code § 3-7]
No person or owner of property, and no person having possession or control
of property, shall cause, suffer, allow or permit to be emitted into the
open air substances in such quantities as shall result in air pollution. The
provisions of this section shall not apply to the use of economic poisons.
§ BH:16-8. INSPECTIONS AND RIGHT OF ENTRY.
§ BH:16-8.1. Access to premises. [Ord. No. 7-6-71; 1967 Code
§ 3-8A]
All buildings and premises subject to this Code are subject to inspection by
the Sanitary Inspector or his duly authorized representatives. All rooms and
areas in the building shall be available and accessible for such inspection
which shall be made during usual business hours if the premises are used
for nonresidential purposes; provided, however, that inspections may be
made at other times if the premises are not available during the foregoing
hours for inspection or there is reason to believe that violations are
occurring on the premises which can only be apprehended and proved by
inspection during other than the prescribed hours; or there is reason to
believe a violation exists of a character which is an immediate threat to
health or safety requiring inspection and abatement without delay.
§ BH:16-6.3 § BH:16-8.2
1:404
§ BH:16-8.2. Emergency inspections. [Ord. No. 7-6-71; 1967 Code
§ 3-8]
Emergency inspections may be authorized without warrant if the Sanitary
Inspector has reason to believe that a condition exists which poses an
immediate threat to life, health or safety. Such procedure shall take place
only where the time required to apply for and secure the issuance of a
warrant would render ineffective the immediate action necessary to abate
the condition. Emergency inspections may also be authorized by the
Governor in times of air pollution emergencies in accordance with N.J.S.A.
26:2C-32. Where the Sanitary Inspector, or his duly authorized
representative, is refused entry or access or is otherwise impeded or
prevented by the owner, occupant or operator from conducting an
inspection of the premises, such person shall be in violation of this Code and
subject to the penalties hereunder.
§ BH:16-8.3. Search warrant or access warrant. [Ord. No. 7-6-71;
1967 Code § 3-8C]
§ BH:16-9. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [New]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Code, or who shall
fail to comply therewith or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be
subject to the General Penalty established in Section BH:1-3 of this Code.
a. The Sanitary Inspector may, upon affidavit, apply to the Judge of the
Municipal Court of the Township for a search warrant setting forth
factually the actual conditions and circumstances that provide a
reasonable basis for believing that a nuisance or violation of the Code
may exist on the premises, including one or more of the following:
1. The premises require inspection according to the cycle established
by the Board of Health of the Township, for periodic inspections or
premises of the type involved.
2. Observation of external conditions (for example, smoke, ash, soot,
odors) of the premises and its public areas has resulted in the belief
that violations of this Code exist.
3. Circumstances such as age and design of fuel-burning equipment
and/or system, types of incinerator, particular use of premises or
other factor which renders systematic inspections of such buildings
necessary in the interest of public health and safety.
b. If the Judge of the Municipal Court is satisfied as to the matters set
forth in the affidavit, he shall authorize the issuance of a search warrant
permitting access to and inspection of that part of the premises on
which the nuisance or violation may exist.
§ BH:16-8.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § BH:16-10
1:405
§ BH:16-10. CONSTRUCTION OF CHAPTER. [Ord. No. 7-6-71; 1967
Code § 3-10]
This Code is to be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes herein
described. Nothing herein is to be construed as repealing or abridging
the emergency powers of any agency of government except to the extent
expressly set forth herein.
§ BH:16-10 § BH:16-10
1:406

Deptford Township
Gloucester County, New Jersey
Unified Development Ordinance
(UDO)
Adopted by the Deptford Township Council
March 2, 1995
Incorporating amendments through May 5, 2014
Deptford Township UDO Table of Contents
May 5, 2014 Page 2
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter 30, Unified Development Ordinance (UDO)
Article I. General Provisions 6
§ 1 Title............................................................................................................................ 6
§ 2. Authority................................................................................................................... 6
§ 3. Purpose...................................................................................................................... 6
§ 4. Conformity with the Master Plan.............................................................................. 7
Article II. Language Interpretation and Definitions 8
§ 5. Language Interpretations. ......................................................................................... 8
§ 6. Definitions................................................................................................................. 8
Article III. Zoning Districts 46
§ 7. Effect and establishment of zoning districts. ............................................................ 46
§ 8. R-40 Low Density Residential District..................................................................... 49
§ 9 R-20 Medium Density Residential District................................................................ 53
§ 9.1 R-20A Medium Density Residential District.......................................................... 55
§ 10. R-10 Medium Density Residential District............................................................. 56
§ 10.1 R-10A Medium and Low Density Residential District......................................... 63
§ 11. R-6 High Density Residential District. ................................................................... 65
§ 11.1. R6-A Affordable High Density Residential District............................................ 68
§ 11.2 AR-1 Age-Restricted Residential 1 District ......................................................... 71
§ 11.3 AR-2 Age-Restricted Residential 2 District. ........................................................ 76
§ 11.4 AR-3 Age-Restricted 3 Institutional District ........................................................ 78
§ 11.5 AR-4, Age-Restricted 4 and Health Care District ................................................ 80
§ 12. RM-1 Multi-Family Residential District. ............................................................... 90
§ 13. RM-2 Multi-Family Residential District. ............................................................... 92
§ 14. Planned Unit Developments. .................................................................................. 94
§ 14.1 Planned Village Development 1. .......................................................................... 98
§ 15. TC-1 Transitional Commercial District. .................................................................105
§ 16. TC-2 Transitional Commercial District. .................................................................108
§ 17. Business Center 4 – BC4 and Business Center 3 – BC3 ........................................111
§ 17.1 Business Center 2 – BC2 ......................................................................................115
§ 17.2 Business Center 1 – BC1 ......................................................................................118
§ 18. C-1 General Commercial District. ..........................................................................122
§ 19. C-2 Neighborhood Commercial District.................................................................124
§ 20. ROM – Research, Office and Manufacturing District. ...........................................126
§ 20.1. O Office District ..................................................................................................129
§ 21. FLX Flex Space District. ........................................................................................131
§ 22. LI-1 Light Industrial District. .................................................................................133
§ 24. INS Institutional District.........................................................................................138
Deptford Township UDO General Provisions
May 5, 2014 Page 3
Article IV. Design and Improvement Standards 141
§ 25. Purpose....................................................................................................................141
§ 26. Streets......................................................................................................................141
§ 27. Off-street parking....................................................................................................155
§ 28. Off-Street loading. ..................................................................................................162
§ 29. Lighting...................................................................................................................163
§ 30. Signs........................................................................................................................164
§ 31. Landscape, Buffer and Tree Protection Standards..................................................186
§ 32. Common Open space Standards. ............................................................................212
§ 33. Water Supply. .........................................................................................................215
§ 34. Sanitary Sewers and Septic Systems.......................................................................216
§ 35. Stormwater Control.................................................................................................216
§ 36. Performance Standards for Industrial Developments .............................................216
§ 37. General design requirements...................................................................................218
Article V. General Regulations 221
§ 38. Affordable Housing Controls and Affirmative Marketing Requirements ..............221
§ 38.1 Development Impact Fee ......................................................................................227
§ 39. Provision of Park and Recreation Land ..................................................................233
§ 40. Reverse Frontage Lots ............................................................................................236
§ 41. Visibility at Street and Driveway Intersections ......................................................236
§ 42. Residential Driveways ............................................................................................237
§ 43. Recreation Uses in Residential Districts.................................................................237
§ 44. Grading Requirements ............................................................................................239
§ 45. Stripping of Topsoil; Excavation of Clay, Sand, Gravel or Rock ..........................241
§ 46. Special Height Limitations .....................................................................................241
§ 47. Prohibited Uses .......................................................................................................242
§ 48. Manufactured Housing and Prefabricated Buildings..............................................243
§ 49. Accessory Buildings and Structures in Residential Districts..................................244
§ 50. Projections into Required Yards .............................................................................244
§ 51. Reduction or Modification of Existing Lots ...........................................................245
§ 52. Lot Configuration....................................................................................................246
§ 53. Conformity of Building Setback lines ....................................................................246
§ 54. Fences and Walls ....................................................................................................246
§ 55. Environmental Regulations.....................................................................................251
§ 56. Use of Reflective Building Materials .....................................................................254
§ 57. Non-Conforming Uses, Lots and Structures...........................................................254
§ 58. Temporary Construction and/or Sales Trailers .......................................................256
§ 59. Collection of Storage of Recyclable Materials in Multifamily Housing ................256
§ 59.1 Seasonal Sales.......................................................................................................257
§ 59A. Temporary Outdoor Display/Sale ........................................................................257
Article VI. Conditional Uses 258
§ 60. Conditional Uses.....................................................................................................258
Deptford Township UDO General Provisions
May 5, 2014 Page 4
§ 61. Conditional Use Regulations for Specific Principal and Accessory Uses..............260
§ 62. [Reserved – Ord. No. O.4.06, 4/3/06].....................................................................267
Article VII. Soil Erosion And Sediment Control 268
§ 63. Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan Required; Exceptions.............................268
§ 64. Minimum Standards and Specifications .................................................................268
§ 65. Procedures...............................................................................................................268
§ 66. Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan Contents and Requirements ...................271
Article VIII. Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment 274
§ 67. Establishment and Composition of the Planning Board .........................................274
§ 68. Powers of the Planning Board.................................................................................276
§ 69. Organization and Advisory Bodies of the Planning Board.....................................276
§ 70. Establishment and Composition of the Zoning Board of Adjustment....................277
§ 71. Powers of the Zoning Board of Adjustment ...........................................................278
§ 72. Annual Report, Expenses and Costs of the Zoning Board of Adjustment..............281
§ 73. Appeals and Applications to the Zoning Board of Adjustment..............................281
§ 74. Meetings of Both Boards ........................................................................................283
§ 75. Public Hearings of Both Boards .............................................................................283
§ 76. Public Notice of a Hearing of Either Board............................................................284
§ 77. Decisions of Either Board.......................................................................................287
§ 78. Appeal of Decision by Either Board.......................................................................288
§ 79. Notice of Decision for Either Board .......................................................................288
Article IX. Review and Approval Procedures 289
§ 80. Purpose....................................................................................................................289
§ 81. Applicability of requirements .................................................................................289
§ 82. Information reviews ................................................................................................289
§ 83. Submission, classification, and completeness of formal applications ....................291
§ 84. Development Review Committee...........................................................................293
§ 85. Approval Procedures for Minor Subdivisions and Minor Site Plans......................294
§ 86. Approval Procedures for Preliminary Major Subdivisions and Site Plans.............297
§ 87. Approval Procedures for Final Major Subdivisions and Site Plans........................300
§ 88. Approval Procedures for Conditional Uses ............................................................302
§ 89. Findings for Planned Developments.......................................................................302
§ 90. Required documentation for general development plans........................................303
§ 91. Approval procedures for general development plans .............................................305
§ 92. Compliance and Time Limitations for Certain Approvals .....................................307
Article X. Specifications of Documents to be Submitted 309
§ 93. Purpose....................................................................................................................309
§ 94. Document Submission Requirements .....................................................................309
Article XI. Fees, Guarantees and Off-Tract Improvements 316
Deptford Township UDO General Provisions
May 5, 2014 Page 5
§ 95. Fees. ........................................................................................................................316
§ 96. Improvement and Maintenance Guarantees............................................................323
§ 97. Off-Tract Improvements .........................................................................................333
§ 98. Administrative Guidelines ......................................................................................336
§ 99. Waivers ...................................................................................................................338
§ 100. Enforcement..........................................................................................................339
§ 101. Violations and Penalties........................................................................................344
§ 102. Amendments .........................................................................................................344
§ 103. Procedure for Amendments ..................................................................................344
§ 104. Severability and Repealer .....................................................................................345
Deptford Township UDO General Provisions
May 5, 2014 Page 6
Article I. General Provisions
§ 1. Title
This chapter is derived from a comprehensive ordinance regulating and limiting the uses of land and the uses and locations of buildings and structures; regulating and restricting the height and bulk of buildings and structures and determining the area of yards and other open spaces; regulating and restricting the density of population; dividing the Township of Deptford, Gloucester County, New Jersey into zoning districts for such purposes; adopting a map of said Township showing boundaries and the classification of such districts; establishing an official map for said municipality; establishing rules, regulations and standards governing the subdivision and development of land within the Township; establishing a Planning Board and a Zoning Board of Adjustment; and prescribing penalties for the violation of its provisions.
The short form by which this chapter may be known shall be the Unified Development Ordinance (UDO) of the Township of Deptford.
§ 2. Authority
A. This ordinance is adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., commonly known as the Municipal Land Use Law, which confers the power to regulate the use of lands within its jurisdiction upon New Jersey municipalities.
B. This ordinance is also based upon the duly recognized police powers of a municipality and is an exercise of the same.
§ 3. Purpose
A. This chapter is adopted in order to promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare and in the furtherance of the following specific objectives:
1. Ensuring the coordinated development of the Township in accordance with its Master Plan.
2. Lessening congestion on the streets and ensuring access to the circulation system.
3. Providing for adequate light and air.
4. Preventing the overcrowding of land and buildings.
5. Avoiding the undue concentration of population.
6. Ensuring the conservation and protection of open space and natural features.
7. Conserving the value of property.
Deptford Township UDO General Provisions
May 5, 2014 Page 7
§ 4. Conformity with the Master Plan
A. The Township Council affirms by its adoption of this chapter that it has received and reviewed the Land Use and Housing Elements of the Deptford Township Master Plan, as duly adopted by the Township Planning Board, and that this chapter is substantially consistent with the recommendations and provisions of those elements.
B. The statement of objectives, principles, assumptions, policies and standards contained in the Deptford Township Master Plan is adopted by reference and shall be considered applicable to this chapter.
C. All future amendments to this chapter shall be made only after a review of the Land Use and Housing Elements of the Master Plan and in conformity with its statement of objectives, principles, assumptions, policies and standards.
Deptford Township UDO Definitions
May 5, 2014 Page 8
Article II. Language Interpretation and Definitions
§ 5. Language Interpretations.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, certain words shall have the meaning assigned to them as follows. The following definitions are intended to interpret and clarify word usage in the Deptford Township Unified Development Ordinance and not necessarily intended to be used to interpret or clarify word usage in other portions of the Code of the Township of Deptford. When words are used in the Unified Development Ordinance but are not defined herein, then definitions used in the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., as applicable, shall control and be utilized to interpret and clarify word usage.
1. Words in the present tense include the future. The singular form of a word includes the plural form and the plural form of a word includes the singular form.
2. The word "building" includes "structure" and any part thereof.
3. The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," "maintained for," "constructed for," "altered for," "converted for," "rented for," "leased for," or "occupied for".
4. The word "person" includes an individual, corporation, partnership, incorporated association, or any similar legal entity.
5. The words "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the specified examples, but is intended to extend their meaning to all other instances of like kind and character.
6. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and not discretionary, and the word "may" is permissive.
7. The feminine gender includes the masculine gender and vice versa.
§ 6. Definitions.
The following words and phrases shall have the meaning given in this section when applied to the entire chapter.
Access- A way or means of approach to provide physical entrance to a property.
Accessory Building or Structure- A building or structure which is detached from a principal building or structure on the same lot and which is customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal building or structure. Any accessory building attached to the principal building shall be considered part of the principal building.
Accessory Use- A use of land or a building or portion thereof customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or building, located on the same lot with the principal use.
Acre- 43,560 square feet.
Deptford Township UDO Definitions
May 5, 2014 Page 9
Addition, Structural- A structure added to the original structure at some time after the completion of the original structure. Any additions to the supporting members of a building, such as walls, columns, beams, girders, posts or tiers.
Adjacent Property- A lot or parcel of land which shares all or part of a common lot line with another lot or parcel of land provided, however, that lots which are separated by a public street shall not be considered adjacent.
Administrative Officer- An official of Deptford Township who is appointed by the Township Council for the purpose of enforcing this chapter.
Adult Day Care – A service that provides a coordinated program of social activities, transportation, meals, personal care and therapeutic activities to persons eighteen (18) years or older with diminished physical or cognitive abilities for not more than eighteen (18) hours in any one day for compensation. [Ord. O.18.13, 12/9/13]
Advisory Information – Information on a changeable copy sign presented in a manner that can be read and comprehended in one second or less time, including but not limited to, the time, temperature and date. [Ord. O.24.10, 12/6/10]
Affordable Housing Development- A development included in the housing element and fair share plan, or proposed as an amendment to same, that may include, but is not limited to, an inclusionary development, a municipal construction project or a 100 percent affordable development. [Ord. 0.3.10, 2/22/10]
Aesthetic Improvement Cut- The removal, to the minimum extent possible, of the smallest and poorest trees so as to permit land development while retaining the maximum number of larger and healthier trees. [Ord. 0.1.10, 2/22/10]
Age-Restricted Development - A residential development including accessory buildings and required or permitted social, cultural and recreational facilities requiring at all permanent residents to be 55 years or 62 years of age or older, as the case may be, in each dwelling and prohibiting any temporary resident from being less than 19 years of age, as permitted by law, and conforming to 24 CFR Part 100 Subpart E, Housing for Older Persons, implementing the federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988, as it may be amended or superseded. [Ord. O.17.08, 10/6/08]
Agriculture- The production, keeping or maintenance; for sale, lease, or personal use; of plants and animals useful to man, including but not limited to: forages and sod crops; grains and seed crops; dairy animals and dairy products; poultry and poultry products; livestock including beef cattle, sheep, swine, horses, ponies, mules, or goats or any mutations or hybrids thereof, including the breeding and grazing of any or all of such animals; bees and apiary products; fur animals; trees and forest products; fruits of all kinds, including grapes, nuts and berries; vegetables; nursery, floral, ornamental and greenhouse products; or lands devoted to a soil conservation or forestry management program.
Deptford Township UDO Definitions
May 5, 2014 Page 10
Air Pollution- The presence of contaminants in the atmosphere in concentrations that preclude its normal dispersive ability and that interfere directly or indirectly with a person's health, safety or comfort or with the full use and enjoyment of their property.
Aisle- The traveled way by which cars enter and depart parking spaces.
Alley- A public or private street primarily designed to serve as secondary access to the side or rear of a property whose frontage is on another street.
Alteration, Structural- Any change in either the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams and girders, or in the dimensions or configurations of the roof or exterior walls.
Ambulatory Surgery Facility – An establishment for outpatient surgery licensed by the NJ Department of Health and Senior Services for same day procedures. [Ord. O.17.08, 10/6/08]
Ancillary Diagnostic Services – Medical services and testing to determine the identity of a disease or condition including but not limited to clinical laboratory draws and assays, medical laboratory, outpatient cardiac testing and procedures, outpatient oncological testing and procedures, and sleep laboratory including overnight testing. [Ord. O.3.14, 2/25/14]
Ancillary Medical Treatment – Medical treatment associated with a health care facility or hospital that provides assistive devices and pharmaceuticals to patients on an inpatient or outpatient basis, including but not limited to orthotics, prosthetics, durable medical equipment services, dental appliances, and complementary medicine. [Ord. O.3.14, 2/25/14]
Anchor Tenant- The major store or stores within a shopping center. For the purpose of this chapter, a store which occupies at least twenty percent (20%) of the gross square footage of the entire shopping center shall be considered an anchor tenant.
Applicant- The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any land proposed to be included in a proposed development including the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an enforceable proprietary interest in such land, and who is submitting an application under this chapter.
Application for Development- The application form and all accompanying documents required by this chapter for approval of a subdivision plat, site plan, planned development, conditional use, zoning variance, or direction of the issuance of any permit required herein, or any and all approvals otherwise required under the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D- 1 et seq.
Assisted Living Facility – An establishment licensed by the NJ Department of Health and Senior Services to provide a coordinated array of supportive personal and health services, available 24 hours per day, to residents who have been assessed to need help with the activities of daily life, including residents who require formal long-term care. [Ord. O.17.08, 10/6/08]
Deptford Township UDO Definitions
May 5, 2014 Page 11
Automobile- A self-propelled free moving vehicle, with four (4) or more wheels, primarily for conveyance on a street or roadway.
Automobile Sales- The use of any building, land area or other premise for the display and sale of new or used automobiles, panel trucks or vans, trailers, or recreation vehicles and including any warranty repair work and other repair service conducted as an accessory use.
Automobile Service Station- Any building, land area or other premises, or portion thereof, used or intended to be used for the retail dispensing or sale of vehicular fuels; and including as an accessory use the sale and installation of lubricants, tires, batteries and similar accessories.
Automobile Wash- Any building or premises or portions thereof used for washing automobiles.
Average Daily Traffic (ADT) - The mean number of cars per day that pass over a given point.
Awning- A roof-like projection from the wall of a building, usually made of cloth, canvas, or similar material, which provides shade or decorative accent to a window or door.
Basement- A space having one-half or more of its floor-to-ceiling height below the average level of the adjoining ground and with a floor-to-ceiling height of not less than six and one-half (6.5) feet.
Behavioral Health Care Facility – A building or portion of a building, whether private profit or non-profit, or institutional, principally engaged in providing services for inpatient and/or outpatient services for treatment of victims of addiction, psychiatric, psychological, or other behavioral health condition where care may be provided on a short term or long term basis whose operators are licensed to provide such services by the State of New Jersey. [Ord. O.3.14, 2/25/14]
Berm- A mound of earth, at least three (3) feet in height, which is used to shield and screen areas from view or to control the direction of water
Bicycle Lane- A lane at the edge of a roadway which is reserved and designed for the use of bicycles.
Bicycle Path- A pathway designed to be used by bicyclists.
Board of Adjustment- See Zoning Board of Adjustment.
Board of Jurisdiction – The Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, that has approval and denial powers over an application for development. [Ord. O.5.08, 4/7/08]
Deptford Township UDO Definitions
May 5, 2014 Page 12
Boarder- An individual other than a member of the family occupying the dwelling unit or a part thereof who, for a consideration, is furnished sleeping accommodations and may be furnished meals or other services as part of the consideration.
Boarding House- A dwelling or part thereof, in which lodging is provided by the owner or operator to two (2) or more boarders.
Figure 6.1, Berm
Buffer- A landscaped strip of land used to visually separate one use from another or from a street. Buffers also serve to shield or block noise, lights, and other nuisances.
Building- A combination of materials to form a construction adapted to permanent, temporary, or continuous occupancy and having a roof.
Building Coverage- The horizontal area measured within the outside of the exterior walls of the ground floor of all principal and accessory buildings on a lot, divided by the entire area of the lot.
Building Height- The vertical distance of a building measured from the average elevation of the finished grade within five (5) feet of the structure to the to the mid-point of the roof plate and peak.
Building Setback Line- A line drawn parallel to a street line or lot line and drawn through the point of a building nearest to the street line or lot line. The term "required setback" means a line that is established a horizontal distance from the street line or lot line and beyond which a building or part of a building is not permitted to extend toward the street line or lot line.
Bulk Standards – Standards and controls that establish the maximum size of building and structures on a lot and the buildable area within which the building may be located, including area, coverage, setback, height, floor area ratio, and yard or other requirements affecting the physical placement of buildings and structures on a lot. [Ord. O.5.08, 4/7/08]
Business Park – An office park that also includes warehousing, light manufacturing and distribution uses. [Ord. O.5.08, 4/7/08]
Deptford Township UDO Definitions
May 5, 2014 Page 13
Business Services (General Business)-Establishments primarily engaged in rendering services to business establishments on a fee or contract basis, such as advertising and mailing; building maintenance; employment service; management and consulting services; protective services; equipment rental and leasing; commercial research; development and testing; reproduction services; and personal supply services.
"c" Variance- A variance prescribed by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c.
Caliper- The diameter of a tree trunk measured in inches, six (6) inches above ground level for trees four (4) inches in diameter or less, and measured twelve (12) inches above ground level for trees greater than four (4) inches in diameter. The tree diameter is also 7/22 of the circumference, measured at the points on the tree noted above.
Call Center – A central office place where agents or operators man banks of telephones to either make outgoing, or field incoming, telephone calls for a large company or organization. [Ord. O.5.08, 4/7/08]
Canopy- A roof-like cover, open to the elements on all four sides, e.g. a cover which is used to protect outdoor equipment such as gasoline pumps.
Cartway- That area of a street within which vehicles are permitted, including travel lanes and parking areas but not including curbs, sidewalks or swales.
Cemetery- Property used for the interring of the dead.
Change of use- Any use which is not substantially the same as the previous use of a building or land.
Channel- The bed and banks of a natural stream which convey the constant or intermittent flow of the stream.
Channelization- The straightening and deepening of channels and/or the surfacing thereof to permit water to move rapidly and/or directly.
Child Care Center – A facility for the purpose of providing custodial care of persons meeting the definition of ‘child care center’ as contained within N.J.S.A. 30:5B-3(b), as it may be amended or superseded. [Ord. O.5.08, 4/7/08]
Church- A building or groups of buildings which by design and construction are primarily intended for the conducting of organized religious services.
Circulation- Systems, structures and physical improvements for the movement of people, goods, water, air, sewage, or power by such means as streets, highways, railways, waterways, towers, airways, pipes and conduits, and the handling of people and goods by such means as terminals, stations, warehouses, and other storage buildings or transshipment points.
Deptford Township UDO Definitions
May 5, 2014 Page 14
Classification- The determination as to whether a plan is a minor or major subdivision and/ or site plan.
Clear Cutting- The removal of the majority of standing trees on a lot or portion of a lot.
Clinic- An establishment where patients are admitted for examination and treatment by one (1) or more physicians, dentists, psychologists or social workers and where patients are not usually lodged overnight.
Club- A group of people organized for a common purpose to pursue common goals, interests or activities and usually characterized by certain membership qualifications, payment of fees and dues, regular meetings, and a constitution and by-laws.
Cluster Development- A development technique that concentrates buildings in specific areas of the site to allow for the remaining land to be used for recreation, common open space, and for the preservation of environmental or historic features.
COAH- the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing established under the Fair Housing Act which has primary jurisdiction for the administration of housing obligations in accordance with sound regional planning consideration in the State. [Ord. 0.3.10, 2/22/10]
College- An educational institution authorized by the state to award associate, baccalaureate or higher degrees.
Commercial Message- Any sign wording, logo, figure, symbol, color, illumination, fixture, projection, or other representation that directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or calls attention to a business product, service, or other commercial activity.
Commercial Use- Any activity carried out for pecuniary gain.
Commercial Vehicle- Any motor vehicle licensed by the state as a commercial vehicle.
Common Open Space- An open space area within or related to a site designated as a development, and designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents and owners of the development. Common open space may contain such complementary structures and improvements as are necessary and appropriate for the use or enjoyment of residents and owners of the development.
Community Association- A homeowners association organized to own, maintain and operate common facilities and open space and to enhance and protect their common interests.
Community Facility- A building, structure, recreational device, service system, or other facility generally available to and/or operated for the benefit of residents, whether public or private; including but not limited to swimming pools, tennis courts, bicycle paths, sewage treatment plants, drainageways, municipal buildings, schools, and similar facilities.
Deptford Township UDO Definitions
May 5, 2014 Page 15
Community Residence for the Developmentally Disabled- Any community residential facility licensed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 30:11B-1 et seq., providing food, shelter, and personal guidance, under such supervision as required, to not more than fifteen (15) developmentally disabled or mentally ill persons, who require assistance, temporarily or permanently, in order to live in the community, and shall include, but not be limited to: group homes, half-way houses, intermediate care facilities, supervised apartment living arrangements, and hostels. Such a residence shall not be considered a health care facility within the meaning of the "Health Care Facilities Planning Act" N.J.S.A. 26:2H-1 et seq. In the case of such community residence housing mentally ill persons, such a residence shall have been approved for a purchase of service contract or an affiliation agreement pursuant to such procedures as shall be established by regulation of the Division of Mental Health and Hospitals of the New Jersey Department of Human Services. See Developmentally Disabled Person and Mentally Ill Person.
Community Residence for the Terminally Ill - Any community residential facility operated as a hospice program providing food, shelter, personal guidance and health care services, under such supervision as required, to not more than 15 terminally ill persons.
Community Shelter For Victims of Domestic Violence- Any shelter approved for a purchase of service contract and certified pursuant to standards and procedures established by the New Jersey Department of Human Services, pursuant to N.J.S.A 30:40-1-14, providing food, shelter, medical care, legal assistance, personal guidance, and other services to not more than fifteen (15) persons who have been the victims of domestic violence, including any children of such victims, who temporarily require shelter and assistance in order to protect their physical or psychological welfare.
Completeness- A determination as to whether an application contains all information required by this chapter and contained on the applicable submission checklist provided to the applicant.
Comprehensive Personal Care Home – A facility which is licensed by the Department of Health and Senior Services pursuant to N.J.A.C. 8:36, et seq. to provide room and board and to assure that assisted living services are available when needed, to four or more adults unrelated to the proprietor, but not to include a boarding or rooming house as defined in N.J.S.A. 55:13B-3(a) and -3(h), respectively. [Ord. O.17.08, 10/6/08]
Concept Plan- An informal presentation and attendant documentation of a proposed subdivision or site plan which is without legal standing but which is intended to allow the applicant to receive suggestions from the Planning Board and/or Development Review Committee.
Conditional Use- A use permitted in a particular zoning district only upon a showing that such use in a specified location will comply with all the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such use as contained in this chapter, and upon the issuance of an authorization therefor by the Planning Board.
Deptford Township UDO Definitions
May 5, 2014 Page 16
Condominium- A building, or group of buildings, in which units are owned individually, and the structure, common areas and facilities are owned by all the owners on a proportional, undivided basis.
Condominium Association- The community association which administers and maintains the common property and common elements of a condominium.
Contiguous- Next to, abutting, or touching and having a boundary, or portion thereof, which is coterminous.
Continuing Care Retirement Community – A form of age-restricted land development operated by an organization that provides housing, services, and health care (including long term care), that provides a continuum of levels of care that meet the needs of individual residents and typically offers a contract-based entry fee that guarantees residence and access to various health care services, whether pre-funded or on a fee-for-service basis. [Ord. O.17.08, 10/6/08]
Conventional Development- Development other than planned or cluster development.
Corner Lot- See Lot, Corner.
Council- The Township Council of the Township of Deptford, said organization being the elected governing body of the municipality.
Country Club- A land area and building(s) containing recreational facilities, clubhouse and customary accessory uses, open only to members and their guests for a membership fee.
County Planning Board- The Planning Board of the County of Gloucester.
Coverage- See Lot Coverage or Building Coverage.
Crown- The branches and foliage of a tree; the upper portion of a tree.
Cul-de-sac- The turnaround at the end of a dead-end street.
Curb- A stone, bituminous or Portland cement concrete, or wood, etc. border usually marking the edge of the roadway or paved area.
"d" Variance- A variance prescribed by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d.
Days- Calendar days, including weekends and holidays.
Data Processing Center – A facility utilizing a series of computers and ancillary equipment to store digital information for records backup and archiving, telecommunications purposes and/or packet switching. [Ord. O.5.08, 4/7/08]
Day Care Center – See Child Care Center. [Ord. O.5.08, 4/7/08]
Deptford Township UDO Definitions
May 5, 2014 Page 17
Deciduous- Plants that drop their leaves before becoming dormant in winter.
Decks- A permanent construction, usually of wood, raised off the ground and connected to the primary building, having no roof or walls but with railings, and which may have direct access to the ground surface and the primary building.
Dedication- Gift or donation of property by the owner to another party.
Density- The permitted number of dwelling units per gross acre of land to be developed.
Department Store- A commercial establishment, which has separate and distinct areas within the structure for the display and sale of differing items, often with changes in décor and furnishing and each department having its own staff and cashiering. These stores are usually on multiple levels. [Ord. O.16.04]
Design Standards- The standards contained herein which set forth the specifications of required improvements.
Detention Basin (Pond)- A constructed or natural water collector facility designed to collect surface and/or sub-surface water in order to impede its flow and to release the same gradually, at a rate not greater than that prior to development of the property, into natural or constructed outlets.
Developable Land Area- That portion of a tract of land which is suitable for development or construction of a building. The developable land area of a tract excludes the area of flood plains, wetlands, open water areas, slopes in excess of twenty percent (20%), and the rights-of-way of any existing or proposed public streets. Where proposed street rights-of-way are unknown, they shall be assumed to account for fifteen percent (15%) of the remaining developable land in conventional developments and ten percent (10%) of the remaining developable land in cluster and PUD developments.
Developer- The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any land included in a proposed development including the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other persons having enforceable proprietary interests in such land.
Development- The division of a parcel of land into two (2) or more parcels; the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure, or of any mining, excavation, landfill, and any use or change in the use of any building or other structure, or land or extension of use of land, for which permission may be required pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law or this chapter.
Development Fee- Money paid by a developer for the improvement of property as permitted in N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.3, as it may be amended or superseded, and utilized to provide affordable housing. [Ord. 0.3.10, 2/22/10]
Development Review Committee- A committee, appointed by the Planning Board and containing such officials as are prescribed in this chapter, which is charged with the task of performing an initial review on certain development applications for the purpose of
Deptford Township UDO Definitions
May 5, 2014 Page 18
helping to determine completeness, providing advice to applicants, and determining when an application is ready for listing on a Planning Board or, if applicable, Zoning Board of Adjustment agenda. The Committee shall function as prescribed in this chapter.
Developmentally Disabled Person- A person who is developmentally disabled as defined by N.J.S.A. 30:11B-2.
Direct Illumination- A means of lighting a sign or other object by means of a light source located within or directly on the object to be lit.
Discount Store or Club- A single-use building either freestanding or part of a multi-use structure or retail complex characterized by the large size of the store, wide range of products offered, centralized cashiering, and marketing based upon discount pricing. [Ord. O.16.04]
District- A part, zone or geographic area within the municipality within which certain zoning or development regulations apply.
Disturbance Zone- That portion of a lot covered by existing or proposed buildings or structures and within a certain permitted distance around the same as noted in §31.
Dormitory- A building used as group living quarters for a student body or religious order as an accessory use for a college, university, boarding school, orphanage, convent, monastery or other similar institutional use.
Drainage- The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by drains, grading, or other means.
Drainage and Utility Rights-of-Way- The lands required for the installation and maintenance of stormwater and sanitary sewers, water pipes or drainageways and other utilities.
Drainageway- Any natural or artificial watercourse, trench, ditch, swale or similar depression into which surface water flows.
Drip Line- The perimeter line on the ground measured from the outermost edge of the vertical plane established by the branches of a tree.
Driveway- A private roadway providing access for vehicles to a parking space, garage, dwelling or other structure.
Drop Manhole- A manhole provided for inspection and maintenance of sewers where an incoming sewer is higher than the outgoing sewer.
Duplex- See Dwelling, Two-Family.
Dwelling- A structure, or an entirely self-contained portion thereof, which is designed for and occupied principally as a place of residence for one (1) housekeeping unit. A dwelling must be suitable for year-round occupancy and must contain facilities for
Deptford Township UDO Definitions
May 5, 2014 Page 19
cooking, sleeping, bathing, and human sanitation which are for the exclusive use of the occupants of the dwelling.
Dwelling, Garden Apartment- A dwelling unit which is designed for, and occupied exclusively as, the residence of one (1) housekeeping unit. Garden apartments may have other dwellings intended for occupancy by one (1) housekeeping unit above or below, or adjacent to them within the same building.
Dwelling, Multi-family- A building which contains more than two (2) dwellings, each of which is intended for occupancy by one (1) housekeeping unit.
Dwelling, Senior Citizen- A dwelling unit which is restricted to occupancy by households of two (2) or less persons in which at least one (1) member is age sixty-two (62) or older.
Dwelling, Single Family Detached- A dwelling which is designed for, and occupied exclusively as, the residence of one (1) housekeeping unit; and which is not attached to any other dwelling.
Dwelling, Single Family Semi-Detached- A dwelling which is designed for, and occupied exclusively as, the residence of one (1) housekeeping unit; and which is attached by means of a common wall to one (1) other dwelling intended for occupancy by one (1) housekeeping unit.
Dwelling, Stacked Townhouse – A multi-family dwelling that is designed and occupied exclusively as the residence of one housekeeping unit where each dwelling has at least two full floors for occupancy between one or more common vertical fire walls and one horizontal fire floor to at least four other such dwellings all housed in the same structure. [Ord. O.5.08, 4/7/08]
Dwelling, Townhouse – A dwelling a minimum of two stories in height that is designed and occupied exclusively as the residence of one housekeeping unit, with no other dwelling above or below them and attached by means of one or more common vertical fire walls to at least two other such dwellings all housed in the same structure. [Ord. O.5.08, 4/7/08]
Dwelling, Two-Family- A structure on a single lot which contains two (2) dwelling units, each of which is designed for, and occupied exclusively as, the residence of one (1) housekeeping unit; and which is totally separated from the other by an unpierced wall extending from the ground to the roof or by an unpierced ceiling and floor extending from exterior wall to exterior wall, except for a common stairwell exterior to both dwelling units.
Dwelling, Zero-Lot Line- A dwelling which is designed for, and occupied exclusively as, the residence of one (1) housekeeping unit; which is located on a separate lot with open space or yard areas provided on three sides of the dwelling.
Easement- A grant of one (1) or more of the property rights by the property owner to and/or for use by the public, a corporation or another person or entity.
Deptford Township UDO Definitions
May 5, 2014 Page 20
Eating and Drinking Places- Retail establishments selling food and drink for consumption on the premises, including lunch counters and refreshment stands selling prepared food and drink for immediate consumption.
Elevation- 1), A vertical distance above or below a fixed reference level, or 2) a flat scale drawing of the front, rear, or side of a building.
Encroachment- Any building, structure or obstruction in, or on, a delineated floodway, right-of-way, or adjacent land.
Environmental Assessment- A written report which analyzes the effect of a development upon the environment.
Environmental Commission- The Deptford Township Environmental Commission.
Environmental Constraints- Features, natural resources, or land characteristics that are sensitive to improvements and which may require conservation measures or the application of creative development techniques to prevent degradation of the environment, or which may limit the amount of development which is possible.
Equalized Assessed Value- assessed value of a property divided by the current average ratio of assessed to true value for the municipality in which the property is situated, as determined in accordance with sections N.J.S. 54:1-35a through 54:1-35c. [Ord. 0.3.10, 2/22/10]
Erosion- The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice, and gravity.
Evergreen- Plants which have green leaves all year long.
Existing Use- The use of a lot or structure at the time of the enactment of a zoning ordinance.
Facade- The exterior wall of a building exposed to public view or that wall viewed by persons not within the building.
Family- One (1) or more individuals occupying a dwelling unit and living as one (1) housekeeping unit.
Family Day Care Home- An accessory use provided in a private residence approved by the New Jersey Division of Youth and Family Services or an organization with which the Division contracts for family day care in which child care services are regularly provided to no less than three (3) nor more than five (5) children for a period of time of no less than fifteen (15) hours per week nor more than eighteen (18) hours within a single day. The limitation on the number of children for whom day care service is provided shall not include children who are (a.) legally related to the service provider or (b.) who are being cared for as part of a cooperative agreement between parents for the care of their children by one (1) or more of the parents where no payment for the care is being provided. See also the definition of Day Care Centers.
Deptford Township UDO Definitions
May 5, 2014 Page 21
Fence- An artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination of materials erected to enclose or screen areas of land.
Final Approval- The official action of the Planning Board taken on a preliminarily approved subdivision or site plan, after all conditions and requirement have been met, and the required improvements have been installed or guarantees properly posted for their installation, or approval has been conditioned upon the posting of such guarantees.
Finished Elevation- The completed elevation of the land surface of a site after final grading.
Flood Fringe Area- That portion of the flood plain outside of the floodway.
Figure 6.2, Flood Plain Cross-Section
Flood Plain- The stream channel and the relatively flat area adjoining the channel of a natural stream or river which has been or may be covered by floodwater. The flood plain is made up of the floodway and the flood fringe.
Floodway- The channel of a natural stream or river and portions of the flood plain adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the floodwater or flood flow of any natural stream or river, in accordance with Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) regulations.
Floor Area, Gross (GFA)- The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all floors of a building measured from the exterior face of exterior walls, or from the centerline of a wall separating two (2) buildings, but not including interior parking spaces, loading space for motor vehicles, or any space where the floor-to-ceiling height is less than six and one-half (6.5) feet.
Floor Area, Net (NFA)- The total of all floor areas of a building, excluding stairwells and elevator shafts, equipment rooms, interior vehicular parking or loading; and all floors below the first or ground floor, except when used or intended to be used for human habitation or service to the public.
Deptford Township UDO Definitions
May 5, 2014 Page 22
Floor Area Ratio- The sum of the area of all floors of buildings or structures compared to the total area of the site.
Footcandle- The unit used to measure lumens (the density of light) per square foot. [Footcandle = lumens/area].
Forester, Professional- A person who has a B.S. degree from a four-year School of Forestry accredited by the Society of American Foresters.
Frontage- That side of a lot abutting on a street; the front lot line.
Front Lot Line- See Lot Line, Front.
Front Yard- See Yard, Front.
Funeral Home- A building licensed and used for the preparation of the deceased for burial and the display of the deceased and ceremonies connected therewith before burial or cremation.
Garage- A building or structure, or part thereof, used or intended to be used for the parking and storage of vehicles.
Garden Apartment- See Dwelling, Garden Apartment.
Gasoline Station- See Automobile Service Station.
General Business- Includes all uses defined in the following categories: retail services or trade, business services, personal services and professional offices.
General Development Plan- A comprehensive plan for the development of a planned unit development.
Glare- The effect produced by brightness sufficient to cause annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility.
Government Agency- Any department, commission, independent agency or instrumentality of the United States, of a state, county, incorporated or unincorporated municipality, township, authority, district or other governmental unit.
Grade- The degree of rise or descent of a sloping surface. See Slope.
Green Building Strategies- Strategies that minimize the impact of development on the environment, enhance the health, safety and well-being of residents by producing durable, low-maintenance, resource-efficient housing while making optimum use of existing infrastructure and the availability of community services. [Ord. 0.3.10, 2/22/10]
Gross Floor Area- See Floor Area, Gross.
Deptford Township UDO Definitions
May 5, 2014 Page 23
Gross Leasable Area- The total floor area for which the tenant pays rent and which is designed for the tenant's occupancy and exclusive use. Where specific data is unavailable, this shall be assumed to be ninety percent (90%) of the gross floor area.
Ground Cover- Grasses or other plants grown to keep soil from eroding.
Gutter- A shallow channel usually set along a curb or the pavement edge of a road for the collection and transport of runoff.
Halfway House- A profit or nonprofit boarding home, rest home, or other home for the sheltered care of persons which, in addition to providing food and shelter to four (4) or more persons unrelated to the proprietor, also provides any personal care or service beyond food, shelter and laundry.
Health Care Facility- A building or portion of a building, whether private profit or non-profit, or institutional, principally engaged in providing services for inpatient and/or outpatient services for physical health maintenance, diagnosis (including testing) and treatment of human diseases, pain or other physical condition of patients licensed to provide such services by the State of New Jersey where necessary. Care may be provided on a short term, long term, or outpatient basis. Additional outpatient services and incidental services may also be provided as secondary services. Such facilities may include ambulatory care, ambulatory surgical facility, ancillary diagnostic services, ancillary medical treatment, behavioral health care facility, cancer radiation treatment, chemotherapy, emergency services (including full service or satellite emergency department); observation beds, medical and dental offices, orthodontics, radiology and other imaging services, outpatient rehabilitation, rehabilitation center (including physical and occupational therapy, and speech pathology), renal dialysis, and sports medicine but excluding institutions that provide healing solely by prayer. [Ord. O.3.14, 2/25/14]
Health Center – A building or portion of a building designed and equipped for the conduct of sports, exercise, leisure time activities, or other customary and usual recreational activities, operated by profit or not-for-profit organizations, open to bona fide members or guests. Also encompasses the term Fitness Center. [Ord. O.17.08, 10/6/08]
Height- See Building Height.
Heliport- An area, either at ground level or elevated on a structure, licensed or approved for the landing and takeoff of helicopters, and including auxiliary facilities such as parking, waiting room, fueling and maintenance equipment.
Historic Site- Any real property, man-made structure, natural object or configuration or any portion or group of the foregoing which have been formally designated in the master plan, or state or national registers of historic places as being of historical, archaeological, cultural, scenic or architectural significance.
Home Occupation- A lawful occupation constituting, either partially or fully, the livelihood of a person, which is conducted in that person's principal residence as an accessory use.
Deptford Township UDO Definitions
May 5, 2014 Page 24
Home occupations are permitted conditionally only when they conform to the appropriate specific standards of this chapter.
Homeowners Association- An association, other than a condominium association, which is organized in a development in which individual owners share common interests in open space and facilities. See Community Association.
Hospital- A type of health care facility whether private profit or non-profit, or institutional, principally engaged in providing short term acute and sub-acute medical treatment for disease or trauma to persons licensed pursuant to N.J.A.C. 8:43G, as it may be amended or superseded. [Ord. O.3.14, 2/25/14]
Hotel- A commercial facility offering transient lodging accommodations to the general public and providing additional services such as restaurants, meeting rooms, and recreation facilities. See Boarding House and Inn.
Housekeeping Unit- One (1) or more persons living together in one (1) dwelling unit on a nonseasonal basis and sharing living, sleeping, cooking and sanitary facilities on a non-profit basis.
Impervious Surface- Any material with an infiltration rate less than one inch per 120 minutes. [Ord. O.17.08, 10/6/08]
Impervious Coverage- The area of all portions of the lot which are covered by impervious surfaces, divided by the entire area of the lot.
Inclusionary Development- A residential development in which a proportion of all units are reserved for low income households as defined by the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing and in which an equal proportion of units are reserved for moderate income households as defined by the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing.
Indirect Illumination- A means of lighting a sign or other object by means of a light source which is located beyond the object to be lit but which is directed or reflected upon it.
Industrial Park- A tract of land that has been planned, developed and operated as an integrated facility for a number of individual industrial uses, with special attention to circulation, parking, utility needs, and aesthetics.
Industrial Property- Any lot or parcel of land containing an industrial use or building of such uses as may be defined in this chapter.
Industry- Those fields of economic activity including forestry, fishing, hunting and trapping; mining; construction; manufacturing; transportation, communication, electric, gas, and sanitary services; and wholesale trade.
Infill Development - The development of a new building on a vacant lot which is located within a built-up area. [Ord. O.3.13, 2/25/13]
Deptford Township UDO Definitions
May 5, 2014 Page 25
Infrastructure- Facilities and services for the support of industrial, commercial, institutional and residential activities including water, sewerage, streets, communications, utilities, public facilities such as schools, parks, fire houses, and libraries.
Inn- A commercial facility usually limited to the housing and feeding of transients.
Island- In street design, a raised area, usually curbed, which is placed to guide traffic, separate lanes, or used for landscaping, signage, or lighting.
Interested Party- In a criminal or quasi-criminal proceeding, any citizen of the State of New Jersey; or, in a civil proceeding, any person, whether residing within or outside the municipality, whose right to use, acquire, or enjoy property is or may be affected by any action taken under this chapter, or whose rights to use, acquire, or enjoy property under this chapter, or any other law of this Municipality, State, or of the United States have been denied, violated, or infringed by an action or a failure to act under this chapter.
Intersection- Where two (2) or more roads cross at grade.
Items of Information – A syllable, symbol, logo, initial, abbreviation, an unbroken group of numbers; or each word in a registered trademark or service mark. [Ord. O.24.10, 12/6/10]
Junk- Scrap, waste, reclaimable material or debris as defined by the Junkyard Ordinance, Chapter 36 of the Code of Deptford Township.
Junkyard- Any area, lot, land, parcel, building or structure or part thereof used for the storage, collection, processing, purchase, sale or abandonment of junk.
Land- Ground, soil or earth including structures on, above or below the surface.
Land Use- A description of how land is occupied or utilized.
Land Use Plan- That portion of the Deptford Township Master Plan which shows the existing and proposed location, extent and intensity of development of land to be used now or in the future for varying types of residential, commercial, industrial, institutional and other public and private purposes or combination of purposes.
Landfill- See Sanitary Landfill.
Landscape- The addition or retention of lawns, trees, plants, and other natural and decorative features to the land.
Landscape Architect- An individual certified as a Landscape Architect by the State of New Jersey.
Loading Space- An off-street space or berth used for the temporary loading or unloading of commercial vehicles.
Deptford Township UDO Definitions
May 5, 2014 Page 26
Long Term Care Facility - An establishment or distinct part of an establishment licensed by the NJ Department of Health and Senior Services as a long-term care facility, for those persons requiring continuous nursing and medical attention; skilled nursing facility; continuing care facility. [Ord. O.17.08, 10/6/08]
Lot- A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit.
Lot Area- The total area within the property lines of a lot, exclusive of any area within a street right-of-way.
Lot, Corner- A lot or parcel of land abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection, or upon two parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. Each corner lot shall have two (2) front yards, one (1) side yard and one (1) rear yard. A corner lot shall have a primary and a secondary front yard. The primary front yard shall be along the street frontage which the house faces.
Lot Depth- The distance measured from the front lot line to the rear lot line. The minimum lot depth shall apply over no less than eighty percent (80%) of the required lot width.
Lot Frontage- The length of the front lot line measured at the street right-of-way line.
Lot Line, Front- The lot line separating a lot from a street right-of-way.
Lot Line, Rear- The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line; or in the case of triangular or otherwise irregularly shaped lots, a line ten (10) feet in length entirely within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line.
Lot Line, Side- Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
Lot, Minimum Area of- The smallest lot area established by this chapter on which a use or structure may be located in a particular district.
Lot Width- The horizontal distance between the side lines of a lot measured an equal distance from the front lot line at the minimum required building setback line.
Magnet Store- The largest retail establishment in a shopping center which draws customers and thereby generates business for surrounding stores. See Anchor Tenant.
Maintenance Guarantee- Any security acceptable to the governing body to insure the maintenance of duly approved improvements installed by the developer after the final inspection of the improvements and in accordance with this chapter.
Major Site Plan- Any site plan not classified as a minor site plan.
Major Subdivision- Any subdivision not classified as a minor subdivision.
Deptford Township UDO Definitions
May 5, 2014 Page 27
Mall- 1), A shaded walk or public promenade; or 2), A shopping center where stores front on both sides of a pedestrian way which may be enclosed or open.
Manufacturing- Establishments engaged in the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances into new products including the assembling of component parts, the manufacturing of products, and the blending of materials such as lubricating oils, plastics, resins or liquors.
Marquee- A roof-like structure projecting over the door of a theater or other building.
Master Plan- A comprehensive long-range plan of Deptford Township intended to guide the growth and development of the Township which includes analyses, recommendations and proposals for the community's population, economy, housing, transportation, community facilities and land use and which shall have been adopted by the Planning Board.
Median- That portion of a divided highway separating the traveled ways of traffic proceeding in opposite directions.
Medical Clinic – A public health facility; blood donor center; kidney dialysis center; or walk-in medical office not requiring prior appointment. [Ord. O.3.14, 2/25/14]
Mentally Ill Person- A person who is afflicted with a mental illness as defined in N.J.S.A. 30:4-23, but shall not include a person who has been committed after having been found not guilty of a criminal offense by reason of insanity or having been found unfit to be tried on a criminal charge.
Minor Site Plan- Any development plan which is limited to the proposed construction of any permitted accessory use(s), such as a sign, home occupation or off-street parking area, or any development plan consisting of an expansion of, or an addition to, an existing conforming structure and use not exempted from site plan review by this chapter and not accounting for more than fifteen percent (15%) additional building coverage and not exceeding ten thousand (10,000) cubic feet of enclosed and roofed area, provided that such development plan does not involve a planned development, the installation of any new road improvements or the expansion of any off-tract improvement for water, sewer, drainage, streets, or similar improvement otherwise required, and does not adversely affect the development of an adjoining property or properties.
Minor Subdivision- A subdivision of land for the creation of not more than four (4) lots (three (3) new lots and the remaining parcel), provided that such subdivision does not involve: (a.) a planned development; (b.) any new street, or the provision of any off-tract improvement otherwise required for water, sewer, drainage, or a similar purpose; and (c.) contains the information reasonably required in order to make an informed determination as to whether the requirements established by this chapter for approval of a minor subdivision have been met. The limit as to the maximum number of lots in a minor subdivision shall include all lots created from the same tract or tracts within the previous five (5) years, which shall be certified to by the applicant.
Deptford Township UDO Definitions
May 5, 2014 Page 28
Mixed-Use Building – A building combining non-residential uses on at least the ground floor with multi-family dwellings on upper floors. [Ord. O.5.08, 4/7/08]
Motel- See Hotel.
Mulch- A layer of wood chips, dry leaves, straw, hay, or other material placed on the surface of the soil around plants to retain moisture, prevent weeds from growing, hold the soil in place, and to aid plant growth.
Multifamily housing development- For the purposes of establishing facilities for the collection or storage of source separated recyclable materials in new multifamily housing developments, "multifamily housing development" means a building containing three (3) or more dwelling units occupied or intended to be occupied by persons living independently of each other, or a group of such buildings.
Municipal Agency- The Planning Board, Zoning Board of Adjustment or Township Council or any other agency created by or responsible to the municipality when acting pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
Municipal Engineer- A professional engineer, licensed by the State of New Jersey, and appointed by the Township Manager to represent the Township's engineering interests. See Planning Board Engineer.
Municipal Planner- A professional planner, licensed by the State of New Jersey, and appointed by the Township Manager to represent the Township's planning interests. See Planning Board Planner.
Neighborhood- An area of the community with characteristics that distinguish it from other community areas and which may include distinct ethnic or economic characteristics, schools, or social clubs, or boundaries defined by physical barriers such as major highways and railroads or natural features such as rivers.
New Car Agency- See Automobile Sales.
Noise- Any undesired audible sound, as defined by the Code of the Township of Deptford.
Non-conforming Building or Structure- A building or structure the size, dimensions or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment to this chapter, but which fails by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment, to conform to the present requirements of the chapter.
Non-conforming Lot- A lot, the area, dimensions or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter, but which fails to conform to the present requirements of this chapter by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment.
Non-conforming Sign- Any sign which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter, but which fails to conform to the present requirements of this chapter by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment.
Deptford Township UDO Definitions
May 5, 2014 Page 29
Non-conforming Use- A use or activity which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment to this chapter, but which fails by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment, to conform to the present requirements of this chapter.
Nuisance- An interference with the enjoyment and use of property.
Nursery- Land or greenhouses used to raise flowers, shrubs and plants for sale.
Nursery School- See Day Care Center.
Nursing Home- An extended or intermediate health care facility licensed or approved to provide full-time convalescent or chronic care to individuals who, by reason of advanced age, chronic illness or infirmity, are unable to care for themselves.
Occupancy or Occupied- The residing of an individual or individuals overnight in a dwelling unit, or the installation, storage or use of equipment, merchandise or machinery in any public, commercial or industrial building.
Occupant- The individual or individuals in actual possession of a premises.
Occupation- Gainful employment in which an individual engages to earn compensation for the necessities of life.
Office- A room or group of rooms used for conducting the affairs of a business, profession, service, industry, or government.
Office Building- A building used primarily for conducting the affairs of a business, profession, service, industry or government or like activity, that may include ancillary services for office workers such as a restaurant, coffee shop, newspaper or candy stand.
Office, Medical – A building or portion of a building principally engaged in providing services for health maintenance, diagnosis (including testing) and treatment of human diseases, pain or other physical or mental condition of patients by physicians or other licensed health care professionals, solely on an outpatient basis, but not to include a behavioral health care center. No overnight patients shall be kept on the premises. Examples of medical offices shall include but not be limited to general physicians, dentists, chiropractors, psychologists, cardiologists, radiologists and other various specialists. [Ord. O.3.14, 2/25/14]
Office Park- A development on a tract of land that contains a number of separate office buildings, supporting uses and open space and which is designed, planned, constructed and managed on an integrated and coordinated basis.
Offsite- Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question but within the property (of which the lot is a part) which is the subject of a development application or contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
Deptford Township UDO Definitions
May 5, 2014 Page 30
Off-tract- Not located on the property which is the subject of a development application nor on a contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
Onsite- Located on the lot in question.
On-tract- Located on a property which is the subject of a development application or on a contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
Open Space- Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved and set aside, dedicated, and designated or reserved for public or private use or enjoyment, or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open space; provided that such areas may be improved with only those buildings, structures, streets and off-street parking and other improvements that are designed to be incidental to the natural openness of the land.
Open Space, Common- Land within or related to a development, not individually owned, which is designed and intended for the common use or enjoyment of the residents of the development and may include such complementary structures and improvements as are necessary and appropriate.
Ordinance- A municipally adopted law or regulation.
Outbuilding- A separate accessory building or structure not physically connected to the principal building.
Outdoor Storage- The keeping, in an unroofed area of any goods, junk, material, merchandise, or unregistered vehicles in the same place for more than twenty-four (24) hours.
Overhang- (1.) The part of a roof or wall which extends beyond the facade of a lower wall; or, (2.) the portion of a vehicle extending beyond the wheel stops or curb.
Parapet- The extension of the main walls of a building above the roof level.
Parcel- A lot or tract of land.
Parking Area- Any public or private land area designed and used for parking motor vehicles including parking lots, garages, private driveways and legally designated areas of public streets.
Parking Lot- An off-street, ground level area, usually surfaced and improved, for the temporary storage of motor vehicles. See Garage; Parking Area.
Parking Space, Off-Street- A temporary storage area for a motor vehicle that is directly accessible to an access aisle, and which is not located on a dedicated street right-of-way. An area either within a structure or in the open exclusive of driveways, access drives and fire lanes, except that nothing shall prohibit private driveways for dwelling units from being considered off-street parking areas, provided that no portion of such public
Deptford Township UDO Definitions
May 5, 2014 Page 31
driveway within the right-of-way line of the street intersected by such driveway shall be considered an off-street parking space.
Figure 6.3, Parking Lot
Pavement- (1) Brick, stone, bituminous or portland cement concrete, etc. placed on the surface of the land; (2) That part of a street having an improved surface.
Perc or Percolation Test- A rough test designed to determine the ability of ground to absorb water, which has been used to test the suitability of a soil for the use and design of a septic system.
Performance Guarantee- Any security that may be accepted by a municipality as a guarantee that improvements required as part of an application for development will be satisfactorily completed.
Permeability- A rating of the ability of a substance to allow water to pass through the openings or intersects.
Permit- Any permit in writing as issued by a designated Township official or by a county, state, or federal agency, or any other applicable permit.
Permitted Use- Any use allowed in a zoning district and subject to the restrictions applicable to that zoning district.
Pervious Surface- Any material that permits passage of stormwater through the material.
Person- A corporation, company, association, society, firm, partnership, or joint stock company, as well as an individual, and all political subdivisions or any agency or instrumentality thereof.
Deptford Township UDO Definitions
May 5, 2014 Page 32
Personal Services- Establishments primarily engaged in providing services involving the care of a person or his or her agent.
Place of Religious Worship- A building or structure, or groups of buildings or structures, which by design and construction are primarily intended for the conducting of organized religious services and accessory uses associated therewith.
Planned Commercial Development – An area of a minimum contiguous or non-contiguous size as specified herein to be developed according to a plan as a single entity containing one or more structures with appurtenant common areas to accommodate commercial or office uses or both and any residential and other uses incidental to the predominant use as may be permitted herein. [Ord. O.5.08, 4/7/08]
Planned Unit Development (PUD)- An area of a minimum contiguous size, as specified by this chapter, to be planned and developed as a single entity containing one (1) or more residential clusters or planned unit residential developments, and which may include one (1) or more public, quasi-public, or commercial areas in such ratios of nonresidential uses to residential uses as permitted by this chapter.
Planning Board- The duly designated planning board of Deptford Township.
Planning Board Engineer- A professional engineer, licensed by the State of New Jersey, and appointed by the Township Planning Board to represent its engineering interests. See Municipal Engineer.
Planning Board Planner- A professional planner, licensed by the State of New Jersey, and appointed by the Township Planning Board to represent its planning interests. See Municipal Planner.
Plat- A map or maps of a subdivision or site plan.
Porch- A roofed open area, which may be screened, usually attached to or part of and with direct access to or from a building.
Potable Water- Water suitable for drinking purposes.
Preliminary Approval- The conferral of certain rights prior to final approval after specific elements of a development plan have been agreed upon by the Planning Board and the applicant.
Preliminary Floor Plans and Elevations- Architectural drawings prepared during early and introductory stages of the design of a project, illustrating in a schematic form its scope, scale, and relationship to its site and immediate environs.
Preliminary Subdivision or Site Plan- A plan indicating the proposed layout of a development and related information that is submitted for preliminary subdivision or site plan approval.
Deptford Township UDO Definitions
May 5, 2014 Page 33
Principal Building- A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is located.
Principal Use- The main purpose for which a lot or building is used.
Professional Office- The office of a member of a recognized profession and/or an administrative or executive office including, but not limited to, architecture, medicine, dentistry, engineering, law, planning, accounting, insurance, and real estate.
Property Line- See Lot Line.
Recreation, Active- Leisure time activities, usually of a more formal nature and performed with others, often requiring equipment and taking place at prescribed places, sites or specialized fields.
Recreation Facility- A place designed and equipped for the conduct of sports, leisure time activities and other customary and usual recreational activities.
Recreation, Passive- Any leisure time activity not considered active, including such activities as walking and bird watching.
Recreational Vehicle- A vehicular type portable structure without permanent foundation, which can be towed, hauled or driven and primarily designed as temporary living accommodation for recreational, camping and travel use and including but not limited to travel trailers, truck campers, camping trailers and self-propelled motor homes.
Recycling Area- Space allocated for the collection and storage of source separated recyclable materials.
Rehabilitation Center - An establishment providing subacute care for persons transitioning from an in-patient hospital status to independent living or recovery from surgery, debilitation or serious illness. [Ord. O.17.08, 10/6/08]
Religious Institution – A building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, where persons regularly assemble for religious purposes and related social events and which building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain religious ceremonies and purposes. [Ord. O.5.08, 4/7/08]
Research Laboratory- An establishment or other facility for carrying on investigation in the natural, physical or social sciences, or engineering and development as an extension of an investigation with the objective of creating end products.
Resource Extraction Operation- The removal of natural resources by means of mining, drilling, or other extractive techniques from the surface or subsurface of the land. For the purposes of this chapter, natural resources shall include sand, gravel, minerals, or any other inorganic material but shall exclude materials regulated by the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities.
Deptford Township UDO Definitions
May 5, 2014 Page 34
Restaurant- An establishment where food and drink is prepared, served and consumed primarily within the principal building.
Resubdivision- See Subdivision.
Retail Services- Establishments providing services or entertainment, as opposed to products, to the general public.
Retail Trade or Sales- Establishments engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods.
Retaining Wall- A structure erected between lands of different elevation to protect structures and/or to prevent the erosion of earth from the upper slope.
Retention Basin (Pond)- A constructed or natural water collector used for the permanent storage of runoff with no outlet provided.
Rezone- To change the zoning classification of particular lots or parcels of land.
Right-of-way- A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, forced dedication, proscription or condemnation and intended to be occupied or occupied by a road, sidewalk, railroad, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water line, sanitary storm sewer or other similar use.
Sanitary Landfill- A site for solid waste disposal.
Satellite Dish Antenna- A structure designed and intended for the reception of radio and television communications which are relayed by means of an earth satellite.
Scenic Area- The natural features of an open area which are visually significant, or geologically or botanically unique.
Scenic Easement- An easement the purpose of which is to limit development in order to preserve a view or scenic area.
School- Any building or part thereof which is designed, constructed or used for education or instruction in any branch of knowledge.
School, Elementary- Any school licensed by the State and which meets State requirements for elementary education.
School, Private- Any building or group of buildings the use of which meets State requirements for primary, secondary or higher education and which use does not secure the major part of its funding from any governmental agency.
School, Secondary- Any school licensed by the State and which is authorized to award diplomas for secondary education.
Deptford Township UDO Definitions
May 5, 2014 Page 35
School, Vocational- A secondary or higher education facility primarily teaching usable skills that prepare students for jobs in a trade and meeting the state requirements as a vocational facility.
Screening- A method of visually shielding or obscuring one abutting or nearby structure or use from another by fencing, walls, berms or densely planted vegetation.
Sedimentation- The deposition of soil that has been transported from its site of origin by water, ice, wind, gravity, or other natural means as a product of erosion.
Selective Cutting- The removal of larger trees on an individual basis while leaving trees of a lesser size.
Self-Service Storage Facility- A structure containing separate storage spaces of varying sizes, leased or rented as individual storage units.
Semi-Detached Dwelling- See Dwelling, Semi-Detached.
Service Station- See Automobile Service Station.
Services- Establishments primarily engaged in providing services for individuals, business and government establishments and other organizations.
Sewage - All effluent carried by sewers whether it is sanitary sewage, industrial wastes or storm water runoff.
Sewerage- The entire system of sewage collection, treatment and disposal.
Shopping Center – A group of commercial establishments planned, constructed and managed as a single entity and which include on-site customer and employee parking, loading areas and common design features with a gross leasable floor area of at least 100,000 sf. [Ord. O.5.08, 4/7/08]
Side Yard- See Yard, Side.
Sidewalk- A paved or surfaced area, paralleling and usually separated from the street, used as a pedestrian walkway.
Sight Triangle Easement- A triangular shaped portion of land established at street intersections in which nothing is erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to limit or obstruct the sight distance of motorists entering or leaving the intersection.
Sign - Any object, device, display, mural or structure, or a part thereof, situated outdoors or indoors, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, design, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination or projected images. This definition shall specifically include any building
Deptford Township UDO Definitions
May 5, 2014 Page 36
or part of a building, including walls and facades used for such purposes and shall further include banners, pennants, flags and similar attention attracting devices. [Ord. O.24.10, 12/6/10]
Figure 6.4, Sign Types
Sign, Animated or Moving- Any sign or part of a sign which changes physical position by any movement or rotation or which gives the visual impression of such movement or rotation.
Sign Area- The area of a sign which is computed by multiplying the greatest height of the sign face by the greatest width of the sign face. The sign area shall include the advertising surface and any framing, trim or molding, but shall not include the supporting structure. See Signable Facade Area.
Sign, Awning- A sign that is mounted or painted on, or attached to an awning that is otherwise permitted by this chapter.
Sign, Banner- A sign which may or may not contain a message constructed of cloth, canvas, plastic, or other flexible material typically suspended or hung by cord, string, or rope from a structure. [Ord. O.24.10, 12/6/10]
Sign, Billboard- A type of off-premise sign, whether on- or off-premises, greater than one hundred fifty (150) square feet in area, attached or affixed to a structure, erected principally or in large part to serve as a means of displaying said sign. [Ord. O.24.10, 12/6/10]
Deptford Township UDO Definitions
May 5, 2014 Page 37
Sign, Business – An on-premises sign which directs attention for purposes of promoting a business, commodity, service, industry, or other activity which is sold, offered or conducted on the premises on which such sign is located or to which it is affixed.
Sign, Campus Identification a message constructed of cloth, canvas or other flexible material held in tension by spring loaded arms that are affixed to a permanent object, which may contain an organizational or corporate logo, or other depiction primarily intended to provide a uniform identification for a health care facility. Campus identification signs shall not be construed to be banner signs. [Ord. O.3.14, 2/25/14]
Sign, Canopy- A sign that is mounted or painted on, or attached to a canopy that is otherwise permitted by this chapter.
Sign, Changeable Copy- A sign that is designed so that the message on the sign can be easily and periodically altered.
Sign, Commercial – Any sign which directs attention for purposes of promoting any business, commodity, service or industry for transactional purposes. [Ord. O.24.10, 12/6/10]
Sign, Development – A sign designating the name of a subdivision of residential homes, whether single-family or multi-family, attached or detached or an apartment complex; or, a sign identifying an entire group of buildings in an office or industrial park. [Ord. O.24.10, 12/6/10]
Sign, Dilapidated – A sign which is structurally unsound, contains faulty wiring, or, loose or oxidized fastenings, or is otherwise detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare. [Ord. O.24.10, 12/6/10]
Sign, Directional- Signs limited to directional messages, principally for pedestrian or vehicular traffic, such as "one-way," "entrance," and "exit".
Sign, Directory – A sign designed for the use of motorists and pedestrians within the interior of a site or commercial or industrial complex which is intended to direct such persons to individual buildings or tenants in multi-tenanted office or industrial parks and shopping centers; or, identify tenants in a single building. [Ord. O.24.10, 12/6/10]
Sign, Facade- See Sign, Wall.
Sign, Freestanding- Any nonmovable sign not affixed to a building.
Sign Height – The highest spot at any one point on the sign measured from the average grade level at the base of the sign. [Ord. O.24.10, 12/6/10]
Sign, Illuminated- A sign lighted by or exposed to artificial lighting either by lights on or in the sign or directed towards the sign. See Direct Illumination and Indirect Illumination.
Sign, Incidental – A sign to convey information to the general public that has a purpose secondary to the use of the lot on which it is located. Examples include, but are not
Deptford Township UDO Definitions
May 5, 2014 Page 38
limited to "No Parking", “No Trespassing”, "Loading Zone", "Telephone", “Danger High Voltage” and "Rest Room" or other similar information such as the hours of operation or credit cards honored at the establishment. [Ord. O.24.10, 12/6/10]
Sign, Internal – Any sign erected, constructed or maintained inside of a building and visible from outside the building, whether illuminated or non-illuminated. [Ord. O.24.10, 12/6/10]
Sign, Marquee- A changeable copy sign associated with a movie or performing arts theater. [Ord. O.24.10, 12/6/10]
Sign, Official – A sign, symbol or device, erected, constructed or maintained by the Federal, State, county or local government or any agency thereof, for the purpose of informing or guiding the public or for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. [Ord. O.24.10, 12/6/10]
Sign, Off-Premise Commercial – A sign containing a commercial message which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered at a location other than the property on which the sign is located. [Ord. O.24.10, 12/6/10]
Sign, Off-Premise Non-Commercial – A sign that does not contain a commercial message which directs attention to an institution, government, governmental entity, eleemosynary institution not primarily engaged in transactional commercial activity, or which is intended for viewpoint communication by either governmental or non-governmental speakers at a location other than the property on which the sign is located. [Ord. O.24.10, 12/6/10]
Sign Permit – A specialized form of zoning permit specifically for signs issued by the Zoning Officer in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. [Ord. O.24.10, 12/6/10]
Sign, Portable – A sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure in a manner considered non-permanent under the Uniform Construction Code or which is located or attached to a trailer, on wheels, or other similar attachment such that the sign may be moved from place to place, either within the lot or to another location. [Ord. O.24.10, 12/6/10]
Sign, Projecting- A sign that is wholly or partly dependent upon a building for support and which projects more than twelve (12) inches from such building.
Sign, Real Estate – A sign of an owner of real property or of a licensed real estate broker indicating that a property is available for a new owner or tenant. [Ord. O.24.10, 12/6/10]
Sign, Residential- A sign located in a district zoned for residential purposes that does not contain any commercial message except for goods or services legally offered on the premises on which the sign is located.
Sign, Roof – A sign that is mounted on the roof of a building or which is wholly dependent upon a building's roof for support and which projects above the parapet of a building with a flat roof, the cornice line of a building with a gambrel, gable, or hip roof, or above the
Deptford Township UDO Definitions
May 5, 2014 Page 39
division between the upper and lower slopes of a building with a mansard roof. [Ord. O.24.10, 12/6/10]
Sign, Temporary – A sign which is not permanently attached to a building structure or permanently affixed to a freestanding structure and which is erected for a limited period of time in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. O.24.10, 12/6/10]
Sign, Trespassing or Warning – An incidental sign indicating no trespassing or no fishing and/or hunting or for dangerous or hazardous conditions. [Ord. O.24.10, 12/6/10]
Sign, Vehicle- A type of portable commercial sign affixed or painted on a motor vehicle or trailer and parked at a location conspicuous to the traveling public for a period in excess of 48 continuous hours, where the design elements and use characteristics of said vehicle or trailer provide evidence that its primary purpose is to serve as a means of displaying and conveying such signage as a commercial message. [Ord. O.24.10, 12/6/10]
Sign, Viewpoint – Any non-commercial sign, symbol, or display, the content of which is intended to draw attention to, or express advocacy for or against, any idea, belief, person, place, thing, entity or policy. [Ord. O.24.10, 12/6/10]
Sign, Wall – A sign fastened to or painted on the facade of a building or structure in such manner that the facade becomes the supporting structure for, or forms the background surface of the sign, and which does not extend more than twelve (12) inches from the supporting facade. [Ord. O.24.10, 12/6/10]
Sign, Window – An internal sign that is affixed to the interior of a window or supported in such a manner as to be readily visible from the exterior of the building. [Ord. O.24.10, 12/6/10]
Single-Family Dwelling- See Dwelling, Single-Family.
Site- Any plot or parcel of land or combination of contiguous lots or parcels of land.
Site Plan- A development plan of one (1) or more lots on which is shown: (1), the existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including but not limited to topography, vegetation, drainage, flood plains, marshes, and waterways; (2), the location of all existing and proposed buildings, drives, parking spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities, utility services, landscaping, structures, signs, lighting, and screening devices; and (3), any other information that may be reasonably required in order to make an informed determination concerning the adequacy of the plan in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. See Major and Minor Site Plan.
Sketch Plan- See Concept Plan.
Slope- The degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually expressed in percent, degrees or ratio. See Grade.
Deptford Township UDO Definitions
May 5, 2014 Page 40
Specimen Tree- A tree with a diameter of twenty-four (24") inches or greater; or a unique, rare, or otherwise specifically selected plant or tree which most typically represents a whole class or group, specifically in shape, form, historical importance, or any other characteristics which may be designated as such by the Township.
Figure 6.5, Street System
Street- Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive or other way: (1.) which is an existing state, county, or municipal roadway; or (2.) which is shown upon a plat approved pursuant to law, or (3.) which is approved by other official action as provided by the Municipal Land Use Law, or (4.) which is shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the county recording officer prior to the appointment of a planning board and the grant to such board of the power to review plats; and includes the land between such street lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, paving areas and other areas within the street lines.
Street, Collector- A street which collects traffic from local streets and connects with minor and major arterials.
Street, Cul-De-Sac- A street with a single common ingress and egress and with a turnaround at the end.
Street, Dead End- A street with a single common ingress and egress and without a turnaround at the end.
Deptford Township UDO Definitions
May 5, 2014 Page 41
Street, Line- The edge of the existing or future right-of-way, whichever may result in the widest right-of-way, as shown on the adopted Master Plan or Official Map, forming the dividing line between the street and a lot.
Street, Local- A street designed to provide vehicular access to abutting property and to discourage through traffic.
Street, Major Arterial- A street with access control, channelized intersections, restricted parking, and which collects and distributes traffic to and from minor arterials.
Street, Minor Arterial- A street with signals at important intersections and stop signs on the side streets, and which collects and distributes traffic to and from collector streets.
Structure- A combination of materials to form a construction for use, occupancy, or ornamentation whether installed on, above, or below the surface of land or water. Fences which are not used for the purposes of corralling or otherwise containing livestock or poultry shall not be considered to be a structure as defined by this chapter.
Structure, Temporary - A structure that has no footing or foundation, no permanent floor, and does not have all of the normal structural components of a structure designed for permanent occupancy of humans or goods.
Subdivision- The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale, or development. The following shall not be considered subdivisions within the meaning of this chapter if no new streets are created: (1.) divisions of land found by the Planning Board or Development Review Committee to be for agricultural purposes where all resulting parcels are five (5) acres or larger in size; (2.) divisions of property by testamentary or intestate provisions; (3.) divisions of property upon court order, including but not limited to, judgements of foreclosure; (4.) consolidation of existing lots by deed or other recorded instrument; and (5.) the conveyance of one (1) or more adjoining lots, tracts or parcels of land owned by the same person or persons and all of which are found and certified by the Administrative Officer to conform to the requirements of this chapter and are shown and designated as separate lots, tracts, or parcels on the municipal tax map. The term subdivision shall also include the term resubdivision. See Major and Minor Subdivision.
Supermarket- A retail establishment exceeding 20,000 square feet in area, primarily selling groceries as well as other convenience and household goods.
Swimming Pool- A water-filled enclosure, permanently constructed or portable, having a depth of more than eighteen (18) inches below the level of the surrounding land, or an above-surface pool, having a depth of more than twenty-four (24) inches, designed, used and maintained for swimming and bathing.
Tenant- An occupant of land or premises who occupies, uses, and enjoys real property for a fixed time, usually through a lease arrangement with the property owner and with the owner's consent.
Deptford Township UDO Definitions
May 5, 2014 Page 42
Theater- A building or part of a building devoted to showing motion pictures, or for dramatic, musical or live performances.
Thinning- The removal of undesirable, competitive, diseased or damaged trees so as to cultivate and improve the development of remaining trees on the lot.
Topography- The configuration (relief) of the surface of a portion of the earth showing natural and artificial features thereon; including, but not limited to, contours, structures, hydrography, and vegetation.
Tot Lot- An improved and equipped play area for small children usually up to elementary school age.
Township Engineer- See Municipal Engineer.
Township Planner- See Municipal Planner.
Tract – An area, parcel, piece of land, or property consisting of one or more lots that is the subject of an application for development. [Ord. O.5.08, 4/7/08]
Tract, Net – The subset of the area of a tract devoted to a single use within a development consisting of more than one use. [Ord. O.17.08, 10/6/08]
Trailer- A structure on wheels, capable of being towed or hauled by another vehicle, which is further defined by Chapter 72 of the Code of the Township of Deptford.
Trade School- See School, Vocational.
Tree- Any woody perennial plant usually having one (1) main stem or trunk and a more or less definitely formed crown, and which has the potential based on its genus and species to grow to a height of ten (10) feet or more.
Tree Diameter- The width of a tree, equal to 7/22 of the circumference, measured four and a half (4.5) feet above the ground.
Tree Mass- Six (6) or more trees each with a minimum diameter breast height of four (4) inches or greater forming a common drip line encompassing at least six hundred (600) square feet in area. [Ord. 0.1.10, 2/22/10]
Tree Protection Zone- That portion of a lot outside of the disturbance zone.
Tree Removal- The cutting down of a tree, the transplanting of a tree to a site other than that under development, or the infliction of damage to a tree which is of such severity as to show evidence within a period of two (2) years of irreparable harm leading to the ultimate death of a tree. Examples of said serious damage include, but are not limited to: damage inflicted to the root system by machinery, storage of materials, and soil compaction; changing the natural grade above or below the root system and around the trunk; damage inflicted on the tree permitting fungus infection or pest infestation;
Deptford Township UDO Definitions
May 5, 2014 Page 43
excessive pruning; excessive thinning; paving with concrete, asphalt, or other impervious material within such proximity as to be harmful to the tree.
Tree Root Area - The area under a tree extending from the trunk to the drip line.
Trip- A single, one-way vehicle movement to or from a property or study area.
Urgent Care Center: A type of medical clinic in a building or portion of a building, whether private or institution, principally engaged in the provision of immediate medical services to patients in an outpatient or ambulatory care setting not requiring emergency room services, for medical conditions caused by illnesses or injuries that require prompt attention and/or treatment to prevent complications or deterioration, but are not life-threatening. Patients shall be served solely on an outpatient basis and such services shall not include overnight stays. [Ord. O.3.14, 2/25/14]
Urgent Care Treatment - the provision of immediate medical service as outpatient care for the treatment of acute and chronic illness and injury that does not require the traumatic care services of an emergency treatment facility in a hospital. [Ord. O.18.13, 12/9/13]
Use- The purpose or activity for which land or buildings are designed, arranged, or intended, or for which land or buildings are occupied or maintained.
Use, Accessory- See Accessory Use.
Use, Conditional- See Conditional Use.
Use, Existing- See Existing Use.
Use Variance- See Variance, Use.
Utility Services- Establishments engaged in the generation, transmission and/or distribution of electricity, gas or steam, including water and irrigation systems and sanitary systems used for the collection and disposal of garbage, sewage and other wastes.
Variance- A departure from the terms of this chapter authorized by the appropriate municipal agency in accordance with the N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
Variance, Use- See "d" variance.
Vehicle, Motor- A self-propelled device used for transportation of people or goods over land surfaces and licensed as a motor vehicle.
Wall- (1.) The vertical exterior surface of a building; or (2) the vertical interior surfaces which divide a building's space into rooms.
Warehouse- A building used primarily for the storage of goods and materials.
Deptford Township UDO Definitions
May 5, 2014 Page 44
Water Course- Any natural or artificial stream, river, creek, ditch, channel, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine or wash in which water flows in a definite direction or course, either continuously or intermittently, and has a definite channel, bed and banks.
Wetlands- An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation; provided, however, that the delineation of the wetland shall use a three parameter approach involving hydrology, soils, and vegetation which shall be acceptable to the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and Energy or the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, whichever shall have primary jurisdiction.
Wrecking Establishment- A facility where the salvage from demolished structures is stored out of doors and is available for resale or reuse.
Figure 6.6, Yards and Lot Lines
Yard- An open space that lies between the principal or accessory building or buildings and the nearest lot line. Such yard shall be unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as may be specifically provided in this chapter.
Yard, Front- An open space extending the full width of the lot between any building and the street line, and measured perpendicular to the street line. Such front yard shall be unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as may be specifically
Deptford Township UDO Definitions
May 5, 2014 Page 45
provided in this chapter. In the case of a corner lot, each yard with frontage on a street shall be considered a front yard.
Yard, Rear- A space extending the full width of the lot between the principal building and the rear lot line, and measured perpendicular to the rear lot line. Such rear yard shall be unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as may be specifically provided in this chapter. In the case of a corner lot, only one rear yard shall be provided and the applicant may choose which yard is to be considered the rear yard.
Yard, Side- A space extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the principal building and the side lot line, and measured perpendicular to side lot line. Such side yard shall be unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as may be specifically provided in this chapter. In the case of a corner lot, not more than one (1) side yard shall be provided and the applicant may choose which yard is to be considered the side yard.
Zero Lot Line- The location of a building on a lot in such a manner that one (1) or more of the building's sides rest directly on a lot line.
Zone- A specifically delineated area or district in a municipality within which regulations and requirements uniformly govern the use, placement, spacing and size of land and buildings.
Zoning- The dividing of a municipality into districts and the establishment of regulations governing the use, placement, spacing and size of land and buildings.
Zoning Board of Adjustment- An officially constituted body of the Township of Deptford, governed by the Municipal Land Use Law, whose principal duties are to grant variances from the strict application of the zoning ordinance.
Zoning Map- The map or maps which are a part of the zoning ordinance and delineate the boundaries of zone districts.
Zoning Officer- The municipal official designated to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 46
Article III. Zoning Districts
§ 7. Effect and establishment of zoning districts.
A. Effect of this chapter.
1. This chapter shall be applicable to the regulation of the use of all land and structures within the Township of Deptford.
a. The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements (or the maximum, when so specified). Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction than is imposed and required by other provisions of law or by other rules, regulations or resolutions, the provisions of this chapter shall control. Where other laws, rules, regulations or resolutions require greater restrictions than are imposed by this chapter, the provisions of such laws, rules, regulations or resolutions shall control.
b. The standards established by this chapter shall be applied uniformly within each zoning district to each class or kind of structure or land. Only uses which are specifically provided for by the regulations of any district shall be permitted in that district unless authorized by the Zoning Board of Adjustment pursuant to this chapter.
c. Upon the effective date of this chapter, no building shall hereafter be used, erected, altered, converted, enlarged, added to, moved or reduced, nor shall any lands be subdivided, developed, or redeveloped in any manner except in conformity with the standards provided herein, as applied to the zoning district in which the building or land is located.
d. Upon the effective date of this chapter, all buildings and land which are not in full conformity with the standards provided herein, as applied to the zoning district in which the building or land is located, shall be deemed to be non- conforming and shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter.
B. Establishment of zoning districts and zoning map.
1. The following zoning districts are hereby created and all land within the Township of Deptford shall be placed in one of these districts by designation on a zoning map, as described below.
R- 40: Low Density Residential Zoning District
R- 20: Medium Density Residential District
R-20A: Medium Density Residential District [Ord. O.11.14, 5/5/14]
R- 10: Medium Density Residential District
R-10A: Medium and Low Density Residential District [Ord. O.20.02, 12/2/02]
R- 6: High Density Residential District
R-6A: Affordable High Density Residential District
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 47
AR-1: Age-Restricted Residential 1 District [Ord. O.17.08, 10/6/08]
AR-2: Age-Restricted Residential 2 District [Ord. O.17.08, 10/6/08]
AR-3: Age-Restricted Institutional 3 District [Ord. O.17.08, 10/6/08]
AR-4: Age-Restricted Mixed 4 District [Ord. O.17.08, 10/6/08]
RM-1: Multi-family Residential District
RM-2: Multi-family Residential District
PUD: Planned Unit Developments
PVD-1: Planned Village Development 1 District
TC-1: Transitional Commercial 1 District
TC-2: Transitional Commercial 2 District
BC-4: Business Center 4 District
BC-3: Business Center 3 District
BC-2: Business Center 2 District
BC-1: Business Center 1 District
ROM: Research, Office and Manufacturing District [Ord. O.5.08, 4/7/08]
O: Office District [Ord. O.18.13, 12/9/13]
C-1: General Commercial District
C-2: Neighborhood Commercial District
FLX: Flex Space District
LI-1: Light Industrial 1 District
LI-2: Light Industrial 2 District
INS: Institutional Zoning District
2. Zoning map. The boundaries of these zoning districts are established on a map entitled, “Zoning, Deptford Township, Gloucester County, NJ”, dated June 2014, which accompanies this ordinance and is incorporated herein. [Ord. O.11.14, 6/24/14]
C. Interpretation of boundaries.
1. The boundaries between zoning districts are, unless otherwise indicated, either the center lines of streets or railroad rights-of-way, municipal boundary lines, property lines existing at the time of the zoning map adoption or amendment, or lines parallel or perpendicular thereto. Distances not specifically indicated shall be determined by the scale of the map.
2. Where a district boundary line divides a lot existing at the time of adoption of this chapter, the regulations applicable to the least restrictive district shall extend over the portion of the lot in the more restrictive district for a distance of not more than twenty (20) feet.
D. Notice of proposed change to classification or boundaries of zoning districts.
1. Notice of a hearing on an amendment to the zoning ordinance proposing a change to the classification or boundaries of a zoning district, exclusive of classification or boundary changes recommended in a periodic general reexamination of the Master Plan by the Planning Board pursuant to Section 76 of P.L.1975, c.291 (C.40:55D-89), shall be given at least 10 days prior to the hearing by the
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 48
Municipal Clerk to the owners of all real property as shown on the current tax duplicates, located, in the case of a classification change, within the district and within the State within 200-feet in all directions of the boundaries of the district, and located, in the case of a boundary change, in the State within 200-feet in all directions of the proposed new boundaries of the district which is the subject of the hearing.
2. A notice pursuant to this Section shall state the date, time and place of the hearing, the nature of the matter to be considered and an identification of the affected zoning districts and proposed boundary changes, if any, by street names, common names or other identifiable landmarks, and by reference to lot and block numbers as shown on the current tax duplicate in the municipal Tax Assessor's office.
a. Notice shall be given by: (1) serving a copy thereof on the property owner as shown on the said current tax duplicate, or their agent in charge of the property, or (2) mailing a copy thereof by certified mail and regular mail to the property owner at their address as shown on the said current tax duplicate.
b. Notice to a partnership owner may be made by service upon any partner. Notice to a corporate owner may be made by service upon its president, a vice president, secretary or other person authorized by appointment or by law to accept service on behalf of the corporation. Notice to a condominium association, horizontal property regime, community trust or homeowners' association, because of its ownership of common elements or areas located within 200-feet of the boundaries of the district which is the subject of the hearing, may be made in the same manner as to a corporation, in addition to notice to unit owners, co-owners, or homeowners on account of such common elements or areas.
3. The Municipal Clerk shall execute affidavits of proof of service of the notices required by this Section, and shall keep the affidavits on file along with the proof of publication of the notice of the required public hearing on the proposed zoning ordinance change. Costs of the notice provision shall be the responsibility of the proponent of the amendment.
4. Protest. Notice of the hearing on an amendment to the zoning ordinance proposing a change to the classification or boundaries of a zoning district, exclusive of classification or boundary changes recommended in a periodic general reexamination of the Master Plan by the Planning Board pursuant to Section 76 of P.L.1975, c.291 (C.40:55D-89), shall be given prior to adoption in accordance with the provisions of Section 2 of P.L.1995, c.249 (C.40:55D-62.1). A protest against any proposed amendment or revision of a zoning ordinance may be filed with the Municipal Clerk, signed by the owners of 20% or more of the area either (1) of the lots or land included in such proposed change, or (2) of the lots or land extending 200-feet in all directions therefrom inclusive of street
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 49
space, whether within or without the municipality. Such amendment or revision shall not become effective following the filing of such protest except by the favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all the members of the governing body of the municipality.
§ 8. R-40 Low Density Residential District.
A. Intent. The intent of this District is to promote the development of appropriately zoned land within the Township for single family detached dwellings at a low density and to permit other compatible uses in accord with the spirit of this chapter.
B. Uses.
1. Principal permitted uses on the land and in the buildings.
a. The following principal uses shall be permitted by right1:
1) Single family detached dwellings.
2) Public playgrounds, woodland, wildlife preserve, natural resource conservation area and parks
3) Community residences for the developmentally disabled, community shelters for victims of domestic violence, community residences for the terminally ill and community residences for persons with head injuries shall be a permitted use in all residential districts of a municipality, and the requirements therefore shall be the same as for single family dwelling units located within such districts shall be restricted to not more than 15 persons.
4) Agricultural uses, subject to the bulk provision of Section 8.F., below.
b. The following principal uses are permitted conditionally upon a determination by the Planning Board that the use can be provided in a manner that will minimize the impact upon adjacent properties, will be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood, will not unduly burden adjacent areas with increases in traffic, noise, threats to public health and safety, and will conform with such additional standards as provided in §61.
1) Commercial recreational uses.
2) A church, synagogue, or similar place of religious worship.
1 - §8.B.1.a.5 repealed by Ord. O.17.08, 10/6/08.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 50
3) A club, lodge, or similar fraternal organization.
4) A cemetery or memorial park.
5) Day care center.
c. Affordable housing. A developer may setaside a minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the total number of dwellings within any R-40 district shall be affordable to low and moderate income households in accordance with §38, excepting congregate care housing and assisted living uses. As compensation, the developer may develop such housing on smaller lots utilizing single family semi-detached dwellings for such affordable unit and thereby gain additional lots for unsubsidized housing. Developers not utilizing such an option shall pay an affordable housing development impact fee in accordance with §38.1. Fractions of a unit shall be addressed through the provisions of §38.2. [Ord. O.2.09, 3/16/09]
2. Accessory uses.
a. The following accessory uses shall be permitted by right:
1) Signs. (See §30 for standards.)
2) Fences and walls. (See §54 for standards.)
3) Off-street parking and private garages. (See §27 for standards.)
4) Private residential recreational facilities. (See §43. for standards.)
5) Private residential sheds.
6) Gardening and tilling of the soil for personal use.
7) Reserved. [Ord. O.17.08, 10/6/08]
8) The erection of a television or radio antenna, other than a satellite dish antenna, which is intended for personal use, provided that it does not exceed the height limitation of the district in which it is located. No more than one (1) antenna shall be permitted per lot.
9) The storage of personal, non-commercial boats and recreational vehicles, provided that they are not used for the purposes of habitation and are not stored within the designated front yard area.
10) The storage of trucks and other vehicles with no more than two axles, provided that they are not stored within the designated front yard area.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 51
11) Home occupations, provided that the sum of all such uses in a dwelling complies with the following standards:
(a) The home occupation may not employ more than one (1) person who is not a member of the household residing in the dwelling.
(b) The home occupation shall primarily be conducted by mail, computer media or via the telephone so that it will not generate traffic caused by clients or customers visiting the dwelling.
(c) The residential exterior appearance of the structure shall not be altered.
(d) Not more than twenty percent (20%) of the total floor area of the dwelling may be devoted to the home occupation use.
(e) There shall be no outdoor storage or display of materials, products or equipment.
(f) One (1) off street parking space must be provided in addition to those required for the dwelling if a non-resident person is employed in conjunction with the home occupation use.
(g) Signs are not permitted to identify any approved Home Occupation.
12) The erection of a television or radio antenna, including satellite dish antenna with a diameter if thirty-six (36) inches or less, which is intended for personal use, provided that it does not exceed the height limitation of the district in which it is located. No more than one (1) antenna shall be permitted per lot.
b. The following accessory uses are permitted conditionally upon a determination by the Planning Board that the use can be provided in a manner that will minimize the impact upon adjacent properties and will conform with such additional standards provided in §61.
1) Family day care homes.
2) Satellite dishes with a diameter greater than thirty-six (36) inches or microwave antennas.
C. Bulk Standards
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 52
1. Principal Uses Other than Agricultural.
a. Minimum lot area - Forty thousand (40,000) square feet.
b. Minimum street frontage - One hundred fifty (150) feet.
c. Minimum lot width - One hundred seventy-five (175) feet.
d. Minimum lot depth - One hundred fifty (150) feet.
e. Minimum front yard setback - Forty (40) feet.
f. Minimum side yard setback, each - Forty (40) feet.
g. Minimum rear yard setback - Fifty (50) feet.
h. Maximum permitted building coverage - Fifteen percent (15%).
i. Maximum permitted impervious coverage - Twenty-five percent (25%).
j. Maximum permitted building height - Thirty-five (35) feet.
k. Accessory structures shall not be located in a front yard nor within ten (10) feet of any property line, provided however, that accessory structures which are one hundred (100) square feet or less in gross floor area may be located within five (5) feet of a side or rear property line. All accessory structures, including sheds, shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the Uniform Construction Code.
2. Reserved. [Ord. O.17.08, 10/6/08]
3. Reserved. [Ord. O.17.08, 10/6/08]
4. Affordable single family semi-detached dwelling. [Ord. O.12.06, 11/13/06]
a. Minimum lot size – Ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
b. Minimum street frontage – Seventy-five (75) feet.
c. Minimum lot width – Seventy-five (75) feet.
d. Minimum lot depth – One hundred twenty-fifty (125) feet.
e. Minimum front yard setback – Forty (40) feet.
f. Minimum side yard setback, common wall – Zero (0) feet.
g. Minimum side yard setback, other – Thirty-five (35) feet.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 53
h. Minimum rear yard setback – Forty (40) feet.
i. Maximum permitted building coverage – Twenty percent (20%).
j. Maximum permitted impervious coverage – Thirty percent (30%).
k. Maximum permitted building height – Thirty-five (35) feet.
l. Accessory buildings and structures shall conform to the requirements of §8.C.1.k.
D. Reserved. [Ord. O.4.06, 4/3/06]
E. Street trees should be provided as required in §31.
F. Bulk Standards for Agricultural Uses in this and all other Residential Districts.
1. Minimum Lot Area.
a. For uses involving the keeping of pigs or poultry – Thirty (30) acres.
b. For all other agricultural uses (other than non-commercial gardening, including the growing of fruits and vegetables, which is accessory to a single family dwelling) – Five (5) acres.
2. Minimum setback of any structure from any street or property line.
a. For uses involving the keeping of pigs or poultry – Three Hundred (300) feet.
b. For all other agricultural uses – One Hundred (100) feet.
§ 9. R-20 Medium Density Residential District.
A. Intent. The intent of this District is to promote the development of appropriately zoned land within the Township for single family detached dwellings at a medium density and to permit other compatible uses in accord with the spirit of this chapter.
B. Uses. All principal and accessory uses as permitted by right and conditionally in the R-40 Zoning District.
C. Bulk standards
1. Lots with public sewer and water.
a. Minimum lot size – Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
b. Minimum street frontage – One hundred (100) feet.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 54
c. Minimum lot width – One hundred twenty-five (125) feet.
d. Minimum lot depth – One hundred twenty-five (125) feet.
e. Minimum front yard setback – Thirty-five (35) feet.
f. Minimum side yard setback, one side – Twenty (20) feet.
g. Minimum aggregate side yard setback (both sides) – Fifty (50) feet
h. Minimum rear yard setback – Thirty-five (35) feet.
i. Maximum permitted building coverage – Twenty percent (20%).
j. Maximum permitted impervious coverage – Thirty percent (30%).
k. Maximum permitted building height – Thirty-five (35) feet.
l. Accessory buildings and structures shall not be located in a front yard nor within ten (10) feet of any property line, provided, however, that accessory structures that are 0ne hundred (100) square feet of less in gross floor area may be located within five (5) feet of a side or rear property line. All accessory structures, including sheds, shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the Uniform Construction Code.
2. Affordable single family semi-detached dwelling. [Ord. O.12.06, 11/13/06]
a. Minimum lot size – Ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
b. Minimum street frontage – Sixty-five (65) feet.
c. Minimum lot width – Sixty-five (65) feet.
d. Minimum lot depth – One hundred twenty-five (125) feet.
e. Minimum front yard setback – Thirty-five (35) feet.
f. Minimum side yard setback, common wall – Zero (0) feet.
g. Minimum side yard setback, other – Twenty (20) feet.
h. Minimum rear yard setback – Thirty-five (35) feet.
i. Maximum permitted building coverage – Twenty percent (20%).
j. Maximum permitted impervious coverage – Thirty percent (30%).
k. Maximum permitted building height – Thirty-five (35) feet.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 55
l. Accessory buildings and structures shall conform to the requirements of §9.C.1.l.
3. Lots without public sewer and water shall comply with the bulk standards as required in §8.C.1, the R-40 zoning district, for single family detached dwellings. [Ord. O.12.06, 11/13/06]
D. Reserved. [Ord. O.4.06]
E. Street trees should be provided as required in §31.
§ 9.1 R-20A Medium Density Residential District [Ord. O.11.14, 5/5/14]
A. Intent. The intent and purpose of the R-20A district is to provide an alternative lot arrangement with more flexible area and yard requirements compared to the R-20 district to promote the development of single family detached uses at a density not to exceed two dwellings per acre. [Ord. O.11.14, 5/5/14]
B. Permitted Principal and Accessory Uses. All principal and accessory uses as permitted by right and conditionally in the R-40 Zoning District. [Ord. O.11.14, 5/5/14]
C. Area, Yard, Coverage and Height Regulations. [Ord. O.11.14, 5/5/14]
1. Principal Uses: Lots with public sewer and water.
a. Minimum lot size – Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, except when the total number of building lots is five or more, twenty percent (20%) of the buildings lots may be a minimum of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet in lot area.
b. Minimum street frontage – Eighty (80) feet, except that on rights-of-way with a radius of five hundred (500) feet or less, the minimum street frontage may be reduced to fifty (50) feet.
c. Minimum lot width – Eighty (80) feet.
d. Minimum lot depth – One hundred eighty-five (185) feet.
e. Minimum front yard setback – Thirty-five (35) feet.
f. Minimum individual side yard setback - Ten (10) feet.
g. Minimum aggregate side yard setback (both yards) - Twenty-five (25) feet.
h. Minimum rear yard setback – Thirty-five (35) feet.
i. Maximum permitted building coverage – Twenty-five percent (25%).
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 56
j. Maximum permitted impervious coverage – Thirty-five percent (35%).
k. Maximum permitted building height – Thirty-five (35) feet.
2. Principal uses: Lots without public water and/or sewer. Lots without public sewer and water shall comply with the bulk standards as required in §8.C.1, the R-40 zoning district, for single family detached dwellings.
3. Accessory uses and structures. Accessory buildings and structures shall not be located in a front yard nor within ten (10) feet of any property line, provided, however, that accessory structures that are one hundred (100) square feet or less in gross floor area may be located within five (5) feet of a side or rear property line. All accessory structures, including sheds, shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the Uniform Construction Code.
4. Accessory buildings and structures shall conform to the requirements of §9.C.1.l. See also §49 for additional limitations and requirements.
D. Additional Requirements. [Ord. O.11.14, 5/5/14]
E. Street trees shall be provided as required in §31.
F. In the event that an application for site plan or subdivision includes land designated for the construction or widening of a public right-of-way contained on the Circulation Plan or Official Map of the municipality, that portion within the tract area shall be constructed or widened as part of the proposed development.
§ 10. R-10 Medium Density Residential District
A. Intent. The intent of this District is to promote the development of appropriately zoned land within the Township for single family detached dwellings at a medium density and to permit other compatible uses in accord with the spirit of this chapter.
B. Uses. In the R-10 district, no lot shall be used and no structure shall be erected, altered or occupied for any purpose except the following: [Ord. O.3.09, 3/16/09]
1. All principal and accessory uses as permitted by right and conditionally in the R-40 Zoning District except that private swimming pools shall only be permitted for single family detached and semi-detached dwellings.
2. In the R-10 district marked on the Zoning Map with a designation of LG-3 semi-detached single family dwellings shall be an additional permitted principal use.
3. In the R-10 district marked on the Zoning Map with a designation of LG-4, LG-5 and LG-6, the following additional principal uses shall be permitted:
a. Multi-family dwellings.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 57
b. Townhouse dwellings.
4. In the R-10 district marked on the Zoning Map with a designation of LG-4, LG-5 and LG-6, the following additional accessory uses shall be permitted:
a. Community center.
b. Indoor and outdoor recreational facility.
c. Maintenance building.
C. Bulk standards. [Ord. O.3.09, 3/16/09]
1. Lots with public sewer and water:
a. Minimum lot area - Ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
b. Minimum street frontage - Seventy (70) feet.
c. Minimum lot width - Eighty (80) feet.
d. Minimum lot depth - One hundred (100) feet.
e. Minimum front yard setback - Thirty (30) feet.
f. Minimum individual side yard setback - Ten (10) feet.
g. Minimum aggregate side yard setback (both yards) - Twenty-five (25) feet.
h. Minimum rear yard setback - Thirty (30) feet.
i. Maximum building coverage - Twenty percent (20%).
j. Maximum impervious coverage - Thirty percent (30%).
k. Maximum building height - Thirty-five (35) feet.
2. Affordable single family semi-detached dwelling. [Ord. O.12.06, 11/13/06]
a. Minimum lot size – Five thousand (5,000) square feet.
b. Minimum street frontage – Fifty (50) feet.
c. Minimum lot width – Fifty (50) feet.
d. Minimum lot depth – One hundred (100) feet.
e. Minimum front yard setback – Thirty (30) feet.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 58
f. Minimum side yard setback, common wall – Zero (0) feet.
g. Minimum side yard setback, other – Twelve feet (12) feet.
h. Minimum rear yard setback – Thirty (30) feet.
i. Maximum permitted building coverage – Thirty percent (30%).
j. Maximum permitted impervious coverage – Forty percent (40%).
k. Maximum permitted building height – Thirty-five (35) feet.
l. Accessory buildings and structures shall conform to the requirements of §10.C.1.l.
3. Lots without public sewer and water shall comply with the bulk standards as required in §8.C.1, the R-40 zoning district, for single family detached dwellings. [Ord. O.12.06]
4. The following bulk standards shall apply to any area designated R-10 and LG-1 on the Zoning Map: [Ord. O.3.09, 3/16/09]
a. Minimum lot area - Eight thousand (8,000) square feet.
b. Minimum street frontage - Sixty (60) feet.
c. Minimum lot width – Seventy-five (75) feet.
d. Minimum lot depth – Ninety (90) feet.
e. Minimum front yard setback - Thirty (30) feet.
f. Minimum individual side yard setback - Ten (10) feet.
g. Minimum aggregate side yard setback (both yards) - Twenty-five (25) feet.
h. Minimum rear yard setback – Twenty-five (25) feet.
i. Maximum building coverage – Twenty-five percent (25%).
j. Maximum impervious coverage – Thirty-five percent (35%).
k. Maximum building height - Thirty-five (35) feet.
5. The following bulk standards shall apply to any area designated R-10 and LG-2 on the Zoning Map: [Ord. O.3.09, 3/16/09]
a. Minimum lot area - Nine thousand (9,000) square feet.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 59
b. Minimum street frontage - Sixty (60) feet.
c. Minimum lot width – Ninety (90) feet.
d. Minimum lot depth – Ninety (90) feet.
e. Minimum front yard setback - Thirty (30) feet.
f. Minimum individual side yard setback - Ten (10) feet.
g. Minimum aggregate side yard setback (both yards) - Twenty-five (25) feet.
h. Minimum rear yard setback – Twenty-five (25) feet.
i. Maximum building coverage – Twenty-five percent (25%).
j. Maximum impervious coverage – Thirty-five percent (35%).
k. Maximum building height - Thirty-five (35) feet.
6. The following bulk standards shall apply to any area designated R-10 and LG-3 on the Zoning Map: [Ord. O.3.09, 3/16/09]
a. Single family detached dwellings.
1) Minimum lot area - Seven thousand (7,000) square feet.
2) Minimum street frontage - Forty (40) feet.
3) Minimum lot width – Fifty-six (56) feet.
4) Minimum lot depth – One hundred twenty-five (125) feet.
5) Minimum front yard setback – Twenty-five (25) feet.
6) Minimum individual side yard setback - Seven (7) feet.
7) Minimum aggregate side yard setback (both yards) - Fifteen (15) feet.
8) Minimum rear yard setback – Twenty-five (25) feet.
9) Maximum building coverage – Thirty percent (30%).
10) Maximum impervious coverage – Forty percent (40%).
11) Maximum building height - Thirty-five (35) feet.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 60
b. Single family semi-detached dwellings.
1) Minimum lot size – Four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet.
2) Minimum street frontage – Eighteen (18) feet.
3) Minimum lot width – Thirty-six (36) feet.
4) Minimum lot depth – One hundred twenty (120) feet.
5) Minimum front yard setback – Twenty-five (25) feet; secondary front yard for a corner lot, fifteen (15) feet.
6) Minimum side yard setback, common wall – Zero (0) feet.
7) Minimum side yard setback, other – Six feet (6) feet.
8) Minimum rear yard setback – Twenty-five (25) feet.
9) Maximum building coverage – Thirty percent (30%).
10) Maximum impervious coverage – Forty percent (40%).
11) Maximum building height – Thirty-five (35) feet.
7. The following bulk standards shall apply to any area designated R-10 and LG-4 on the Zoning Map: [Ord. O.3.09, 3/16/09]
a. Maximum density - Five (5) dwelling units per acre.
b. Minimum lot size – Two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet.
c. Minimum street frontage – Fourteen (14) feet.
d. Minimum lot width – Twenty-four (24) feet.
e. Minimum lot depth – One hundred (100) feet.
f. Minimum front yard setback – Twenty (20) feet; secondary front yard for a corner lot, ten (10) feet.
g. Minimum side yard setback, common wall – Zero (0) feet.
h. Minimum side yard setback, other – Fifteen (15) feet.
i. Minimum rear yard - Twenty-five (25) feet.
j. Maximum building coverage, individual lot - Fifty-five percent (55%).
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 61
k. Maximum impervious surface coverage, individual lot – Seventy-five percent (75%).
l. Maximum building height - Thirty-five (35) feet.
m. Minimum dwelling width – Twenty-four (24) feet.
n. Minimum distance between buildings - Thirty (30) feet.
o. Minimum fully planted landscaped buffer adjacent to public rights-of-way - Twenty-five (25) feet.
p. No more than eight (8) dwellings shall be contained in any one (1) building.
8. The following bulk standards shall apply to any area designated R-10 and LG-5 on the Zoning Map: [Ord. O.3.09, 3/16/09]
a. Minimum tract area – Five (5) acres.
b. Maximum density – Eight (8) dwellings per acre.
c. Minimum building setback:
1) From tract perimeter – Fifty (50) feet.
2) From street sidewalk – Twenty-five (25) feet.
3) From edge of cartway – Thirty-three (33) feet.
4) From parking lot – Twenty-five (25) feet.
5) From on street parking – Twenty (20) feet.
d. Minimum dwelling width – Twenty (20) feet.
e. Maximum building length through the long axis – One hundred sixty (160) feet.
f. Minimum distances between buildings:
1) From front of building to any other building – ninety (90) feet.
2) From rear of building to rear of building – Forty (40) feet.
3) From side of building to side of building – Twenty (20) feet.
4) From rear of building to side of building – Thirty (30) feet.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 62
g. Maximum building height – Thirty-five (35) feet.
h. Maximum building coverage of tract – Twenty-five percent (25%)
i. Maximum impervious coverage of tract – Fifty percent (50%)
j. Minimum parking setback from tract perimeter – Fifty (50) feet.
k. Minimum fully planted landscaped buffer adjacent to public rights-of-way - Twenty-five (25) feet.
l. No more than eight (8) dwellings shall be contained in any one (1) structure.
9. The following bulk standards shall apply to any area designated R-10 and LG-6 on the Zoning Map: [Ord. O.3.09, 3/16/09]
a. Minimum tract area – Five (5) acres.
b. Maximum density – Twelve (12) dwellings per acre.
c. Minimum building setback:
1) From tract perimeter – Fifty (50) feet.
2) From parking lot and on street parking – Ten (10) feet.
d. Maximum building length through the long axis – Two hundred fifty (250) feet.
e. Minimum distances between buildings:
1) From front of building to any other building – One hundred (100) feet.
2) From rear of building to rear of building – Sixty (60) feet.
3) From side of building to side of building – Thirty (30) feet.
4) From rear of building to side of building – Forty (40) feet.
f. Maximum building height – Thirty-five (35) feet.
g. Minimum parking setback from tract perimeter – Twenty-five (25) feet.
h. Maximum building coverage of tract – Twenty-five percent (25%)
i. Maximum impervious coverage of tract – Fifty percent (50%)
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 63
j. Minimum fully planted landscaped buffer adjacent to public rights-of-way - Twenty-five (25) feet.
10. Accessory uses and structures, with the exception of –B.4 uses, shall not be located in a front yard or within ten (10) feet of any property line, provided however, that accessory structures which are one hundred (100) square feet or less in gross floor area may be located within five (5) feet of a side or rear property line. All accessory structures, including sheds, shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the Uniform Construction Code. Accessory uses and structures permitted under –B.4 herein shall meet the area and yard requirements for principal uses and structures. [Ord. O.3.09, 3/16/09]
D. Cluster Development is not permitted in the R-10 District.
E. Landscaping shall be provided as required in §31. [Ord. O.3.09, 3/16/09]
§ 10.1 R-10A Medium and Low Density Residential District.
A. Intent. The intent of this District is to promote the development of appropriately zoned land within the Township for single family detached dwellings at a medium density and to permit other compatible uses in accord with the spirit of this chapter.
B. Uses. All principal and accessory uses as permitted by right and conditionally in the R-40 Zoning District.
C. Bulk standards.
1. Lots with public sewer and water:
a. Minimum lot area - Ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
b. Minimum street frontage - Seventy (70) feet.
c. Minimum lot width - Eighty (80) feet.
d. Minimum lot depth - One hundred (100) feet.
e. Minimum front yard setback - Thirty (30) feet.
f. Minimum individual side yard setback - Ten (10) feet.
g. Minimum aggregate side yard setback (both yards) - Twenty-five (25) feet.
h. Minimum rear yard setback - Thirty (30) feet.
i. Maximum permitted building coverage - Twenty percent (20%).
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 64
j. Maximum permitted impervious coverage - Thirty percent (30%).
k. Maximum permitted building height - Thirty-five (35) feet.
l. Accessory structures shall not be located in a front yard nor within ten (10) feet of any property line, provided however, that accessory structures which are one hundred (100) square feet or less in gross floor area may be located within five (5) feet of a side or rear property line. All accessory structures, including sheds, shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the Uniform Construction Code.
2. Affordable single family semi-detached dwelling. [Ord. O.12.06, 11/13/06]
a. Minimum lot size – Five thousand (5,000) square feet.
b. Minimum street frontage – Fifty (50) feet.
c. Minimum lot width – Fifty (50) feet.
d. Minimum lot depth – One hundred (100) feet.
e. Minimum front yard setback – Thirty (30) feet.
f. Minimum side yard setback, common wall – Zero (0) feet.
g. Minimum side yard setback, other – Twelve feet (12) feet.
h. Minimum rear yard setback – Thirty (30) feet.
i. Maximum permitted building coverage – Thirty percent (30%).
j. Maximum permitted impervious coverage – Forty percent (40%).
k. Maximum permitted building height – Thirty-five (35) feet.
l. Accessory buildings and structures shall conform to the requirements of §10.1-C.1.l.
3. Lots without public sewer and water shall comply with the bulk standards as required in §8.C.1, the R-40 zoning district, for single family detached dwellings. [Ord. O.12.06, 11/13/06]
D. Cluster Development is not permitted in the R-10A District.
E. Street trees should be provided as required in §31.
F. Any lot which is ten (10) acres or larger subsequent to January 1, 2003, shall be subject to the area and bulk requirements of the R-40 zoning district.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 65
§ 11. R-6 High Density Residential District.
A. Intent. The intent of this District is to promote the development of appropriately zoned land within the Township for single family dwellings at higher densities and to permit other compatible uses in accord with the spirit of this chapter. This district is specifically designed to permit infill development and redevelopment in and near older neighborhoods which developed with small lot sizes prior to the enactment of zoning in Deptford Township. It is also designed to provide standards for single and two-family detached and semi-detached dwellings located in planned unit developments.
B. Uses.
1. All principal and accessory uses as permitted by right and conditionally in the R-40 Zoning District.
2. Single family zero-lot line dwellings as principal uses, when located in a planned unit development.
3. Two-family dwellings as principal uses, when located in a planned unit development.
C. Bulk standards.
1. Lots with public sewer and water:
a. Single family detached dwellings (conventional lot).
1) Minimum lot area - Six thousand (6,000) square feet.
2) Minimum street frontage - Fifty (50) feet.
3) Minimum lot width - Sixty (60) feet.
4) Minimum lot depth - One hundred (100) feet.
5) Minimum front yard setback - Thirty (30) feet.
6) Minimum individual side yard setback - Five (5) feet.
7) Minimum aggregate side yard setback (both yards) - Fifteen (15) feet.
8) Minimum rear yard setback - Twenty-five (25) feet.
9) Maximum permitted building coverage - Twenty-five percent (25%).
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 66
10) Maximum permitted impervious coverage - Thirty-five percent (35%).
11) Maximum permitted building height - Thirty-five (35) feet.
12) Accessory structures shall not be located in a front yard nor within five (5) feet of a side or rear property line. All accessory structures, including sheds, shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the Uniform Construction Code.
b. Single family detached dwellings (Zero Lot Line or "Z" Lot), when located in a planned unit development.
1) Minimum lot area - Six thousand (6,000) square feet.
2) Minimum street frontage - Fifty (50) feet.
3) Minimum lot width - Sixty (60) feet.
4) Minimum lot depth - One hundred (100) feet.
5) Minimum front yard setback - Twenty (20) feet; however, an attached or detached garage must be set back thirty (30) feet.
6) Minimum individual side yard setback - None required, however, where a side yard of less than five (5) feet is provided, the building walls closest to the reduced side yard line may not be broken by any doors or windows and a minimum three (3) foot wide maintenance easement must be provided on the adjacent property.
7) Minimum aggregate side yard setback (both yards) - Fifteen (15) feet.
8) Minimum rear yard setback - Twenty-five (25) feet.
9) Maximum permitted building coverage - Thirty-five percent (35%).
10) Maximum permitted impervious coverage - Fifty percent (50%).
11) Maximum permitted building height - Thirty-five (35) feet.
12) Accessory structures shall not be located in a front yard nor within five (5) feet of a side or rear property line. All accessory structures, including sheds, shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the Uniform Construction Code.
c. Two-family dwellings, when located in a planned unit development.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 67
1) Minimum lot area - Five thousand (5,000) square feet per housekeeping unit [ten thousand (10,000) square feet per two-family structure].
2) Minimum street frontage per lot - Sixty (60) feet.
3) Minimum width per lot - Seventy-five (75) feet.
4) Minimum lot depth - One hundred (100) feet.
5) Minimum front yard setback - Thirty (30) feet.
6) Minimum individual side yard setback - Fifteen (15) feet.
7) Minimum aggregate side yard setback (both yards) - Thirty (30) feet.
8) Minimum rear yard setback - Twenty-five (25) feet.
9) Maximum permitted building coverage - Twenty percent (20%).
10) Maximum permitted impervious coverage - Thirty-five percent (35%).
11) Maximum permitted building height - Thirty-five (35) feet.
12) Accessory structures shall not be located in a front yard nor within five (5) feet of a side or rear property line. All accessory structures, including sheds, shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the Uniform Construction Code.
2. Affordable single family semi-detached dwelling. [Ord. O.12.06, 11/13/06]
a. Minimum lot size – Four thousand (4,000) square feet.
b. Minimum street frontage – Forty (40) feet.
c. Minimum lot width – Forty (40) feet.
d. Minimum lot depth – One hundred (100) feet.
e. Minimum front yard setback – Twenty (20) feet, except for attached or detached garages, which shall be set back thirty (30) feet.
f. Minimum side yard setback, common wall – Zero (0) feet.
g. Minimum side yard setback, other – Eight feet (8) feet.
h. Minimum rear yard setback – Twenty-five (25) feet.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 68
i. Maximum permitted building coverage – Thirty-five percent (35%).
j. Maximum permitted impervious coverage – Fifty percent (50%).
k. Maximum permitted building height – Thirty-five (35) feet.
l. Accessory buildings and structures shall conform to the requirements of §11.C.1.a.12.
3. Lots without public sewer and water shall comply with the bulk standards as required in §8.C.1, the R-40 zoning district, for single family detached dwellings. [Ord. O.12.06, 11/13/06]
D. Cluster Development is not permitted in the R-6 District.
E. Street trees should be provided as required in §31.
§ 11.1. R6-A Affordable High Density Residential District.
A. Intent. The intent of this District is to promote the development of appropriately zoned land within the Township for single family detached and attached dwellings at higher densities and to permit other compatible uses in accord with the spirit of this chapter. This district is specifically designated to require inclusionary residential developments whereby a portion if the dwelling units will be affordable to low and moderate income households as regulated by the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing. All residential lots within this District must be served by public sewer and water.
B. Low and moderate income housing requirements. All residential development in this District shall make provisions for housing units affordable to low and moderate income households as provided by §38. The sum of low and moderate income units shall be fifteen percent (15%) of the entire development.
C. Permitted uses and mix of uses.
1. The following principal uses shall be permitted by right:
a. Single family detached dwellings, conventional or zero-lot line.
b. Single family semi-detached dwellings.
c. Community residences for the developmentally disabled and community shelters for victims of domestic violence serving not more than six (6) persons, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.1.
d. All accessory uses as permitted by right and conditionally in the R-40 Zoning District.
D. Bulk standards.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 69
1. Minimum tract size - Fifteen (15) acres.
2. Maximum density shall not exceed four (4) dwelling units per acre.
3. Permitted mix of uses and lot sizes.
a. Single family detached dwellings (minimum lot area 10,000 sq.) must constitute a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the tract area.
b. Single family detached dwellings, zero-lot line or conventional (minimum lot area 6,000 sq. ft.) may constitute up to fifty percent (50%) of the tract area.
c. Single family semi-detached dwellings may constitute up to thirty-five percent (35%) of the tract area.
4. Single family detached dwellings (minimum 10,000 sq. ft.):
a. Minimum lot area - Ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
b. Minimum street frontage - Seventy (70) feet.
c. Minimum lot width - Eighty (80) feet.
d. Minimum lot depth - One hundred (100) feet.
e. Minimum front yard setback - Thirty (30) feet.
f. Minimum individual side yard setback - Ten (10) feet.
g. Minimum aggregate side yard setback (both yards) - Twenty-five (25) feet
h. Minimum rear yard setback - Thirty (30) feet.
i. Maximum permitted building coverage - Twenty percent (20%).
j. Maximum permitted impervious coverage - Thirty percent (30%).
k. Maximum permitted building height - Thirty-five (35) feet.
l. Accessory structures shall not be located in a front yard nor within ten (10) feet of any property line, provided however, that accessory structures which are one hundred (100) square feet or less in gross floor area may be located within five (5) feet of a side or rear property line. All accessory structures, including sheds, shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the Uniform Construction Code.
5. Single family detached dwellings (conventional lot - 6,000 sq. ft.).
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 70
a. Minimum lot area - Six thousand (6,000) square feet.
b. Minimum street frontage - Fifty (50) feet.
c. Minimum lot width - Sixty (60) feet.
d. Minimum lot depth - One hundred (100) feet.
e. Minimum front yard setback - Thirty (30) feet.
f. Minimum individual side yard setback - Five (5) feet.
g. Minimum aggregate side yard setback (both yards) - Fifteen (15) feet
h. Minimum rear yard setback - Twenty-five (25) feet.
i. Maximum permitted building coverage - Twenty-five percent (25%).
j. Maximum permitted impervious coverage - Thirty-five percent (35%).
k. Maximum permitted building height - Thirty-five (35) feet.
l. Accessory structures shall not be located in a front yard nor within five (5) feet of a side or rear property line. All accessory structures, including sheds, shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the Uniform Construction Code.
6. Single family detached dwelling (zero-lot line).
a. Minimum lot area - Six thousand (6,000) square feet.
b. Minimum street frontage - Fifty (50) feet.
c. Minimum lot width - Sixty (60) feet.
d. Minimum lot depth - One hundred (100) feet.
e. Minimum front yard setback - Twenty (20) feet; however, an attached or detached garage must be set back thirty (30) feet.
f. Minimum individual side yard setback - None required, however, where a side yard of less than five (5) feet is provided, the building walls closest to the reduced side yard line may not be broken by any doors or windows and a minimum three (3) foot wide maintenance easement must be provided on the adjacent property.
g. Minimum aggregate side yard setback (both yards) - Fifteen (15) feet
h. Minimum rear yard setback - Twenty-five (25) feet.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 71
i. Maximum permitted building coverage - Thirty-five percent (35%).
j. Maximum permitted impervious coverage - Fifty percent (50%).
k. Maximum permitted building height - Thirty-five (35) feet.
l. Accessory structures shall not be located in a front yard nor within five (5) feet of a side or rear property line. All accessory structures, including sheds, shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the Uniform Construction Code.
7. Single family semi-detached dwellings.
a. Minimum lot area - Five thousand (5,000) square feet per housekeeping unit [ten thousand (10,000) square feet per single family semi-detached structure].
b. Minimum street frontage per lot - Fifty (50) feet.
c. Minimum width per lot - Seventy-five (75) feet.
d. Minimum lot depth - One hundred (100) feet.
e. Minimum front yard setback - Thirty (30) feet.
f. Minimum individual side yard setback - Fifteen (15) feet.
g. Minimum aggregate side yard setback (both yards) - Thirty (30) feet
h. Minimum rear yard setback - Twenty-five (25) feet.
i. Maximum permitted building coverage - Twenty percent (20%).
j. Maximum permitted impervious coverage - Thirty-five percent (35%).
k. Maximum permitted building height - Thirty-five (35) feet.
l. Accessory structures shall not be located in a front yard nor within five (5) feet of a side or rear property line. All accessory structures, including sheds, shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the Uniform Construction Code.
E. Street trees should be provided as required in §31.
§ 11.2 AR-1 Age-Restricted Residential 1 District. [Ord. O.17.08, 10/6/08]
A. Intent. The Age-Restricted Residential 1 (AR-1) district is intended to provide for residential development restricted by age for active adults with ancillary social, cultural and recreational amenities in a comprehensively planned development with significant
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 72
open space. All development in the AR-1 district shall be age-restricted development as defined herein.
B. Permitted Uses. In the AR-1 district, no lot shall be used and no structure shall be erected, altered or occupied for any purpose except the following:
1. Single family detached dwellings.
2. Single family semi-detached dwellings.
3. Townhouse dwellings.
4. Municipal purpose.
5. Active and passive recreation.
C. Limitations on Permitted Uses. Within an AR-1 district, a minimum of fifty-five percent (55%) shall be –B.1 uses and a maximum of thirty-five percent (35%) of the total number of units shall be –B.3 uses.
D. Accessory Uses and Structures Permitted. Any of the following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted when used in conjunction with a principal or conditional permitted use:
1. Community center for the use of residents and their guests.
2. Active common recreational facilities for the use and enjoyment of residents and their guests, including but not limited to, tennis, community swimming pool, court and field sports, fitness center, fitness trail and bikeway.
3. Management office as part of a community center.
4. Maintenance facility.
5. Security facility, excluding gate-controlled access.
6. Sales center for on-tract real estate transactions only, until the final dwelling is initially sold.
7. Decks on fee simple townhouses and as approved as part of a site plan in accordance with Article IX.
8. Private tool shed for fee simple lots.
9. Swimming pool for fee simple lots provided no community swimming pool is present.
10. Off-street surface parking.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 73
11. Fences, walls and street furniture.
12. Signs.
13. Accessory uses on the same lot and customarily incidental to the principal use.
E. Bulk Standards. The following area, yard, and coverage standards shall apply to uses within the AR-1 district:
1. Maximum Density. The maximum density of the AR-1 district shall not exceed three units per gross acre, except as modified by sub-paragraph –F, herein below.
2. Single family detached dwelling.
a. Minimum lot area - Six thousand (6,000) square feet.
b. Minimum street frontage – Forty-five (45) feet.
c. Minimum lot width - Sixty (60) feet.
d. Minimum lot depth - One hundred (100) feet.
e. Minimum front yard – Twenty-five feet (25) feet, except for attached or detached garages, which shall be set back a minimum of thirty (30) feet.
f. Minimum individual side yard – Six (6) feet.
g. Minimum aggregate (both yards) side yard - Fifteen (15) feet.
h. Minimum rear yard - Twenty-five (25) feet.
i. Maximum building coverage – Thirty percent (30%).
j. Maximum impervious coverage - Forty percent (40%).
k. Maximum building height - Thirty-five (35) feet.
3. Single family semi-detached dwelling.
a. Minimum lot size – Four thousand (4,000) square feet.
b. Minimum street frontage – Thirty-five (35) feet.
c. Minimum lot width – Forty (40) feet.
d. Minimum lot depth – One hundred (100) feet.
e. Minimum front yard – Twenty-five feet (25) feet, except for attached or detached garages, which shall be set back a minimum of thirty (30) feet.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 74
f. Minimum side yard, common wall – Zero (0) feet.
g. Minimum side yard, other – Eight feet (8) feet.
h. Minimum rear yard – Twenty-five (25) feet.
i. Maximum building coverage – Thirty-five percent (35%).
j. Maximum impervious coverage – Fifty percent (50%).
k. Maximum building height – Thirty-five (35) feet.
4. Townhouse dwelling, fee simple lots.
a. Minimum lot size – Two thousand (2,000) sf.
b. Minimum street frontage – Twenty (20) feet per unit
c. Minimum lot width – Twenty (20) feet per unit.
d. Minimum lot depth – One hundred (100) feet.
e. Minimum front yard- Twenty-five (25) feet.
f. Minimum side yard - Zero (0) feet if adjoining another unit, ten (10) feet if an outside wall.
g. Minimum rear yard– Twenty (20) feet.
h. Maximum building coverage – Sixty percent (60%).
i. Maximum impervious coverage – Seventy percent (70%).
5. Townhouse dwellings, condominium ownership. Where individual fee simple lots are not proposed, the following distance requirements shall substitute for required yard areas:
a. Minimum distance from the front of any building to any other building – One hundred (100) feet.
b. Minimum distance from the side of any building to any other building – Thirty (30) feet.
c. Minimum distance from the rear of any building to any other building – Sixty (60) feet.
d. Minimum distance of recreational or maintenance facilities to any dwelling – Eighty (80) feet.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 75
e. Minimum distance of any dwelling to the tract perimeter – Sixty (60) feet.
f. Maximum building coverage of net tract area – Forty percent (40%)
g. Maximum impervious coverage of net tract area – Fifty-five percent (55%).
6. Additional townhouse requirements.
a. Maximum building height – Thirty-five (35) feet.
b. Minimum unit width – Twenty (20) feet.
c. A minimum of three hundred (300) square feet of storage shall be provided for each unit, excluding kitchen and bathroom cabinetry.
d. No more than eight (8) townhouse dwellings shall be permitted in any one structure.
e. Where parking lots for townhouse uses are proposed, no parking space shall be closer than twelve (12) feet to the face of the building. This provision shall not be construed as to affect private parking in residential driveways.
f. The front façade of any garage, whether attached or detached, shall not extend towards the street any closer than the front façade of the dwelling.
g. Accessory structures shall not be located in a front yard or within five (5) feet of a side or rear property line. All accessory structures, including sheds, shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the Uniform Construction Code.
7. Lots without public sewer and water shall comply with the bulk standards as required in §8.C.1, the R-40 zoning district, for single family detached dwellings.
F. Affordable Housing. A minimum of twenty percent (20%) of the total number of dwellings within an AR-1 district shall be affordable to low and moderate income households in accordance with §38.A and N.J.A.C. 5:97-6.4(b) 3, as they may be amended or superseded. The required affordable housing shall not be counted towards the density limitation otherwise applicable in the AR-1 district. For the purposes of §38.2, construction after the effective date of this section within the AR-1 district shall be considered inclusionary development.
G. Buffer Requirements. In addition to the general requirements of §31, the following specific requirements pertain to the AR-1 district:
1. Perimeter buffer requirements. Landscape buffers shall be required along the perimeter property lines and where residential building types change. In the
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 76
development of the site, existing vegetation shall be retained which is of high quality and appropriate density. Where existing vegetation is unsuitable, it shall be augmented or replaced by new plantings in accordance with a landscape plan submitted to and approved by the Planning Board. The perimeter buffer shall be a minimum width of twenty-five (25) feet and suitable for its function of site enhancement, screening, or control of climatic effects. The perimeter buffer may be planted within any required perimeter setback but shall not be included in any fee simple lot.
2. Building Within a Perimeter Buffer. Public and private streets affording access to the site may cross a required perimeter buffer. Accessory structures and buildings such as utilities, entrance gate facilities, recreational trail, signs approved as part of the signage plan, and traffic signal and street lighting systems shall be permitted within the buffer. No off-street parking facilities, above ground storm water management facilities or other buildings shall be constructed within the required perimeter buffer.
§ 11.3 AR-2 Age-Restricted Residential 2 District. [Ord. O.17.08, 10/6/08]
A. Intent. The Age-Restricted Residential 2 (AR-2) district is intended to establish zoning standards for a portion of the Locust Grove planned unit development. All residential development in the AR-2 district shall be age-restricted development as defined in this Ordinance.
B. Permitted Uses. In the AR-2 district, no lot shall be used and no structure shall be erected, altered or occupied for any purpose except the following:
1. Single family detached dwellings.
2. Common and public open space.
3. Municipal purpose.
4. Active and passive recreation.
5. Professional offices when approved as part of a planned unit development and not exceeding five percent (5%) of the net tract area of the development devoted to age-restricted residential development.
C. Accessory Uses and Structures Permitted. Any of the following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted when used in conjunction with a principal or conditional permitted use:
1. Community center for the use of residents and their guests.
2. Active common recreational facilities for the use and enjoyment of residents and their guests, including but not limited to, tennis, community swimming pool, court and field sports, fitness center, fitness trail and bikeway.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 77
3. Recreational facilities when part of municipally owned open space.
4. Management office as part of a community center.
5. Maintenance facility.
6. Security facility, excluding gate-controlled access.
7. Sales center for on-tract real estate transactions only, until the final dwelling is initially sold.
8. Private tool shed.
9. Swimming pool provided no community swimming pool is present.
10. Off-street surface parking.
11. Fences, walls and street furniture.
12. Signs.
13. Accessory uses on the same lot and customarily incidental to the principal use.
D. Bulk Standards. The following area, yard, and coverage standards shall apply to uses within the AR-2 district:
1. Single family detached dwelling.
a. Minimum lot area – Four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet.
b. Minimum street frontage – Forty (40) feet.
c. Minimum lot width - Fifty (50) feet.
d. Minimum lot depth - Ninety (90) feet.
e. Minimum front yard – Twenty feet (20) feet.
f. Minimum individual side yard - Five (5) feet.
g. Minimum aggregate (both yards) side yard - Twelve (12) feet.
h. Minimum rear yard - Twenty (20) feet.
i. Maximum building coverage – Forty percent (40%).
j. Maximum impervious coverage – Fifty-five percent (55%).
k. Maximum building height - Thirty-five (35) feet.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 78
2. Other uses.
a. Minimum lot area – One and one-quarter acres.
b. Minimum street frontage – Two hundred fifty (250) feet.
c. Minimum lot width - Two hundred fifty (250) feet.
d. Minimum lot depth – One hundred fifty (150) feet.
e. Minimum front yard – Thirty feet (30) feet.
f. Minimum side yard - Twenty (20) feet.
g. Minimum rear yard - Thirty (30) feet.
h. Maximum building coverage – Twenty-five percent (25%).
i. Maximum impervious coverage – Sixty percent (60%).
j. Maximum building height – Twenty-eight (28) feet.
§ 11.4 AR-3 Age-Restricted 3 Institutional District. [Ord. O.17.08, 10/6/08]
A. Intent. The district is intended for combinations of medical and residential uses existing within Deptford with an emphasis on providing assistance to the elderly and the infirm.
B. Permitted Uses. A building may be erected, altered, or used and a lot may be occupied or used for any of the following purposes or combination of purposes.
1. Assisted living facility.
2. Comprehensive personal care home.
3. Long term care facility.
4. Rehabilitation center.
5. Municipal purpose.
C. Accessory Uses and Structures Permitted. Any of the following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted when used in conjunction with a principal or conditional permitted use:
1. Active and passive recreation.
2. Management and medical offices.
3. Maintenance facility.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 79
4. Security facility.
5. Off-street surface parking.
6. Fences, walls and street furniture.
7. Signs.
8. Accessory uses on the same lot and customarily incidental to the principal use.
D. Bulk Standards. The following area, yard, and coverage standards shall apply to uses within the AR-3 district:
1. Minimum lot area: Three (3) acres.
2. Maximum building coverage: Twenty-five percent (25%).
3. Maximum impervious surface coverage: Sixty-five percent (65%).
4. Minimum lot frontage: Two hundred (200) feet.
5. Minimum lot width at the building line: Two hundred (200) feet.
6. Minimum lot depth: Three hundred (300) feet.
7. Minimum front yard setback: Fifty (50) feet, except that this distance shall be reduced to twenty-five (25) feet along Clements Bridge Road in conjunction with the implementation of streetscape standards.
8. Minimum side yard setback: Thirty (30) feet.
9. Minimum rear yard setback: Thirty-five (35) feet.
10. Minimum parking area setback from property line:
a. Thirty-five (35) feet adjacent to an arterial or collector road; twenty-five (25) feet from any other street;
b. Thirty-five (35) feet adjacent to a lot used for residential purposes;
c. Ten (10) feet adjacent to a lot used for non-residential purposes, except that in the case of an integrated use combining non-residential uses planned together, no setback shall be required.
d. Minimum distance from building to parking - Twelve (12) feet.
e. Off-street parking facilities shall be on the same site as the building and located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the nearest entrance of the building they are intended to serve. Parking spaces shall be provided in
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 80
areas designed specifically for parking and there shall be no parallel parking along interior private streets unless the street width is constructed to Township standards.
f. Maximum height: Two stories and thirty-five (35) feet.
11. More than one building per lot shall be permitted, provided the minimum lot size requirement is met.
§ 11.5 AR-4, Age-Restricted 4 and Health Care District. [Ord. O.3.14, 2/25/14]
A. Intent. The district is intended for age-restricted development designed to meet the diverse housing and health care needs of an aging population and alternatively for the development of health care facilities and medical uses. As part of an age-restricted community, retail personal sales and services, medical complex and office uses designed to serve both senior citizens within the district and nearby neighborhoods and as part of a health care facility, intended for regional health care needs along with various and sundry medical and accessory uses. All residential uses in the AR-4 district shall be age-restricted development as defined in this Ordinance.
B. Permitted Uses. A building may be erected, altered, or used and a lot may be occupied or used for any of the following purposes or combination of purposes.
1. Single family detached dwellings.
2. Comprehensive personal care homes.
3. Assisted living facility.
4. Rehabilitation center.
5. Long-term care facility.
6. Health center and health education center.
7. Municipal use.
8. Medical and dental offices, medical clinic and/or medical services
9. Child care center pursuant to N.J.A.C. 40:55D-66.6.
C. Conditional Uses. The following uses may be permitted when authorized as a conditional use by the board of jurisdiction:
1. Health care facility, medical clinic and medical offices in a campus setting provided that the following criteria are met:
a. The minimum tract size shall be thirty (30) gross acres.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 81
b. The total development of the site shall not exceed a floor area ratio of 0.50.
c. The uses are not combined with a –B.1 use on any portion of the tract.
d. There shall be direct access to a major arterial road as classified on the Circulation Plan of the Master Plan.
2. Continuing care retirement community (CCRC), provided that the following criteria are met:
a. The minimum tract size shall be thirty (30) gross acres.
b. There shall be direct access to a major arterial road as classified on the Circulation Plan of the Master Plan.
c. A minimum of sixty percent (60%) of the net tract acreage shall consist of single family detached dwellings conforming to the area, yard, building coverage and height standards of the AR-2 district.
d. A maximum of thirty percent (30%) of the net tract acreage shall consist of apartment dwellings.
e. Townhouse dwellings shall be an additional permitted use.
f. A minimum of ten percent (10%) and a maximum of twenty percent (20%) of the net tract acreage shall consist of –B.2 through –B.5 permitted principal uses.
3. Personal sales and services, in no way to be construed as permitting a convenience store, provided that the following criteria are met:
a. The floor area ratio shall not exceed .02 of the total tract area, or 25,000 sf., whichever is less.
b. Such uses shall not be in more than two buildings.
c. The orientation of each building shall be towards the highest order street.
4. Accessory conditional uses permitted as part of a comprehensively designed continuing care retirement community:
a. Medical and dental offices and/or medical services, ambulatory surgery facility, provided that the floor area ratio shall not exceed .04 of total tract area or 50,000 square feet, whichever is less.
D. Accessory Uses and Structures. Any of the following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted when used in conjunction with a principal or conditional permitted use:
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 82
1. Residential uses and CCRC.
a. Community center for the use of residents and guests.
b. Active common recreational facilities for the use and enjoyment of residents and their guests, including but not limited to, tennis, community swimming pool, court and field sports, fitness center, fitness trail and bikeway.
c. Management office as part of a community center.
d. Sales center for on-tract real estate transactions only, until the final dwelling is initially sold.
e. Private tool shed on fee simple lots.
f. Swimming pool on fee simple lots provided no community swimming pool is present.
2. Health care facility, medical clinic and medical offices in a campus setting.
a. Bus stop and taxi stand with associated facilities.
b. Child care center pursuant to N.J.A.C. 40:55D-66.6.
c. Community/conference meeting space.
d. Retail sales and services related to the primary facility use that in no way shall be construed as permitting a convenience store.
e. Interior and exterior playground.
f. Outdoor storage of industrial gases.
g. Pharmacy.
h. Restaurant, café and snack bar.
i. Health Center including gymnasium space
j. General Administrative Offices
3. All permitted and conditional uses excepting –B.1 uses.
a. Maintenance facility.
b. Security facility, excluding gate-controlled access.
c. Off-street surface parking.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 83
d. Fences, walls and street furniture.
e. Signs.
f. Accessory uses on the same lot and customarily incidental to the principal use.
E. Bulk Standards. The following area, yard, and coverage standards shall apply to uses within the AR-4 district:
1. Single family detached dwelling (not in a CCRC).
a. Minimum lot area - Six thousand (6,000) square feet.
b. Minimum street frontage – Forty-five (45) feet.
c. Minimum lot width - Sixty (60) feet.
d. Minimum lot depth - One hundred (100) feet.
e. Minimum front yard – Twenty-five feet (25) feet, except for attached or detached garages, which shall be set back thirty (30) feet.
f. Minimum individual side yard - Five (5) feet.
g. Minimum aggregate (both yards) side yard - Fifteen (15) feet.
h. Minimum rear yard - Twenty-five (25) feet.
i. Maximum building coverage – Thirty percent (30%).
j. Maximum impervious coverage - Forty percent (40%).
k. Maximum building height - Thirty-five (35) feet.
2. Townhouse dwelling, fee simple lots (only within a CCRC).
a. Minimum lot size – Two thousand (2,000) sf.
b. Minimum street frontage – Twenty (20) feet per unit
c. Minimum lot width – Twenty (20) feet per unit.
d. Minimum lot depth – One hundred (100) feet.
e. Minimum front yard- Twenty-five (25) feet.
f. Minimum side yard - Zero (0) feet if adjoining another unit, ten (10) feet if an outside wall.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 84
g. Minimum rear yard– Twenty (20) feet.
h. Maximum building coverage – Sixty percent (60%).
i. Maximum impervious coverage – Seventy percent (70%).
3. Townhouse dwellings, condominium ownership (only within a CCRC). Where individual fee simple lots are not proposed, the following distance requirements shall substitute for required yard areas:
a. Minimum distance from the front of any building to any other building – One hundred (100) feet.
b. Minimum distance from the side of any building to any other building – Thirty (30) feet.
c. Minimum distance from the rear of any building to any other building – Sixty (60) feet.
d. Minimum distance of recreational or maintenance facilities to any dwelling – Eighty (80) feet.
e. Minimum distance of any dwelling to the tract perimeter – Sixty (60) feet.
f. Maximum building coverage of net tract area – Forty percent (40%).
g. Maximum impervious coverage of net tract area – Fifty-five percent (55%).
4. Additional townhouse requirements.
a. Maximum building height – Thirty-five (35) feet.
b. Minimum unit width – Twenty (20) feet.
c. A minimum of three hundred (300) square feet of storage shall be provided for each unit, excluding kitchen and bathroom cabinetry.
d. No more than eight (8) townhouse dwellings shall be permitted in any one structure.
e. Where parking lots for townhouse uses are proposed, no parking space shall be closer than twelve (12) feet to the face of the building. This provision shall not be construed as to affect private parking in residential driveways.
5. Apartments.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 85
a. Minimum lot size - Three (3) acres.
b. Maximum lot size – Six (6) acres.
c. Maximum building coverage of net tract area – Twenty percent (20%).
d. Maximum impervious surface coverage of net tract area - Fifty percent (50%).
e. Maximum building height – Two stories and thirty-five (35) feet.
f. Minimum distance from the front of any building to any other building – One hundred (100) feet.
g. Minimum distance from the side of any building to any other building – Thirty (30) feet.
h. Minimum distance from the rear of any building to any other building – Sixty (60) feet.
i. Minimum distance of recreational or maintenance facilities to any dwelling – Eighty (80) feet.
j. Minimum distance of any dwelling to the tract perimeter – Sixty (60) feet.
k. Minimum building setback from public streets and property lines - Fifty (50) feet.
l. Minimum distance from building to parking - Twelve (12) feet.
m. Off-street parking facilities shall be on the same site as the building and located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the nearest entrance of the building they are intended to serve. Parking spaces shall be provided in areas designed specifically for parking and there shall be no parallel parking along interior private streets unless the street width is constructed to Township standards.
n. Buildings shall be arranged in groups or clusters and not in long rows parallel to street lines. The total length of any one axis in a structure shall not exceed one hundred sixty hundred (160) feet.
o. Buildings shall be designed in a common architectural style. Variations in setback, materials and design shall be encouraged.
p. More than one building per lot shall be permitted, provided the minimum lot size requirement is met.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 86
q. Sufficient area and equipment shall be provided within each building for the laundering and artificial drying of the laundry of the occupants of each building, unless each unit is equipped with a washer and dryer.
r. A minimum of one hundred (100) square feet of storage shall be provided for each efficiency dwelling and one hundred fifty (150) square feet for any other apartment dwelling, excluding kitchen and bathroom cabinetry.
6. Comprehensive personal care home, assisted living facility, rehabilitation center, and long term care facility:
a. Minimum lot area: Two (2) acres.
b. Maximum lot area: Five (5) acres.
c. Maximum beds per acre: Thirty-six (36).
d. Maximum building coverage: Twenty percent (20%).
e. Maximum impervious surface coverage: Sixty percent (60%).
f. Minimum lot frontage: One hundred twenty-five (125) feet.
g. Minimum lot width at the building line: Two hundred (200) feet.
h. Minimum lot depth: Three hundred (300) feet.
i. Minimum front yard setback: Fifty (50) feet.
j. Minimum side yard setback: Thirty (30) feet.
k. Minimum rear yard setback: Thirty-five (35) feet.
l. Minimum parking area setback from property line:
1) Thirty-five (35) feet adjacent to an arterial or collector road; twenty-five (25) feet from any other street;
2) Twenty-five (25) feet adjacent to a lot used for residential purposes;
3) Ten (10) feet adjacent to a lot used for non-residential purposes, except that in the case of an integrated use combining offices and the uses herein planned together, no setback shall be required.
4) Maximum height: Two stories and forty-five (45) feet.
7. Medical and dental offices, medical clinic and/or medical services, health center and health education center and child care centers.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 87
a. Minimum lot area – One and one-quarter acres.
b. Minimum street frontage – Two hundred fifty (250) feet.
c. Minimum lot width - Two hundred fifty (250) feet.
d. Minimum lot depth – One hundred fifty (150) feet.
e. Minimum front yard – Thirty feet (30) feet.
f. Minimum side yard - Twenty (20) feet.
g. Minimum rear yard - Thirty (30) feet.
h. Maximum building coverage – Twenty-five percent (25%).
i. Maximum impervious surface coverage – Sixty percent (60%).
j. Maximum building height – Twenty-eight (28) feet.
8. Health care facility including medical clinic and medical offices, child care centers.
a. Multiple principal buildings on the same lot or tract
1) Minimum tract area – Ten (10) acres.
2) Minimum lot area per principal building – Two (2) acres.
3) Minimum street frontage – One hundred seventy-five (175) feet.
4) Minimum lot width – Two hundred (200) feet.
5) Minimum lot depth – Three hundred (300) feet.
6) Minimum front yard – Fifty (50) feet.
7) Minimum side yard:
(a) From a non-residentially zoned lot – Twenty (20) feet.
(b) From a residentially zoned lot or –B.1 use – Fifty (50) feet.
8) Minimum rear yard:
(a) From a non-residentially zoned lot – Twenty (20) feet.
(b) From a residentially zoned lot or –B.1 use – Fifty (50) feet.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 88
9) Maximum building height. No building shall exceed fifty (50) feet within one hundred (100) feet of the tract perimeter or seventy-five (75) feet with a setback of 100 feet or greater, excepting guard houses, which shall be setback a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet.
10) Parking setback from the tract perimeter – twenty five (25) feet
11) Minimum building separation from another freestanding building shall be thirty (30) feet, excepting maintenance facilities and guard houses.
12) Maximum building coverage (includes all principal and accessory buildings located on a site) – Thirty percent (30%).
13) Maximum impervious surface coverage - Seventy-five percent (75%).
14) Accessory structures shall be subject to all the same locational requirements as principal buildings and shall not have a total ground floor area in excess of fifteen percent (15%) of the area of the site.
b. One principal building on individual lots.
1) Minimum lot size – Three (3) acres.
2) Minimum frontage - Two hundred (200) feet.
3) Minimum lot width - Two hundred (200) feet.
4) Minimum lot depth – Two hundred (200) feet.
5) Minimum front yard – Fifty (50) feet.
6) Minimum side yard:
(a) From a non-residentially zoned lot – Twenty (20) feet.
(b) From a residentially zoned lot or –B.1 use – Thirty (30) feet.
7) Minimum rear yard:
(a) From a non-residentially zoned lot – Twenty (20) feet.
(b) From a residentially zoned lot – Thirty (30) feet.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 89
8) Maximum building height. Maximum building height. No building shall exceed fifty (50) feet within one hundred (100) feet of the tract perimeter or seventy-five (75) feet with a setback of 100 feet or greater, excepting guard houses, which shall be setback a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet.
9) Minimum building separation from another freestanding building shall be thirty (30) feet, excepting maintenance facilities and guard houses.
10) Parking setback from the tract perimeter – twenty five (25) feet
11) Maximum building coverage (includes all principal and accessory buildings located on a site) – Thirty percent (30%).
12) Maximum impervious surface coverage - Seventy-five percent (75%).
F. Affordable Housing Requirements. A minimum of twenty percent (20%) of the total for-sale dwellings or fifteen percent (15%) of the total rental dwellings (or other residential use) within an AR-4 district shall be affordable to low and moderate income households in accordance with §38.A and N.J.A.C. 5:97-6.4(b) as it may be amended or superseded. For the purposes of §38.2, the net residential development within the AR-4 district shall be considered inclusionary development.
G. Additional Requirements.
1. Comprehensive personal care homes and assisted living facilities shall conform to the requirements of N.J.A.C. 8:36-1 et seq. as they may be amended or superseded.
2. Each assisted living facility unit shall offer, at a minimum, one unfurnished room, a private bathroom, a kitchenette, and a lockable door on the unit entrance. This provision shall not be construed to limit the ability to have shared units.
3. The front façade of any garage, whether attached or detached, shall not extend towards the street any closer than the front façade of the dwelling.
H. Buffer Requirements. In addition to the general requirements of §31, the following specific requirements pertain to the AR-4 district.
1. Perimeter buffer requirements. Landscape buffers shall be required along the perimeter property lines, where residential building types change and between residential and non-residential uses. Wetlands, wetlands buffers and other environmentally sensitive property in required buffer areas may be left in a naturally vegetated state and shall be considered buffer areas in satisfaction of these requirements. In the development of the site, existing vegetation shall be retained which is of high quality and appropriate density. Where existing
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 90
vegetation is unsuitable, if possible, it shall be augmented or replaced by new plantings in accordance with a landscape plan submitted to and approved by the Planning Board. The perimeter buffer width shall be as required in §31.D. For the purpose of establishing buffer requirements, the uses listed in §11.5.B.8 and -9 and §11.5.C.1 shall be considered professional offices.
2. Building within a perimeter buffer. Public and private streets affording access to the site may cross a required perimeter buffer. Accessory structures and buildings such as utilities, entrance gate facilities, recreational trail, signs approved as part of the signage plan, and traffic signal and street lighting systems shall be permitted within the buffer. No off-street parking facilities, above ground storm water management facilities or other buildings shall be constructed within the required perimeter buffer.
§ 12. RM-1 Multi-Family Residential District.
A. Intent. The intent of this district is to promote the development of appropriately zoned lands within the Township for townhouses and other compatible uses in accord with the spirit of this chapter.
B. Low and moderate income housing requirements. All townhouse developments in this District shall make provision for housing units affordable to low and moderate income households as provided for by §38. The sum of low and moderate income units shall be twenty percent (20%) of the entire development.
C. Uses.
1. Principal uses permitted.
a. Townhouses.
2. Accessory uses permitted.
a. Off-street parking and private garages when attached to the dwelling. (See §27 for standards.)
b. Signs. (See §30. for standards.)
c. Fences and walls. (See §54 for standards.)
d. Recreational facilities.
D. Bulk and design standards.
1. Townhouses.
a. Minimum tract size - Five (5) acres.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 91
b. Maximum density shall not exceed six (6) dwelling units per acre for sale units and ten (10) dwelling units per acre for rental units.
c. Maximum building coverage - Twenty-five percent (25%).
d. Maximum impervious surface coverage - Fifty percent (50%).
e. Maximum building height - Thirty-five (35) feet.
f. Minimum dwelling width - Twenty (20) feet.
g. Minimum front yard - Twenty-five (25) feet.
h. Minimum side yard (on end units only) - Ten (10) feet.
i. Minimum rear yard - Twenty-five (25) feet.
j. Minimum distance between structures - Twenty (20) feet.
k. Minimum building setback from existing public streets and property lines - Fifty (50) feet.
l. Minimum landscaped buffer adjacent to existing public streets and property lines - Twenty-five (25) feet.
m. Minimum distance from building to parking - Twenty-five (25) feet.
n. All off-street parking facilities shall be on the same site as the building and located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the nearest entrance of the building they are intended to serve. Parking spaces shall be provided in areas designed specifically for parking and there shall be no parallel parking along interior private streets unless the street width is constructed to Township standards.
o. No more than eight (8) dwelling units shall be contained in any one (1) structure.
p. Townhouses shall be arranged in groups or clusters and not in long rows parallel to street lines. The total length of any one (1) structure shall not exceed one hundred sixty (160) feet.
q. Variations in setback, materials and design shall be encouraged. A minimum of two (2) feet variation in setback shall occur at least every third dwelling.
r. All units shall be designed in a unified architectural style.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 92
s. More than one (1) building per lot shall be permitted, provided the minimum tract size requirement is met. However, if fee-simple townhouse units are proposed, each unit shall have a minimum lot area of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet.
t. Accessory structures shall not be located in a front yard nor within five (5) feet of a side or rear property line.
u. All dwelling units within a structure shall be connected to approved and functioning public water and sanitary sewer systems prior to the issuance of certificates of occupancy.
E. Common open space requirements. (See §32. for standards.)
F. Landscaped buffers and interior parking lot landscaping shall be provided as is required in §31.
§ 13. RM-2 Multi-Family Residential District.
A. Intent. The intent of this District is to provide standards for the development and redevelopment of appropriately zoned lands within the Township for single and two-family dwellings, townhouses and garden apartments, and other compatible uses in accord with the spirit of this chapter. The district is intended to primarily serve areas already zoned for this type of development. Expansion of the garden apartment use is anticipated to occur primarily in planned unit developments.
B. Low and moderate income housing requirements. All townhouse and garden apartment developments in this District shall make provision for housing units affordable to low and moderate income households as provided for by §38. The sum of low and moderate income units shall be twenty percent (20%) of the entire development.
C. Uses.
1. Principal uses permitted.
a. All residential uses permitted in the R-6 District.
b. Townhouses.
c. Garden apartments.
2. Accessory uses permitted.
a. Off-street parking and private garages. (See §27 for standards.)
b. Signs. (See §30 for standards.)
c. Fences and walls. (See §54 for standards.)
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 93
d. Recreational facilities.
e. Indoor common laundry facilities for garden apartments.
D. Bulk and design standards.
1. Uses permitted in the R-6 District shall use that District's bulk and design standards.
2. Townhouses shall use the RM-1 District's bulk and design standards governing townhouses.
3. Garden apartments.
a. Minimum tract size - Five (5) acres.
b. Maximum density shall not exceed six (6) dwelling units per acre for sale units and ten (10) dwelling units per acre for rental units.
c. Maximum building coverage - Twenty percent (20%).
d. Maximum impervious surface coverage - Seventy percent (70%).
e. Maximum building height - Thirty-five (35) feet.
f. Minimum distance between structures - Thirty-five (35) feet.
g. Minimum building setback from public streets and property lines - Fifty (50) feet.
h. Minimum distance from building to parking - Twenty-five (25) feet.
i. All off-street parking facilities shall be on the same site as the building and located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the nearest entrance of the building they are intended to serve. Parking spaces shall be provided in areas designed specifically for parking and there shall be no parallel parking along interior private streets unless the street width is constructed to Township standards.
j. Buildings containing apartment flats shall be arranged in groups or clusters and not in long rows parallel to street lines. The total length of any one (1) structure shall not exceed two hundred (200) feet.
k. Variations in setback, materials and design shall be encouraged.
l. More than one (1) building per lot shall be permitted, provided the minimum tract size requirement is met.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 94
m. A landscaped buffer, twenty-five (25) feet in width, shall be provided along all public streets and adjacent to all property lines.
n. Buildings shall be designed in a common architectural style.
o. Sufficient area and equipment shall be provided within each building for the laundering and artificial drying of the laundry of the occupants of each building.
p. All dwelling units within a structure shall be connected to approved and functioning public water and sanitary sewer systems prior to the issuance of certificates of occupancy.
E. Common open space requirements. (See §32 for standards.)
F. Landscaped buffers and interior parking lot landscaping shall be provided as is required in §31.
G. Collection or storage of recyclable materials in multifamily housing shall be provided as required in §59.
§ 14. PUD Planned Unit Developments.
A. Intent. The Planned Unit Development (PUD) regulations are designed to permit the integrated development of exceptionally large tracts of land so as to permit a well planned project which provides a balanced mix of land uses. Because of the unique nature of PUD's and the fact that their development normally extends over a longer period of time than conventional development, these regulations allow a different approval mechanism than that required of other forms of development. PUD's are designed as conditional uses to be authorized by the Planning Board only after a determination that the proposed PUD will meet the objectives of this section and can be developed in full compliance with the regulations of this chapter.
B. Applications for approval of a planned unit development (PUD) shall be required to first secure general development plan approval from the Planning Board.
C. Permitted uses and mix of uses.
1. Residential uses and their associated open space and buffer areas shall constitute a minimum of seventy-five percent (75%) of the land area of the entire PUD. [Ord. O.12.06, 11/13/06]
a. Single family detached dwellings, other than zero lot line dwellings, must constitute a minimum of forty percent (40%) of the land area of the residential portion of the PUD.
b. Townhouses, zero lot line dwellings, and two-family dwellings may constitute up to fifty percent (50%) of the land area of the residential
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 95
portion of the PUD. All townhouses shall be within inclusionary developments as required in §38.
c. Multi-family dwellings may constitute up to thirty percent (30%) of the land area of the residential portion of the PUD. The dwellings may take the form of garden apartment dwellings, in combination with townhouse structures or as dwellings in combined buildings in accordance with sub-paragraph -3, herein. Structures containing both townhouses and multi-family dwellings shall count towards the multi-family portion of the residential part of the PUD. [Ord. O.12.06, 11/13/06]
2. Non-residential uses and their associated open space and buffer areas may constitute up to twenty-five percent (25%) of the land area of the entire PUD.
a. Any use permitted in the C-1 Commercial District may be provided as part of the non-residential portion of the PUD in a parcel of twenty (20) acres or more.
b. Any use permitted in the C-2 Commercial District may be provided as part of the non-residential portion of the PUD in a parcel of less than twenty (20) acres.
c. Any use permitted in an INS Institutional District may be provided in a PUD provided that the minimum area standards of the INS District are met.
d. No other non-residential uses shall be permitted in a PUD.
3. Combined residential and non-residential buildings shall be permitted provided that the ground level floor is a retail or office use, excepting means of access to upper floors. Such buildings shall be counted towards the non-residential land area of the PUD. [Ord. O.12.06, 11/13/06]
D. Bulk standards.
1. Minimum tract area for a PUD - One hundred (100) contiguous acres.
2. The overall density of the residential portion of a PUD, including its associated open space, shall not exceed five (5) units per acre. Density shall be calculated on the developable land area minus all lands intended for commercial or institutional uses.
3. Single family detached dwellings, other than zero lot line dwellings, may be developed according to the densities and bulk standards permitted in the R-10 Residential District.
4. Zero lot line and two-family dwellings may be developed according to the densities and bulk standards permitted in the R-6 Residential District.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 96
5. Townhouses and garden apartments may be developed according to the densities and bulk standards permitted in the RM-2 Residential District.
6. Non-residential uses may be developed according to the bulk standards, buffering and landscaping, and general requirements of the appropriate zoning district for that use, as prescribed above in permitted non-residential uses.
E. Special open space, recreation, and community facilities requirements.
1. Open space and recreation is required as per §32.
2. Circulation.
a. All street improvements shall be provided with curb and sidewalk, to such design standards as may be required by the Township Engineer upon review of the required traffic impact study.
b. Every PUD shall provide a path system for bicycles and pedestrians throughout the development, including the open space system. This path system may, at times, parallel the vehicular circulation system but shall always be grade separated from the cartway of the street system.
c. Provisions shall be made for the future extension of all portions of the circulation system and for connection to existing systems on adjacent lands.
d. At no point in the phased development of the PUD shall any building be permitted to be occupied if it is situated more than twelve hundred (1,200) feet from a point on a street which provides at least two (2) separate means of access to the township-wide street system. In the event that access is to be provided by means of a future road extension, temporary or emergency street access must be provided.
3. Buffers and landscaping.
a. A landscaped buffer of not less than fifty (50) feet in width shall be provided along the entire perimeter of the PUD and along any existing or proposed collector or arterial roads.
b. Foundation and accent plantings must be provided for every building in a PUD. Detailed landscape plans may be submitted at the time of site plan approval for each section.
c. The landscaping and buffer requirements of §31 and the requirements of the appropriate zoning district for each use, as prescribed by this ordinance, shall apply.
4. Utilities.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 97
a. Public water and sanitary sewer service must be provided to all occupied buildings in the PUD.
b. All residential buildings other than single family detached dwellings and all non-residential buildings shall be provided with facilities for the common private collection and disposal of solid waste, including areas for the collection and storage of recyclable materials. Design requirements of the appropriate zoning district for each use shall apply.
c. Street lighting, signage, and street furniture shall be designed and installed according to a common design standard for the entire development, subject to the size requirements of the appropriate zoning district for each use which shall apply.
d. All existing and proposed utilities shall be installed underground.
e. All streets, pedestrian and bicycle paths, and occupied parking areas serving three (3) or more vehicles shall be adequately lit between the hours of dusk and dawn.
5. Site planning considerations.
a. All development shall be designed so as to maximize the preservation of significant existing trees, natural features, and to protect and utilize viewsheds.
b. No residential lots shall have direct vehicular access from collector or arterial roadways. Reverse frontage lots shall be discouraged but, when necessary for residential lots on collector or arterial streets, shall be provided as required in §40.
c. All development shall be sited so as to attempt to preserve privacy and to ensure natural light.
d. All buildings shall be designed with consideration given to energy efficiency and sun and wind orientation.
6. Signs shall be provided as permitted by §30 for the appropriate zoning district for each use.
F. Off-street parking and loading shall be provided as required by §27.
G. Inclusionary Affordable Housing Requirements. [Ord. O.12.06, 11/13/06]
1. Residential uses. A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the total number of dwelling units shall be affordable to low and moderate income households in accordance with §38.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 98
2. Non-residential uses. Affordable housing units generated by non-residential development as determined by §38.2 shall be constructed within the PUD. If the non-residential use is a retail or office use, the required affordable housing dwellings may be constructed within the same building as permitted under paragraph –C.3, herein. Other required units generated by the non-residential uses shall be integrated into the residential part of the PUD. The entire affordable housing obligation may also be constructed within the residential part of the PUD.
§ 14.1 PVD-1 Planned Village Development 1. [Ord. O.13.09, 11/9/09]
A. Purpose. The Planned Village Development 1 (PVD-1) is intended for residential development with a variety of housing types serving various segments of the population. A submission for development approval as a planned unit residential development pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-62 is encouraged.
B. Permitted Uses. No lot within PVD-1 shall be used and no structure shall be erected, altered or occupied for any purpose except the following:
1. Parks and recreation; conservation.
2. Single family detached dwellings.
3. Stacked townhouse dwellings.
4. Townhouse dwellings.
5. Multi-family dwellings.
6. Municipal purpose.
C. Accessory Uses and Structures Permitted. Any of the following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted when used in conjunction with a principal permitted use:
1. Community center and recreation center.
2. Gatehouse.
3. Community swimming pool for the common use of residents.
4. Outdoor recreational facilities, including tennis or other court sports.
5. Off-street surface and structured parking.
6. Car sheds and detached garages for private residential use, only.
7. Fences, walls and street furniture.
8. Signs.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 99
9. Common satellite dish and television antennas.
10. Management building and sales or rental office.
11. Maintenance building.
12. Accessory uses on the same lot and customarily incidental to the principal use.
D. Density Limitations and Affordable Housing Requirements. The base residential density shall be four (4) units per gross acre with a mandatory setaside for affordable housing of twenty percent (20%) if a rental tenure and twenty-five percent (25%) if a for-sale tenure. For the purposes of this district, “gross acre” shall mean the total acreage of all of the lots included in the application for development minus any existing rights-of-way and lands deed restricted from further development at the time of an application for development. At the option of the developer, the maximum density may be increased to eight (8) units per gross acre provided the following requirements are met:
1. A portion of the tract consisting of a minimum of five (5) acres of developable land is subdivided and conveyed to the municipality for affordable housing purposes;
2. The affordable housing site has adequate access to a public street;
3. The affordable housing site’s storm water volume shall be controlled on the remainder of the applicant’s site and an adequate easement for discharge granted;
4. Public sewer and water with adequate capacity for the size of the development planned for the affordable housing development is made available at the location of adequate public access to the site;
5. The development has initially for-sale tenure; and
6. The initial submission application is classified as a planned development.
E. General tract requirements.
1. The amount of land to be reserved for park and active recreation facilities shall be equal to or greater than 0.01 acres per dwelling and oriented primarily towards the multi-family concentration of the development.
2. Minimum frontage on an arterial road shall be seven hundred fifty (750) lineal feet.
3. Minimum perimeter setback for buildings shall be fifty (50) feet.
4. Minimum parking area setback shall be fifty (50) feet from a public street existing prior to the development of the tract and twenty (20) feet from any other tract
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 100
boundary except that in no circumstance shall parking be permitted in any required perimeter buffer.
5. Common open space and adequate recreation areas shall be set aside in suitable locations to provide for the recreation needs of residents those portions of the project that, because of their natural features, constitute important visual amenities and environmental resources. A planned unit residential development is required to have continuity of open space resulting from the integration of upland, wetland, floodplain and surface water areas within the tract. Parks shall be developed with active recreation appropriate to the population being served or may function as passive recreation and seating areas.
6. Appearance and Aesthetic Control. All development shall be planned and designed to promote and achieve aesthetically pleasing views from and to the various residential building types within the development. The creation and promotion of such aesthetic conditions shall strengthen and preserve the municipality's environmental characteristics and promote the civic pride, prosperity, and general welfare of the residents of the development, the Township, and visitors thereto.
7. Pedestrian circulation. There shall be an extensive system of pedestrian walks serving all facilities within the development, providing access to dwellings, parking areas, open spaces, recreational and other communal facilities. The walkways shall feature adjoining landscaped areas that include trees, shrubs, benches, flower beds, ground covers or other such materials to enhance the appearance of the walkway areas. Pedestrian walkways shall have adequate lighting.
F. Bulk Requirements. Except as otherwise modified, the following area, yard, and coverage standards contained herein shall apply to all development in the PVD-1 district. These regulations shall not apply to any lot dedicated for public utility uses or solely used for storm water management:
1. Building type ratios. No more than fifty percent (50%) of any one residential building type shall be permitted within the PVD-1 district, excluding any dwellings on a paragraph –D.1 site.
2. A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the total number of dwellings, excluding any dwellings on a paragraph –D.1 site, shall be single family detached.
3. Single family detached dwellings shall conform to the R-6 requirements, except as modified by paragraph –E.3.
4. Building limitations and separation requirements shall be as indicated in the following table:
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 101
Requirement
Standard
Maximum Dwellings per Building (Townhouses)
8 dwellings
Maximum Dwellings per Building (Stacked Townhouses)
16 dwellings
Maximum Dwellings per Building (Multi-family)
24 dwellings
Maximum Dwellings per Building (Multi-family in 100% affordable building)
75 dwellings
Minimum Distance from Building front to Building front
60 feet
Minimum Distance from Building front to Building side
35 feet
Minimum Distance from Building front to Building rear
60 feet
Minimum Distance from Building side to Building rear
35 feet
Minimum Distance from Building rear to Building rear
50 feet
Minimum Distance from Building side to Building side
20 feet
5. Building dimensions. Minimum and maximum building dimensions shall be as indicated in the following table:
Requirement
Standard
Minimum width of townhouse or stacked townhouse with no attached garage
20 feet
Minimum width of townhouse or stacked townhouse with attached or internal garage
24 feet
Maximum building length through the long axis of a townhouse or stacked townhouse
228 feet
Maximum height - townhouse
35 feet
Maximum height - stacked townhouses and multi-family buildings
4 stories/45 feet
6. Fee simple townhouse and community building requirements shall be as indicated in the following table: Use
Townhouse
(fee simple lots)
Community Building
Minimum lot size
1,800 sf.
10,000 sf
Maximum lot size
2,400 sf.
Not Applicable
Minimum lot frontage
20 ft.
100 ft.
Minimum lot depth
100 ft.
100 ft.
Maximum building coverage
70%
50%
Maximum lot coverage
80%
70%
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 102
Use
Townhouse
(fee simple lots)
Community Building
Principal Building Minimum Yard Depths and Height Limitations
Front yard
25 ft.
25 ft.
Side yard
0 ft. common wall, 15 ft. end unit.
20 ft.
Rear yard
25 ft.
30 ft.
Maximum Height
35 ft.
35 ft.
Accessory Building Minimum Yard Depths and Height Limitations
Front Yard
N.P.
N.P.
Side yard
N.P.
10 ft.
Rear yard
5 ft.
10 ft.
Maximum accessory building height
18 ft.
28 ft.
Tool shed height
12 ft.
12 ft.
Tool shed side and rear yard
5 ft.
5 ft.
N.P. = Not a permitted location
7. Building setbacks from streets and driveways. Minimum building setbacks shall be as in the following table:
Requirement
Standard
From major collector drive or street (r.o.w. or private r.o.w. easement)
50 feet(1)
Front or rear façade from a residential access drive or street (r.o.w. or private r.o.w. easement)
30 feet(2)
Side facades from a residential access drive or street (r.o.w. or private r.o.w. easement)
20 feet(3)
(1), or 60 feet from the edge of cartway, whichever is greater.
(2), or 40 feet from the edge of cartway, whichever is greater.
(3), or 30 feet from the edge of cartway, whichever is greater.
8. Parking lot setbacks. Where parking lots for residential uses are proposed, no parking space shall be closer than twelve (12) feet to a building. Parking lots shall be setback a minimum of fifty (50) feet, if from a right-of-way or private right-of-way easement, or sixty (60) feet from the edge of cartway of a major collector, whichever is greater, and twenty (20) feet from the edge of a residential access cartway.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 103
9. Master Plan Streets. The public street plan for any Planned Village Development that encompasses all or part of a new, extended or expanded street, as depicted on the Circulation Plan of the Master Plan, shall be designed to implement the intent and purpose of said master plan street.
G. Design standards.
1. The design and layout of any PVD-1 development shall conform to the following standards.
a. Site planning principles.
1) Spatial relationships between buildings and other structures shall be formal. Façades shall be parallel to street lines and exterior building walls shall typically be either parallel or at right angles to each other. A lot with multiple buildings should be organized around a feature such as a courtyard, green, or quadrangle that encourages pedestrian activity and incidental social interaction among users. Buildings shall be located to allow for adequate fire and emergency access.
2) Community buildings should be located to front toward and relate to public streets, both functionally and visually. Buildings shall not be oriented to front toward a parking lot. Buildings shall be oriented to address the geometry of the abutting street pattern.
3) Buildings shall define the street-edge through adherence to uniform setbacks along the street for each block. A minimum of eighty percent (80%) of all residential building facades on a block face shall be located at the minimum front yard setback line. The streetscape shall also be reinforced by lines of uniformly spaced shade trees and may be further reinforced by walls, hedges, or fences that define front yards.
4) Buildings on corner lots shall be considered significant structures, since they have at least two facades visibly exposed to the street. Such buildings shall be designed architectural features to emphasize their location.
5) Buildings located at entrances from collector and arterial roads into and out of neighborhoods shall mark the transition in a distinctive fashion using massing, additional height, contrasting materials, and/or architectural detailing to obtain this effect.
6) Focal points or points of visual termination shall generally be occupied by prominent buildings and structures that employ
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 104
enhanced height, massing, distinctive architectural treatments, ornamental site elements or other distinguishing features.
7) Driveways from single family residential properties which intersect streets shall be no wider than 12 feet at the property line, but may expand to match the width of the garage doors within the 20 feet of driveway length directly in front of the garage.
b. Variation in single-family detached residential building design.
1) Excessive uniformity in the exterior design and appearance of dwellings erected in the same residential neighborhood may adversely affect the desirability of the residential area and impair the value of both improved and unimproved real property in such areas. Planned village development, in which residential lot sizes are modest and, consequently, houses will be close together, is particularly susceptible to the negative impacts of such uniformity. It is the purpose of this section to prevent these and other harmful effects of excessive uniformity in design and appearance of dwellings and thus promote and protect the general welfare of the community.
2) Not more than one zoning permit shall be issued for any particular single-family detached dwelling unit design in any housing development consisting of two or more detached dwelling units when the houses are substantially alike in exterior design and appearance unless such houses are separated by a distance of at least one hundred fifty (150) feet.
3) Houses shall be considered substantially alike in exterior design and appearance if they share any one of the following characteristics:
(a) The basic dimensions of the floor plans are without substantial differentiation.
(b) The height and design of the roofs are without substantial change in design and appearance.
(c) The size, location and type of windows and doors in the front elevation are without substantial differentiation.
4) There shall be not less than six basic house designs in any single family detached planned village development.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 105
5) When houses which are substantially alike in exterior design and appearance are located within the same block, the materials used on the exterior shall be varied.
6) To insure conformity with the provisions of this section, no construction permit shall hereafter be issued for more than one dwelling in any housing development until the builder shall post for each specific lot on the map of the subdivision on file with the construction official, the type and model of each house for which a construction permit has been or is being issued.
c. Accessory Garages.
1) Each market rate dwelling shall have a garage. Dwellings intended for low and moderate income household occupancy are exempt from this requirement; however, affordable dwellings shall have adequate off-street parking.
2) Garages may be detached from or attached to the principal dwelling. In either case the garage shall be aligned either parallel with or perpendicular to the alignment of the principal building.
3) The architectural design of the garage, including the proportions, roof pitch, exterior materials, windows/doors, and color shall be the same as that of the dwelling.
4) As part of the application and review process, the applicant shall develop a pattern book of architectural standards to be reviewed and approved by the Planning Board. Such approval may be subsequent to a general development plan approval but precedent to a grant of preliminary subdivision or site plan approval. The Planning Board may request the assistance of qualified staff and consultants to provide technical assistance in analyzing the adequacy of the architectural standards. Once approved, the pattern book will be utilized to ensure that sufficient variation in building design occurs to avoid sameness in the design of houses.
§ 15. TC-1 Transitional Commercial District.
A. Intent. The intent of the TC-1 Transitional Commercial District is to protect the character of neighborhoods which have historically developed in a predominantly residential fashion but which have significant non-residential uses located within the district and which are located on or near arterial roadways.
B. Uses.
1. Principal permitted uses on the land and in the buildings.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 106
a. Single-family detached dwelling existing as of January 1, 2003 subject to the regulations of the R-6 zoning district.
b. General business and professional offices.
c. Facilities of financial and related service organizations including banks, stock brokers, Realtors, insurance agencies, and similar facilities.
d. Stores for the sale of retail goods.
e. Shops specializing in personal or business services, excluding the repair of large items which cannot be hand carried.
f. Day care centers.
g. Eating and drinking establishments.
2. Accessory uses permitted.
a. Off-street parking lots. However, no off-street parking shall be permitted in any part of the front yard for non-residential developments. (See §27 for additional standards.)
b. Signs. (See §30 for standards.)
c. Fences and walls. (See §54 for standards.)
d. Recreational uses for residential lots.
C. Bulk standards.
1. Minimum lot area.
a. Single family dwellings or conversions of existing residential structures for non-residential use - Six thousand (6,000) square feet.
b. New non-residential development - Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
2. Street frontage and yard requirements.
a. Single family dwellings or conversions of existing residential structures for non-residential use:
1) Minimum lot width at building line - Sixty (60) feet.
2) Minimum street frontage - Fifty (50) feet.
3) Minimum lot depth - One hundred (100) feet.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 107
4) Minimum front yard - Thirty (30) feet.
5) Minimum side yards - Fifteen (15) feet aggregate width provided, however, that one (1) side yard shall be at least ten (10) feet in width and the remaining side yard shall be no less than five (5) feet in width.
6) Minimum rear yard - Twenty-five (25) feet
b. New non-residential development.
1) Minimum lot width at the building line - Two hundred (200) feet.
2) Minimum street frontage - Two hundred (200) feet.
3) Minimum lot depth - One hundred (100) feet.
4) Minimum front yard - Thirty (30) feet.
5) Minimum side yards - Fifty (50) feet aggregate width provided, however, that no single side yard shall be less than twenty-five (25) feet in width.
6) Minimum rear yard - Twenty-five (25) feet.
2. Maximum building height - Thirty-five (35) feet.
3. Maximum building coverage, including all principal and accessory buildings.
a. Single family dwellings or conversions of existing residential structures for non-residential use - Thirty percent (30%).
b. New non-residential development - Twenty percent (20%).
4. Single family dwellings or conversions of existing residential structures for non-residential use - Eighty percent (80%).
a. Single family dwellings or conversions of existing residential structures for non-residential use - Eighty percent (80%).
b. New non-residential development - Seventy percent (70%).
D. Buffers and landscaping.
1. Single family dwellings - None required.
2. Non-residential conversions of existing residential structures.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 108
a. All portions of the front yard area not required for access walks and driveways shall be landscaped with a variety of deciduous and evergreen trees, shrubs grass, and natural ground cover.
b. Whenever possible, a landscaped buffer screen ten (10) feet in width shall be provided adjacent to any side or rear property line. The Planning Board may authorize a reduction in the width of the buffer area and/or the provision of an opaque fence or similar visual screen when it is demonstrated that the provision of a ten (10) foot wide buffer would be impractical because of the location of an existing structure or the need to provide required off-street parking.
c. All landscaping, screening, and buffers shall be further subject to the provisions of §31.
3. New non-residential development.
a. A landscaped buffer of not less than twenty (20) feet in width shall be provided adjacent to any street line.
b. A landscaped buffer of not less than twenty (20) feet in width shall be provided along any common property line in a side or rear yard.
c. Buffer plantings and interior parking lot landscaping should be provided as specified in §31.
§ 16. TC-2 Transitional Commercial District.
A. Intent. The intent of the TC-2 Transitional Commercial District is to protect the character of neighborhoods which have historically developed in a predominantly residential fashion but which have significant non-residential uses located within the district and which are located on or near arterial roadways.
B. Uses.
1. The following uses shall be permitted by right.
a. Single-family detached dwelling existing as of January 1, 2003 subject to the regulations of the R-10 zoning district.
b. General business and professional offices.
c. Facilities of financial and related service organizations including banks, stock brokers, Realtors, insurance agencies, and similar facilities.
d. Stores for the sale of retail goods.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 109
e. Shops specializing in personal or business services, excluding the repair of large items which can not be hand carried.
f. Day care centers.
g. Eating and drinking establishments.
2. Accessory uses permitted.
a. Off-street parking lots, however, no off-street parking shall be permitted in any part of the front yard. (See §27 for additional standards.)
b. Signs. (See §30 for standards.)
c. Fences and walls. (See §54 for standards.)
C. Bulk standards.
1. Minimum lot area.
a. Single family dwellings or conversions of existing residential structures for non-residential use - Ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
b. New non-residential development - Forty thousand (40,000) square feet.
2. Street frontage and yard requirements.
a. Single family dwellings or conversions of existing residential structures for non-residential use.
1) Minimum lot width at building line - Eighty (80) feet.
2) Minimum street frontage - Seventy (70) feet.
3) Minimum lot depth - One hundred (100) feet.
4) Minimum front yard - Thirty (30) feet.
5) Minimum side yards - Twenty-five (25) feet.
6) Minimum rear yard - Thirty (30) feet.
b. New non-residential development.
1) Minimum lot width at building line - Two hundred (200) feet.
2) Minimum street frontage - Two hundred (200) feet.
3) Minimum lot depth - One hundred fifty (150) feet.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 110
4) Minimum front yard - Thirty (30) feet.
5) Minimum side yards - Fifty (50) feet, each.
6) Minimum rear yard - Fifty (50) feet.
3. Maximum building height - Thirty-five (35) feet.
4. Maximum building coverage, including all principal and accessory buildings.
a. Single family dwellings or conversions of existing residential structures for non-residential use - Thirty percent (30%).
b. New non-residential development - Thirty-five percent (35%).
c. Maximum impervious site coverage.
1) Single family dwellings or conversions of existing residential structures for non-residential use - Fifty percent (50%).
2) New non-residential development - Seventy percent (70%).
D. Buffers and landscaping.
1. Single family dwellings - None required.
2. Non-residential conversions of existing residential structures.
a. All portions of the front yard area not required for access walks and driveways shall be landscaped with a variety of deciduous and evergreen trees, shrubs, and grass or natural ground cover.
b. Whenever possible, a landscaped buffer screen ten (10) feet in width shall be provided adjacent to any side or rear property line. The Planning Board may authorize a reduction in the width of the buffer area and/or the provision of an opaque fence or similar visual screen if it is demonstrated that the provision of a ten (10) foot wide buffer would be impractical because of the location of an existing structure or the need to provide required off-street parking.
c. All landscaping, screening, and buffers shall be further subject to the provisions of §31.
3. New non-residential development.
a. A landscaped buffer of not less than twenty (20) feet in width shall be provided adjacent to any street line.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 111
b. A landscaped buffer of not less than twenty (20) feet in width shall be provided along any common property line in a side or rear yard.
c. Buffer plantings and interior parking lot landscaping should be provided as specified in §31.
4. General design requirements, as required by §37.
§ 17. BC-4 Business Center 4 and BC-3 Business Center 3
A. Purpose. To provide an area for various types of non-residential development with minimal feasible impacts upon natural features and traffic congestion. For the purposes of this section, “tract” shall mean the total lot or lots included in the development application.
B. Uses.
1. Principal permitted uses on the land and in the buildings.
a. Retail sales and services, including supermarkets.
b. General business, governmental, and professional offices.
c. Facilities of financial and related service organizations including banks, stock brokers, Realtors, insurance agencies.
d. Data processing and information processing centers.
e. Day care centers.
f. Hospital; nursing home; medical, dental, or similar health related clinic including offices for the practice of medicine by more than one (1) doctor and/or medical group for the examination of and/or treatment of persons as out-patients and the laboratories incidental thereto.
g. Business services including software writing, drafting services, reproduction and printing services, typing or stenographic services, accounting offices, employments offices, and the offices of temporary office personnel services.
h. Hotel or motel.
i. Planned office development. Two (2) or more buildings containing uses permitted within this District located on one (1) or more lots; or one (1) or more buildings containing uses located on two (2) or more lots; and designed as a planned development of related structures and uses including the provision of common access and drives, shared parking, a unified architectural and building scheme, a unified signage and graphic
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 112
plan, indoor malls connecting buildings when required, and a coordinated storm drainage and open space layout.
j. Eating and drinking places.
k. Planned Commercial Development: as above in –i. but including any use permitted in this zone.
l. Recreation, exercise and health clubs and facilities.
m. Funeral parlors.
n. Department stores.
o. Discount stores or clubs.
2. Accessory uses permitted.
a. The following accessory uses are permitted by right.
1) Off-street parking lots and structures.
2) Signs.
3) Fences and walls.
4) Other uses normally incidental and subordinate to permitted uses.
b. The following accessory uses shall be permitted only in a building principally used for offices, when intended to provide ancillary services and facilities to the employees or visitors to the office campus. No exterior signage shall be permitted for these accessory uses other than a listing on a directory sign as herein provided for.
1) Day care or similar custodial care centers for children or adults requiring supervision.
2) Health club, athletic or related facilities.
3) Newsstand including the accessory sales of candy, tobacco, sundries and similar items.
C. Design Standards:
1. Minimum development tract size: 2 acres
2. Trip Generation: all development shall be designed as to uses such that no more than the following maximum peak hour trips per acre shall be generated:
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 113
Development Tract Size (Acres) Maximum Trip Ends per Acre. 2, 3, 4
Under 50 acres 18
50 acres or more 16 [Ord. O.16.04, 10/4/04]
a. Pass-by trips shall be excluded for no more than the ITE average for that use.
b. Traffic information shall include impacts on the level of service on adjacent rights-of-way and intersections for the purpose of determining fair-share of improvement costs.
c. If improvements to the existing circulation system are proposed that will ameliorate declines in level of service on adjacent rights-of-way and intersections resulting from the development, increases in the maximum trips up to an additional 10% will be permitted, provided those trips are part of the level of service calculated above.
3. Street frontage and yard requirements:
Development Tract Size
Under 50 acres
50 acres or more
Frontage
300 feet
500 feet
Width
300 feet
600 feet
Depth
300 feet
800 feet
Side Yard (each)
- from an existing residential use
150 feet
200 feet
- from a non-residential use
50 feet
100 feet
Front Yard
- Buildings over 14,000 sf.
150 feet
200 feet
- Other Buildings
75 feet
75 feet
2 Based upon the most current edition of the ITE Trip Generation Manual for a.m., or p.m. street peak equations whichever is greater.
3 If the traffic generation information supplied includes information that concludes to the satisfaction of the reviewing agency that a percentage of the peak traffic enters a limited access state or federal highway prior to impacting an intersection which legs are local or county rights-of-way, the maximum peak trips permitted under this section may be increased by the same percentage.
4 Acres shall not include wetlands or 100 year flood plain
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 114
Development Tract Size
Under 50 acres
50 acres or more
Rear Yard
- from an existing residential use
150 feet
200 feet
- from a non-residential use
50 feet
100 feet
4. Maximum Height: Three stories or 40 feet, except that, for hotels located in the BC-4 district only and located a maximum of one thousand (1,000) feet from a main travel lane of a limited access highway, may be up to four stories and 55 feet in height. [Ord. O.10.09, 8/3/09]
5. Minimum building to building distance: 30 feet.
6. Maximum building coverage: NA
7. Maximum impervious coverage:
a. Tracts under 50 acres: 60%
b. Tracts 50 acres or more: 75%
8. Maximum size of single use: 75,000 square feet in BC4 only. Maximum size of discount stores or clubs in BC-3 100,000 square feet. [Ord. O.16.04, 10/4/04]
9. Accessory Structures shall be subject to all the same locational requirements as principal buildings and shall not have a ground floor area in excess of five percent (5%) of the area of the site. Provided, however, that canopies over gasoline pumps may be within sixty (60) feet of a street line.
10. Buffer and landscaping
a. Landscape buffers shall be provided as follows:
1) Adjacent to any street line: 50 feet
2) Adjacent to a residential district: 100 feet
3) Adjacent to a non-residential district: 50 feet
b. Buffer plantings and interior parking lot landscaping should be provided as specified in §31.
D. General design requirements as required by §37.
E. Planned Developments
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 115
1. Base requirements: Any planned commercial or planned office development of at least 25 acres total may utilize this section. Total acres is defined as either contiguous or non-contiguous property included in the development application.
2. Applicability: The Peak trip generation limits shall apply to the total acreage in the application.
§ 17.1 BC-2 Business Center 2
A. Purpose. To provide an area for various types of non-residential development with moderate levels of development intensity. For the purposes of this section, “tract” shall mean the total lot or lots included in the development application.
B. Uses.
1. Principal permitted uses.
a. All those permitted in the BC-3 zone.
b. Movie theaters, performing arts facilities, sports venue, and community centers.
c. Hotels, motels, and inns including such ancillary uses as conference halls, banquet rooms, and recreational facilities such as swimming pools.
d. Automobile service stations including facilities for the retail sale of gasoline and diesel fuel for consumption by motor vehicles and convenience goods when provided on the site of an approved planned commercial development.
e. Shopping centers, when part of a planned commercial development.
f. Garden centers.
g. Department Stores.
h. Discount stores or clubs not to exceed 100,000 square feet.
2. Accessory uses permitted.
a. Off-street parking lots and structures.
b. Garages to house delivery trucks and other commercial vehicles (unenclosed storage of trucks and trailers is not permitted).
c. Canopies over gasoline pumps.
d. Signs.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 116
e. Fences and walls.
f. Other uses normally incidental and subordinate to permitted uses.
C. Design Standards
1. Minimum development tract size: 5 acres
2. Trip generation: All development shall be designed as to uses such that no more than the following maximum peak hour trips per acre shall be generated:
Development Tract Size (Acres) Maximum Trip Ends per Acre 5,6,7
Under 100 acres 27.0
100 acres or more 22.5
a. Pass-by trips shall be excluded for no more than the ITE average for that use.
b. Traffic information shall include impacts on the level of service on adjacent rights-of-way and intersections for the purpose of determining fair-share of improvement costs.
c. If improvements to the existing circulation system are proposed that will ameliorate declines in level of service on adjacent rights-of-way and intersections resulting from the development, increases in the maximum trips up to an additional 10% will be permitted, provided those trips are part of the level of service calculated above.
3. Street frontage and yard requirements:
Development Tract Size
Under 100 acres
100 acres or more
Frontage
300 feet
500 feet
Width
300 feet
600 feet
Depth
300 feet
800 feet
Side Yard (each)
- from an existing residential use
150 feet
200 feet
5 - Based upon the most current edition of the ITE Trip Generation Manual for a.m., or p.m. street peak equations whichever is greater.
6 - If the traffic generation information supplied includes information that concludes to the satisfaction of the reviewing agency that a percentage of the peak traffic enters a limited access state or federal highway prior to impacting an intersection which legs are local or county rights-of-way, the maximum peak hour trips permitted under this section may be increased by the same percentage.
7 - Acres shall not include wetlands or 100 year floodplain
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 117
Development Tract Size
Under 100 acres
100 acres or more
- from a non-residential use
50 feet
100 feet
Front Yard
- Buildings over 14,000 sf.
150 feet
200 feet
- Other Buildings
75 feet
75 feet
Rear Yard
- from an existing residential use
150 feet
200 feet
- from a non-residential use
50 feet
100 feet
4. Maximum building height: Three stories and 40 feet, except that hotels located a minimum of three hundred (300) feet from a residential district may be up to six stories and 75 feet in height. [Ord. O.7.08, 4/21/08]
5. Minimum building to building distance: 30 feet.
6. Maximum building coverage: NA
7. Maximum impervious coverage:
a. Tracts under 100 acres: 60%
b. Tracts 100 acres or more: 75%
8. Accessory Structures shall be subject to all the same location requirements as principal buildings and shall not have a ground floor area in excess of five percent (5%) of the area of the site. Provided, however, that canopies over gasoline pumps may be within sixty (60) feet of a street line.
9. Buffer and landscaping
a. Landscape buffers shall be provided as follows:
1) Adjacent to any street line: 50 feet
2) Adjacent to a residential district: 100 feet
3) Adjacent to a non-residential district: 50 feet
b. Buffer plantings and interior parking lot landscaping should be provided as specified in §31.
D. General design requirements as required by §37.
E. Planned Developments.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 118
1. Base requirements: Any planned commercial or planned office development of at least 25 acres total may utilize this section. Total acres is defined as either contiguous or non-contiguous property included in the development application.
2. Applicability: The peak trip generation limits shall apply to the total acreage in the application.
§ 17.2 BC-1 Business Center 1
A. Purpose. To provide an area for various types of more intensive development adjacent to a major highway interchange. For the purposes of this section, “tract” shall mean the total lot or lots included in the development application.
B. Uses:
1. Principal permitted uses.
a. All those permitted in the BC-2 zone.
b. New vehicle sales with incidental sale of used vehicles.
c. The following principal uses and no others shall be permitted provided that the use does not create any noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, heat, glare, or other objectionable effect in excess of the performance standards for industrial developments as required in §36.
d. Scientific or industrial research, testing or experimental laboratory, or product development.
e. General business or governmental offices.
f. Repair and service of home, business, and/or industrial appliances, equipment, or instruments.
g. Assembly of parts manufactured elsewhere.
h. Warehouse, storage, packing and crating, and distribution facilities, wholesale sales.
i. Data processing, printing, publishing, book binding, engraving, lithographing, reproducing, photo finishing, film processing, radio, television, or cinema studio, or similar establishment.
j. Cold storage, frozen food, and food processing.
k. General service or contractor’s shop including carpenter and cabinet making shop, roofing shop, plumbing shop, furniture repair, light metal working, electrical shop, and similar establishments.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 119
l. Mail order merchandise business provided no more than 10% of the total floor area may be used for retail sales to the general public.
m. Commercial greenhouse, nursery, and wholesale florist.
n. Self-service storage facilities, subject to the following additional standards:
1) Off-street parking shall be provided at the office at the rate of two (2) spaces per one hundred (100) storage units plus two (1) spaces for the manager’s apartment.
2) One (1) ten (10) foot wide parking/loading lane shall be provided adjacent to each bay of storage buildings, exclusive of required aisle widths.
3) The minimum aisle width, exclusive of parking/travel lanes, shall be fifteen (15) feet for one-way traffic flow and twenty-four (24) feet for two-way traffic flow.
4) Self-service storage facilities shall not exceed three (3) stories in height.
5) Self-service storage facilities shall be designed so that the exterior of the development is composed of solid masonry walls or a decorative fence, unbroken by garage doors. Chain link fences are specifically prohibited. No portion of the facility shall be unprotected by either a solid wall or fence.
6) Each facility shall be sufficiently landscaped to lessen the impact of the severe exterior wall or fence.
7) One (1) resident manager’s apartment shall be required for onsite supervision.
8) The facility shall agree to include in each storage unit lease a prohibition on the storage of toxic, explosive, hazardous, or illegal materials.
o. Department Stores. [Ord. O.16.04, 10/4/04]
p. Discount Stores or Clubs not to exceed 100,000 sq. ft. in any configuration including outdoor sales area. [Ord. O.16.04, 10/4/04]
2. Accessory uses permitted (as permitted in the BC-2 zone)
C. Design Standards
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 120
1. Minimum development tract size: 20 acres
2. Trip generation: All development shall be designed as to uses such that no more than the following maximum peak hour trips per acre shall be generated:
Development Tract Size (Acres) Maximum Trip Ends per Acre8, 9, 10
Under 100 acres 31.5
Greater than 100 acres 27.0
a. Pass-by trips shall be excluded for no more than the ITE average for that use.
b. Traffic information shall include impacts on the level of service on adjacent rights-of-way and intersections for the purpose of determining fair-share of improvement costs.
c. If improvements to the existing circulation system are proposed that will ameliorate declines in level of service on adjacent rights-of-way and intersections resulting from the development, increases in the maximum trips up to an additional 10% will be permitted, provided those trips are part of the level of service calculated above.
3. Street frontage and yard requirements:
Development Tract Size
Under 100 acres
100 acres or more
Frontage
300 feet
500 feet
Width
300 feet
600 feet
Depth
300 feet
800 feet
Front Yard
- Buildings over 14,000 sf.
150 feet
200 feet
- Other Buildings
75 feet
75 feet
8- Based upon the most current edition of the ITE Trip Generation Manual for a.m., or p.m. street peak equations whichever is greater.
9 - If the traffic generation information supplied includes information that concludes to the satisfaction of the reviewing agency that a percentage of the peak traffic enters a limited access state or federal highway prior to impacting an intersection which legs are local or county rights-of-way, the maximum peak trips permitted under this section may be increased by the same percentage.
10- Acres shall not include wetlands or 100 year floodplain.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 121
4. Maximum Height: Four stories or 50 feet, except that lodging uses shall have a maximum height of 10% of the distance from a tract perimeter in addition to the 50 foot maximum or 100 feet whichever is less.
5. Minimum building to building distance: 30 feet.
6. Maximum building coverage: NA
7. Maximum impervious coverage:
a. Tracts under 50 acres: 60%
b. Tracts 50 to 100 acres: 65%
c. Tracts 100 acres or more: 75%
8. Accessory Structures shall be subject to all the same location requirements as principal buildings and shall not have a ground floor area in excess of five percent (5%) of the area of the site. Provided, however, that canopies over gasoline pumps may be within sixty (60) feet of a street line.
9. Buffer and landscaping
a. Landscape buffers shall be provided as follows:
1) Adjacent to any perimeter street line: 25 feet
2) When abutting an existing residential district or use: 50 feet
3) When abutting a non-residential district: 25 feet
b. Buffer plantings and interior parking lot landscaping should be provided as specified in §31.
c. Any portion of the perimeter of a proposed development abutting an area permanently constrained against any development may utilize a credit for up to 50% of the required buffer.
D. General design requirements as required by §37.
E. Planned Developments
1. Base requirements: Any planned commercial or planned office development of at least 25 acres total may utilize this section. Total acres is defined as either contiguous or non-contiguous property included in the development application.
2. Applicability: The Peak hour trip generation limits shall apply to the total acreage in the application.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 122
§ 18. C-1 General Commercial District.
A. Intent. The intent of the C-1 General Commercial District is to promote the commercial development of appropriately located larger tracts of land which are not located within the Town Center District. The property in the C-1 Commercial District shall be of sufficient size to permit the unified development of tracts of land with primary access to the principal arterial or collector roads within the Township. The complimentary and coordinated development of adjacent properties shall be encouraged through regulations designed to control points of ingress and egress, provide for common access and drives, shared parking, a common architectural and building scheme, pedestrian malls connecting buildings, and coordinate storm drainage and open space areas.
B. Uses.
1. Principal permitted uses on the land and in the buildings.
a. Retail trade.
b. Eating or drinking place.
c. Banking facilities, including those with drive-through and bank machine facilities.
d. Data processing and information processing centers.
e. General business or professional offices.
f. Day care centers.
g. Medical clinic with offices for the practice of medicine by more than one (1) doctor and/or medical group for the examination of and/or treatment of persons as out-patients and the laboratories incidental thereto.
h. Movie theaters, performing arts facilities, and community centers.
i. Personal and business service establishments.
j. Facilities for the retail sale of gasoline or diesel fuels for consumption by motor vehicles.
k. Shopping Center.
l. Supermarket, when located in a shopping center.
m. Recreation, exercise and health clubs and facilities when owned and operated by a nongovernmental agency including, but not limited to, buildings for bowling alleys, indoor court games such as racquetball,
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 123
handball, squash, tennis, basketball and other facilities related thereto including indoor swimming and sauna facilities.
n. Public Park and Ride facilities.
o. Garden center stores and facilities.
2. Accessory uses permitted.
a. Off-street parking lots and structures. (See §27 for standards.)
b. Garages to house delivery trucks and other commercial vehicles. (Unenclosed storage of trucks is not permitted.)
c. Signs. (See §30 for standards.)
d. Fences and walls. (See §54 for standards.)
e. Repair of motor vehicles only when accessory to a facility for the retail sale of gasoline or diesel fuels or to a motor vehicle sales agency.
f. Canopies over gasoline pumps.
C. Bulk standards.
1. Minimum lot size - Five (5) acres.
2. Minimum frontage - Three hundred (300) feet.
3. Minimum lot width - Three hundred (300) feet.
4. Minimum lot depth - Three hundred (300) feet.
5. Minimum front yard - Fifty (50) feet.
6. Minimum side yard (each).
a. Twenty (20) feet adjacent to a non-residentially zoned lot.
b. Fifty (50) feet adjacent to a residentially zoned lot.
7. Minimum rear yard.
a. Twenty (20) feet adjacent to a non-residentially zoned lot.
b. Fifty (50) feet adjacent to a residentially zoned lot.
8. Maximum building height. Height regulations are a function of setbacks from any property or yard line. The height of any building shall not exceed thirty-five
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 124
(35) feet at the building setback line from all public streets and lot lines; increasing to a maximum permitted height of fifty (50) feet at the rate of one (1) foot in height for each additional one (1) foot that the building is set back from the building setback line.
9. Minimum building setback from another freestanding building within the same commercial development - Twenty (20) feet or a distance equal to fifty percent (50%) of the height of the taller of the buildings, whichever is greater.
10. Maximum building coverage (includes all principal and accessory buildings located on a site) - Twenty-five percent (25%).
11. Maximum impervious coverage - Seventy percent (70%).
12. Accessory structures shall be subject to all the same locational requirements as principal buildings and shall not have a ground floor area in excess of five percent (5%) of the area of the site. Provided, however, that canopies over gasoline pumps may be within thirty-five (35) feet of a street line.
D. Buffers and landscaping.
1. Landscaped buffers shall be provided as follows:
a. Adjacent to any street line - Twenty-five (25) feet.
b. Adjacent to a residential district - Twenty-five (25) feet.
c. Adjacent to a non-residential district - Twenty (20) feet.
2. Buffer plantings and interior parking lot landscaping should be provided as specified in §31.
E. General design requirements, as required in §37.
§ 19. C-2 Neighborhood Commercial District
A. Intent. The intent of the C-2 Neighborhood Commercial District is intended to promote the development of appropriately located tracts of land to provide commercial services to nearby residential areas.
B. Uses.
1. Principal permitted uses on the land and in the buildings -
a. Retail trade.
b. Eating or drinking place.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 125
c. Banking facilities, including those with drive-through and bank machine facilities.
d. General or professional offices.
e. Personal service establishments.
f. Day care centers.
2. Accessory uses permitted.
a. Off-street parking lots. (See §27 for standards.)
b. Signs. (See §30 for standards.)
c. Fences and walls. (See §54 for standards.)
C. Bulk standards.
1. Minimum lot size - Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
2. Minimum street frontage - One hundred (100) feet.
3. Minimum lot width - One hundred (100) feet.
4. Minimum lot depth - Two hundred (200) feet.
5. Minimum front yard - Fifty (50) feet.
6. Minimum side yard (each).
a. Adjacent to a non-residential use - None required, but ten (10) feet when provided.
b. Adjacent to a residential use or district - Twenty-five (25) feet.
7. Minimum rear yard.
a. Adjacent to a non-residential use - Twenty (20) feet.
b. Adjacent to a residential use or district - Fifty (50) feet.
8. Maximum building height - Thirty-five (35) feet.
9. Maximum building coverage (includes all principal and accessory buildings located on a site) - Thirty percent (30%).
10. Maximum impervious coverage - Eighty percent (80%).
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 126
11. Accessory structures shall be subject to all the same locational requirements as principal buildings and shall not have a ground floor area in excess of five percent (5%) of the area of the site.
D. Buffers and landscaping.
1. Landscaped buffers shall be provided as follows:
a. Adjacent to any street line - Ten (10) feet.
b. Adjacent to a residential district - Twenty-five (25) feet.
c. Adjacent to a non-residential district, when a yard is provided - Ten (10) feet.
E. General design requirements, as required in §37.
§ 20. ROM – Research, Office and Manufacturing District. [Ord. O.5.08, 4/7/08]
A. Intent. The Research, Office and Manufacturing (ROM) district is intended for the research, development and manufacturing of products, delivery of professional services and administration of businesses serving primarily regional and/or national markets. By virtue of this type of activity, size, parking and loading requirements, land use and/or nuisance characteristics, these uses require a nearby entrance to a limited access highway.
B. Permitted Uses. In the ROM district, no lot shall be used and no structure shall be erected, altered or occupied for any purpose except the following:
1. On lots less than 10 acres:
a. Professional, administrative and business offices.
b. Data processing center.
c. Call center.
d. Combined office and manufacturing or distribution uses in a single building.
e. Agriculture.
f. Public parks and recreation; conservation.
g. Municipal purpose.
C. Accessory Uses and Structures Permitted. Any of the following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted when used in conjunction with a principal or conditional permitted use:
1. Security office.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 127
2. Maintenance building.
3. Restaurant or employee cafeteria as part of a principal building or as the entire use of an accessory building, provided the cafeteria is limited in service to the employees and visitors to the principal use.
4. Indoor and outdoor recreational facilities planned as an integral part of the principal use.
5. Display showrooms for products of permitted on-site research, testing or manufacturing not exceeding five percent (5%) of the total floor area of the building.
6. Child care center.
7. Off-street surface and structured parking.
8. Fences, walls and street furniture.
9. Signs.
10. Outdoor storage of equipment and materials in accordance with sub-paragraph –E, herein below.
11. Accessory uses on the same lot and customarily incidental to the principal use.
D. Bulk Standards. Except as otherwise modified, the following bulk standards shall apply to all lots:
1. Individual Principal Use.
a. Minimum lot area – Four (4) acres.
b. Minimum lot frontage – Two hundred (200) feet.
c. Minimum lot width – Three hundred (300) feet.
d. Minimum lot depth – Four hundred (400) feet.
e. Minimum front yard – One hundred (100) feet.
f. Minimum side yard – Thirty (30) feet.
g. Minimum rear yard – Fifty (50) feet.
h. Maximum building height – Forty (40) feet or two (2) stories, whichever is less.
i. Maximum impervious coverage – Sixty-five percent (65%)
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 128
j. Maximum floor area ratio – Twenty-five hundredths (.25)
2. Office Park or Business Park Use.
a. Minimum lot area – Five (5) acres.
b. Minimum lot frontage – Three hundred (300) feet.
c. Minimum lot width – Four hundred (400) feet.
d. Minimum lot depth – Four hundred (400) feet.
e. Minimum front yard – One hundred (100) feet.
f. Minimum side yard – Thirty (30) feet.
g. Minimum rear yard – Fifty (50) feet.
h. Maximum building height – Fifty (50) feet or three (3) stories, whichever is less.
i. Maximum impervious coverage – Seventy percent (70%)
j. Maximum floor area ratio – Three tenths (.30)
3. Accessory buildings and uses. The following regulations shall apply to accessory buildings and uses:
a. No accessory building or use shall be located in a front yard.
b. Minimum side yard – Thirty (30) feet.
c. Minimum rear yard – Twenty-five (25) feet.
d. Minimum distance to other building – Thirty (30) feet.
e. Maximum height - Half the height of the principal use to which it relates.
f. Accessory uses to a comprehensively planned office or business park may be located on an individual lot. In this event, the area, yard and coverage standards of the TC-1 Transitional Commercial District for new non-residential development may be utilized.
4. Parking area setback.
a. From street line – Fifty (50) feet.
b. From any other lot line – Thirty (30) feet.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 129
5. Minimum landscape buffer widths.
a. Adjacent to any street line excepting a limited access highway – Fifty (50) feet.
b. Adjacent to the street line of a limited access highway – Thirty (30) feet.
c. Adjacent to any other lot line – Thirty (30) feet.
E. Outdoor Storage. Materials used in the manufacture or assembly of products and equipment may be stored outside behind the front building line provided that such storage shall meet the following requirements:
1. The location of the outdoor storage shall be approved by the board of jurisdiction and delineated on a site plan;
2. Outdoor storage shall be located in a side or rear yard behind the front building line;
3. Outdoor storage shall not occupy more than fifty percent (50%) of the total area of the side and rear yards;
4. The height of outdoor storage shall not exceed twelve (12) feet;
5. The outdoor storage shall be behind a fully opaque fence; and
6. Landscape buffering of the outdoor storage shall be required in accordance with §31.C.
§ 20.1. O Office District [Ord. O.18.13, 12/9/13]
A. Intent. The purpose of the Office (O) district is to provide for office and related principal and accessory uses on lots with vehicular access to a collector or arterial road devoted to the establishment of non-retail commercial uses and specifically to serve the need for medical services due to population growth and an aging population.
B. Permitted Uses. In the O district, no lot shall be used and no structure shall be erected, altered or occupied for any purpose except the following:
1. Professional office, as modified by –B.2, below.
2. Medical and dental offices and clinics, including urgent care treatment facilities, but not to include outpatient treatment for addictive substances.
3. Ambulatory surgical facility.
4. Bank and other financial institution, including drive-through facilities.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 130
5. Funeral home.
6. Child care center.
7. Adult day care.
8. Technical, trade or occupational school.
9. Municipal use.
C. Accessory Uses and Structures Permitted. Any of the following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted when used in conjunction with a principal use.
1. Drive-thru facilities for banks and other financial institutions.
2. Off-street parking.
3. Fences, walls and street furniture.
4. Signs.
5. Garages and tool sheds.
6. Accessory uses customarily incidental to a principal use.
D. Bulk Standards. The following area, yard, and coverage standards shall apply to uses within the O district:
1. Minimum lot size – Sixty thousand (60,000) sf.
2. Minimum lot frontage – One hundred twenty-five (125) feet.
3. Minimum lot width – One hundred twenty-five (125) feet.
4. Maximum floor area ratio – Two tenths (0.20).
5. Maximum impervious surface ratio – Sixty-five percent (65%).
6. Maximum building height – Thirty-five (35) feet and two stories.
7. Minimum front yard – Thirty (30) feet.
8. Minimum side yard – Fifteen (15) feet.
9. Minimum rear yard – Twenty-five (25) feet.
10. Parking area setback:
a. From any streetline - Thirty (30) feet.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 131
b. From any side or rear yard – Fifteen (15) feet.
c. From any building – Ten (10) feet, except that parking aisles may be within six (6) feet.
d. Notwithstanding any other provision, no parking shall be located in between the front façade of a building and the streetline.
11. Accessory buildings and uses. The following regulations shall apply to accessory buildings and uses:
a. No accessory building or use shall be located in a front yard.
b. Minimum side and rear yard – Fifteen (15) feet.
c. Minimum distance to any other building – Twenty (20) feet.
d. Maximum accessory building height:
1) Garages - One-and-a-half stories and twenty (20) feet.
2) Tool Sheds – One story and twelve (12) feet.
3) Other accessory buildings – Sixteen (16) feet.
E. Design requirements shall be as required in §31.M, Streetscape Standards, and §37, General Design Requirements.
§ 21. FLX Flex Space District.
A. Intent.
The intent of the FLX Flex Space District is to promote the development of appropriate areas within the Township which will provide opportunities for the use of buildings for office, light manufacturing, warehousing, and distribution facilities.
B. Uses.
1. Principal permitted uses on the land and in the buildings.
a. The following uses shall be permitted by right.
1) Scientific research laboratory.
2) Printing, publishing, lithographing, binding, or similar processes.
3) Offices and shops of tradesmen, including the sale of materials produced onsite by the tradesman.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 132
4) Warehouse, storage house, or distribution center, including a truck terminal.
5) Mail order merchandise facility.
6) Motion picture film production, television or radio studio, cable television studio, satellite ground station.
7) General business offices, banks, and offices of financial institutions.
8) Facilities for the retail sale of gasoline and diesel fuel for consumption by motor vehicles.
9) Automotive sales and service facilities.
b. The following principal uses are permitted conditionally upon a determination by the Planning Board that the use can be provided in a manner that will minimize the impact upon adjacent properties and will conform with such additional standards as provided in §61.
1) Self-service storage facilities.
2. Accessory uses permitted.
a. Off-street parking lots and structures. (See §27 for standards.)
b. Garages to house delivery trucks and other commercial vehicles. (Unenclosed storage of trucks and trailers are not permitted).
c. Signs. (See §30 for standards.)
d. Fences and walls. (See §54 for standards.)
e. The warehousing of materials permitted in association with a permitted principal use.
f. Canopies over gasoline pumps.
C. Bulk standards.
1. Minimum lot area - Two (2) acres.
2. Minimum lot width at building line - Three hundred (300) feet.
3. Minimum lot depth - Two hundred fifty (250 feet.
4. Minimum front yard - Seventy-five (75) feet.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 133
5. Minimum side yards, each.
a. The minimum building setback from a non-residentially zoned lot - Twenty-five (25) feet.
b. The minimum building setback from a residentially zoned lot - Fifty (50) feet.
6. Minimum rear yard.
a. The minimum building setback from a non-residentially zoned lot - Twenty-five (25) feet.
b. The minimum building setback from a residentially zoned lot - Fifty (50) feet.
7. Maximum building height - Twenty-five (25) feet.
8. Maximum building coverage (includes all principal and accessory buildings) - Thirty-five percent (35%).
9. Maximum impervious coverage - Eighty percent (80%).
10. Minimum gross leasable floor area for the first building or first phase of any development - Three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet.
11. Accessory structures shall be subject to all the same locational requirements as principal buildings provided, however, that canopies over gasoline pumps may be within thirty (30) feet of a street line.
D. Buffers and landscaping.
1. Landscaped buffers shall be provided as follows:
a. Adjacent to any street line - Twenty-five (25) feet.
b. Adjacent to a residential district - Twenty-five (25) feet.
c. Adjacent to a non-residential district - Ten (10) feet.
2. Buffer plantings and interior parking lot landscaping should be provided as specified in § 31.
E. General design requirements, as required in §37.
§ 22. LI-1 Light Industrial District.
A. Intent.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 134
The intent of the LI-1 Light Industrial Zoning District is to promote the industrial development of appropriately located tracts of land which are well located with respect to major arterial roadways. The LI-1 Light Industrial District is intended to encourage industrial development within smaller, previously approved individual parcels and industrial parks with non-polluting industrial and related uses.
B. Uses.
1. The following principal uses and no others shall be permitted provided that the use does not create any noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, heat, glare, or other objectionable effect in excess of the performance standards for industrial developments as required in §36.
a. Scientific or industrial research, testing or experimental laboratory, or product development.
b. General business or governmental offices.
c. Repair and service of home, business, and/or industrial appliances, equipment, or instruments.
d. Assembly and light manufacturing.
e. Warehouse, storage, packing and crating, and distribution facilities.
f. Data processing, printing, publishing, book binding, engraving, lithographing, reproducing, photo finishing, film processing, radio, television, or cinema studio, or similar establishment.
g. Cold storage, frozen food, and food processing.
h. Laundry, cleaning, and dying plant.
i. General service or contractor's shop including carpenter and cabinet making shop, roofing shop, plumbing shop, furniture repair, light metal working, electrical shop, and similar establishments.
j. Automobile repair, body work, and painting.
k. Mail order merchandise business provided no retail sales to the general public occur onsite.
l. Commercial greenhouse, nursery, and wholesale florist.
m. Self-service storage facilities, subject to the following additional standards:
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 135
1) Off-street parking shall be provided at the office at the rate of two (2) spaces per one hundred (100) storage units plus two (2) spaces for the manager's apartment.
2) One (1) ten (10) foot wide parking/loading lane shall be provide adjacent to each bay of storage buildings, exclusive of required aisle widths.
3) The minimum aisle width, exclusive of parking/travel lanes, shall be fifteen (15) feet for one-way traffic flow and twenty-four (24) feet for two-way traffic flow.
4) Self-service storage facilities shall not exceed one (1) story in height.
5) Self-service storage facilities shall be designed so that the exterior of the development is composed of solid masonry walls or a decorative fence, unbroken by garage doors. Chain link fences are specifically prohibited. No portion of the facility shall be unprotected by either a solid wall or fence.
6) Each facility shall be heavily landscaped to lessen the impact of the severe exterior wall or fence.
7) One (1) resident manager's apartment shall be required for onsite supervision.
8) The facility shall agree to include in each storage unit lease a prohibition on the storage of toxic, explosive, hazardous, or illegal materials.
2. Accessory uses permitted.
a. Off-street parking lots and structures. (See §27 for standards.)
b. Structures to house delivery trucks and other commercial vehicles.
c. Signs. (See §30 for standards.)
d. Fences and walls. (See §54 for standards.)
C. Bulk standards.
1. Industrial parks containing multiple principal buildings on the same lot or tract.
a. Minimum tract size - Five (5) acres.
b. Minimum lot area per principal building - One (1) acre.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 136
c. Minimum street frontage - One hundred fifty (150) feet.
d. Minimum lot width - One hundred fifty (150) feet.
e. Minimum lot depth - Three hundred (300) feet.
f. Minimum front yard - Thirty (30) feet.
g. Minimum side yard (each).
1) The minimum building setback from a non-residentially zoned lot - Twenty (20) feet.
2) The minimum building setback from a residentially zoned lot - Fifty (50) feet.
h. Minimum rear yard.
1) The minimum building setback from a non-residentially zoned lot - Twenty (20) feet.
2) The minimum building setback from a residentially zoned lot - Fifty (50) feet.
i. Maximum building height. Height regulations are a function of setbacks from any property or yard line. The height of any building shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet at the building setback line from all public streets and lot lines; increasing to a maximum permitted height of fifty (50) feet at the rate of two (2) feet in height for each additional one (1) foot that the building is set back from the building setback line.
j. Building setback from another freestanding building within the same industrial development - Fifty (50) feet.
k. Maximum building coverage (includes all principal and accessory buildings located on a site) - Forty-five percent (45%).
l. Maximum impervious coverage - Seventy-five percent (75%).
m. Accessory structures shall be subject to all the same locational requirements as principal buildings and shall not have a ground floor area in excess of fifteen percent (15%) of the area of the site.
2. Industrial uses on individual lots.
a. Minimum lot size - Five (5) acres.
b. Minimum frontage - Two hundred (200) feet.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 137
c. Minimum lot width - Two hundred (200) feet.
d. Minimum lot depth - Three hundred (300) feet.
e. Minimum front yard - Seventy-five (75) feet.
f. Minimum side yard (each).
1) The minimum building setback from a non-residentially zoned lot - Twenty-five (25) feet.
2) The minimum building setback from a residentially zoned lot - Fifty (50) feet.
g. Minimum rear yard.
1) The minimum building setback from a non-residentially zoned lot - Twenty-five (25) feet.
2) The minimum building setback from a residentially zoned lot - Fifty (50) feet.
h. Maximum building height. Height regulations are a function of setbacks from any property or yard line. The height of any building shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet at the building setback line from all public streets and lot lines; increasing to a maximum permitted height of fifty (50) feet at the rate of two (2) feet in height for each additional one (1) foot that the building is set back from the building setback line.
i. Maximum building coverage (includes all principal and accessory buildings located on a site) - Forty percent (40%).
j. Maximum impervious coverage - Seventy percent (70%).
k. Accessory structures shall be subject to all the same locational requirements as principal buildings and shall not have a ground floor area in excess of ten percent (10%) of the area of the site.
D. Buffers and landscaping.
1. Landscaped buffers shall be provided as follows:
a. Adjacent to any street line - Twenty (20) feet.
b. Adjacent to a residential district - Twenty-five (25) feet.
c. Adjacent to a non-residential district - Twenty (20) feet.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 138
2. Buffer plantings and interior parking lot landscaping should be provided as specified in §31.
E. General design requirements, as required in §37.
§ 24. INS Institutional District.
A. Intent.
The intent of the INS Institutional Zoning District is to provide regulations for public and quasi-public land uses and to insure their compatibility with surrounding land uses.
B. Uses.
1. Principal permitted uses on the land and in the buildings.
a. Uses by right.
1) Governmental use or building, other than those enumerated as conditional uses below including but not limited to a municipal administrative or public safety facility, community center, library, or park.
b. The following principal uses are permitted conditionally upon a determination by the Planning Board that the use can be provided in a manner that will minimize the impact upon adjacent properties, will be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood, will not unduly burden adjacent areas with increases in traffic, noise, threats to public health and safety, and will conform with such additional standards as provided in §61.
1) Hospital, sanitarium, medical or health center, convalescent home, nursing home, or similar health facility.
2) Church, synagogue, chapel, convent, or similar place of worship, including a rectory or parish house.
3) College, private or public elementary, secondary or nursery school, business or trade school, school of dance or music, or any similar educational institution.
4) Cemetery and crematorium, provided however that crematorium chimneys shall not be located within five hundred (500) feet of any street or residential property line.
5) Private recreational use of a primarily outdoor character, such as swim clubs, tennis clubs, country clubs, or similar facilities.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 139
2. Accessory uses permitted.
a. Off-street parking lots and structures. (See §27 for standards.)
b. Play fields or recreational facilities.
c. Signs. (See §30 for standards.)
d. Fences and walls. (See §54 for standards.)
e. Dormitory.
f. Offices of staff doctors.
g. Living accommodations for watchmen, caretakers, or the staff or employees of a permitted institution.
C. Bulk standards.
1. Minimum lot size - Five (5) acres.
2. Minimum street frontage - Three hundred (300) feet.
3. Minimum lot width - Three hundred (300) feet.
4. Minimum front yard - One hundred (100) feet.
5. Minimum side yard (each).
a. The minimum building setback from a non-residentially zoned lot - Fifty (50) feet.
b. The minimum building setback from a residentially zoned lot - Seventy-five (75) feet.
6. Minimum rear yard.
a. The minimum building setback from a non-residentially zoned lot - Fifty (50) feet.
b. The minimum building setback from a residentially zoned lot - Seventy-five (75) feet.
7. Maximum building height. Thirty-five (35) feet except that the height may be increased to a maximum permitted height of fifty (50) feet at the rate of two (2) feet in height for each additional one (1) foot that the building is set back from the building setback lines.
Deptford Township UDO Zoning Districts
May 5, 2014 Page 140
8. Building setback from another freestanding building within the same development - Fifty (50) feet.
9. Maximum building coverage (includes all principal and accessory buildings located on a site) - Twenty percent (20%).
10. Maximum impervious coverage - Seventy percent (70%).
11. Accessory structures shall be subject to all the same locational requirements as principal buildings and shall not have a ground floor area in excess of five percent (5%) of the area of the site.
D. Future use of institutional land.
1. Because of the unique and varied character of uses permitted in the Institutional District, either by right or by conditional approval, it may not be appropriate to allow one institutional use to automatically replace another institutional use upon its abandonment or discontinuance. For the purposes of this section, the replacement of any use with another which is not of the exact character of the previous use shall be considered a change of use.
2. In the event of the non-use, abandonment, or change in the use of any institutionally zoned land, the Planning Board, on its own motion or upon an application for a zoning change, shall consider the site and make a recommendation to the Township Council as to an appropriate zoning map amendment for the site in question.
E. Buffers and landscaping.
1. Landscaped buffers shall be provided as follows:
a. Adjacent to any street line - Twenty-five (25) feet.
b. Adjacent to a residential district - Thirty (30) feet.
c. Adjacent to a non-residential district - Twenty (20) feet.
F. General design requirements, as required in §37.
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 141
Article IV. Design and Improvement Standards
§ 25. Purpose.
A subdivision and/or site plan shall be designed and conform to standards that will result in a well-planned community, protect the health and safety of the residents, and provide a desirable living environment without unnecessarily adding to development costs. The following improvements shall be required: streets and circulation, off-street parking and loading, landscaping and common open space, affordable housing, water supply, sanitary sewers, and storm water management.
§ 26. Streets.
Where applicable the Residential Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21-4) and the following shall apply.
A. General.
The arrangement of streets shall conform to the circulation plan of the Master Plan and/or Official Map of Deptford Township. For streets now shown on the Master Plan and/or Official Map, the arrangement shall provide for the appropriate extension of existing streets. New residential developments of twenty (20) lots or more shall be designed with a minimum of two means of fully improved access to the existing street network. New streets within a development shall be arranged so as to discourage through traffic and provide for maximum privacy, while creating an acceptable traffic pattern.
B. Street hierarchy and cartway width. Streets shall be classified in a street hierarchy system with design tailored to function.
1. The street hierarchy system shall be defined by road function and average daily traffic (ADT), calculated by trip generation rates prepared by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) as indicated in Exhibit 1 or as updated by ITE and agreed to by the Township's professional staff. Trip generation rates from other sources may be used if the applicant demonstrates that these sources better reflect local conditions.
2. Each residential street shall be classified and designed for its entire length to meet the standards for one of the street types as defined in Exhibit 2. The Township Master Plan and/ or Official Map may also be referenced to determine a street's classification.
3. The applicant shall demonstrate to the approving agency's satisfaction that the distribution of traffic to the proposed street system will not exceed the ADT thresholds indicated in Exhibit 2 for any proposed street type.
4. Cartway widths for each street classification are shown in Exhibit 3.
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 142
EXHIBIT 1
RSIS & ITE TRIP GENERATION RATES BY MAJOR LAND USE CATEGORIES
LAND USE TYPE AVERAGE WEEKDAY TRIP GENERATION RATES
Trips per indicated measure:
Residential Dwelling Unit
Single-family detached 10.2
Condominium/townhouse 5.9
Apartment 6.5
Low-rise apartment 7.2
Mid-rise apartment 5.5
High-rise apartment 4.3
Mobile home park 5.0
Retirement Community 2.8
Recreation home (owner) 3.2
Trips per indicated measure:
1,000 gross ft.2
Office Building Employee of building area
General office, under 100,000 gross ft.2 3.7 17.7
General office, 100,000-199,999 gross ft.2 3.8 14.3
General office, over 200,000 gross ft.2 2.9 10.9
Medical office building NA 54.6
Office park 3.3 20.7
Research Center 2.4 5.3
Trips per indicated measure:
1,000 gross ft.2
Industrial Employee of building area
Light industrial 3.2 5.5
Heavy industrial 2.1 1.5
Industrial park 3.6 7.0
Manufacturing 2.1 3.9
Warehousing 3.9 4.9
Mini warehouseNA 2.8
Trips per indicated measure:
Lodging Employee Room
Hotel 11.3 10.5
Motel 12.8 10.1
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 143
EXHIBIT 1, (continued)
RSIS & ITE TRIP GENERATION RATES BY MAJOR LAND USE CATEGORIES
LAND USE TYPE AVERAGE WEEKDAY TRIP GENERATION RATES
Trips per indicated measure:
Employee 1,000 gross ft.2
Retail of leasable area
Specialty retail NA 40.7
Discount store NA 70.1
Shopping center
Under 50,000 ft.2 leasable area NA 117.9
50,000-99,999 ft.2 leasable area NA 82.0
100,000-199,999 ft.2 leasable area NA 66.7
200,000-299,999 ft.2 leasable area NA 50.6
300,000-399,999 ft.2 leasable area NA 41.9
400,000-499,999 ft.2 leasable area NA 49.7
500,000-999,999 ft.2 leasable area NA 37.2
1,000,000-1,249,999 ft.2 leasable area NA 37.1
Over 1,250,000 ft.2 leasable area NA 34.1
Trips per indicated measure:
Institutional Employee Student
Elementary school 13.1 1.0
High school 16.3 1.4
Junior/community college NA 1.6
University NA 2.4
Library 51.0 41.8/ 1,000 sq. ft.
Notes:
NA = Information not available from ITE. Applicant should submit data on comparable uses.
Source: Institute of Transportation Engineers
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 144
EXHIBIT 2
RESIDENTIAL STREET HIERARCHY: DEFINITION
RESIDENTIAL FUNCTION MAXIMUM
STREET TYPE ADT AT
INTERSECTION
1) Low Density Lowest order of residential streets. Provides access to lots on culs- 150
Residential Street de-sac in the R-40 and R-20 Districts which serve no more than
fifteen (15) dwellings and which do not exceed a maximum ADT of 150.
2) Local Residential The next order of Township street. Provides frontage for250
Street access to lots and carries traffic having destination or
origin on the street itself. Designed to carry the least amount
of traffic at the lowest speed. Most housing units will front on this class of street. Includes loop and non-terminus streets as well as cul-de-sacs in Districts other than R-40 and R-20. It may include limited access to non-residential lots but, because of traffic volumes, such uses will typically be served by collector roads.
Local residential streets should be designated so that at its intersection with other streets they will not carry an ADT greater than 250. Where a new development will cause traffic volumes in excess of 250 ADT, a minor collector street shall be provided. In older sections of the Township where existing development patterns will yield a higher ADT, but the street does not function as a minor collector or higher classification of street, the Planning Board may waive the maximum ADT standard.
3) Minor The next order of roadway, minor collectors conduct and distribute 5,000
Collector traffic between lower-order residential streets and higher-order streets such as arterials and expressways. Minor collectors may also serve as distribution routes within residential developments. These streets carry larger volumes of traffic at higher speeds. Their function is to promote free traffic flow, therefore, parking is prohibited, and direct access to homes from this level of street is to be avoided.
Some older collector streets were previously developed with uses fronting on them. In such neighborhoods, additional curbcuts onto collector streets will be permitted only when there is no feasible alternative and then every effort will be made to reduce the number of curbcuts by using common driveways or service roads.
4) Major Next order of roadway. It differs from a minor collector only in the 8,000
Collector volume of traffic it is designed to carry. Therefore, like the minor collector, parking is prohibited, and direct access to adjacent uses from this level of street should be avoided. In addition, somewhat larger road design standards are required.
5) Arterial The highest order of Township street. It forms an integral portion of >8,000
the inter-regional road system and conveys traffic between centers. It should be excluded from residential areas.
Source: Model Subdivision and Site Plan Ordinance, Listokin and Baker, Center for Urban Policy Research, Rutgers University, 1987.
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 145
EXHIBIT 3
CARTWAY WIDTH
TOTAL LAND-
STREET TRAVEL SUB- PARKING IMPROVED SUB- CARTWAY SCAPED
CLASSIFICATION LANES TOTAL LANE SHOULDER TOTAL WIDTH MEDIAN
Low Density Residential Street two 11' 22' one 8' None 8' 30' None
(Cul-de-sac: R-40 and R-20)
Local Residential Street two 10' 20' two 7' None 14' 34' None
Minor Collector Street two 10' 20' Not Permitted two 6' 12' 32' None
Major Collector four 12' 48' Not Permitted two 6' 12' 60' None
Arterial four 12' 48' Not Permitted two 8' 16' 64' 20'
Source: Model Subdivision and Site Plan Ordinance, Listokin and Baker, Center for Urban Policy Research, Rutgers University, 1987.
C. Street grade, intersections, and pavement.
1. Street grade.
a. Minimum street grade permitted for all streets shall be 0.75%; but streets constructed at this grade shall be closely monitored and strict attention paid to construction techniques to avoid ponding. Where waivers are granted allowing grades less than 0.75%, combination curbs and gutters shall be required.
b. Maximum street grade shall vary by road hierarchy, with flatter grades required for roads with higher ADTs, in accordance with the requirements shown in Exhibit 4.
c. Vertical curves shall be in accordance with AASHTO standards, based on a design speed five (5) mph above the posted speed. For standard speed limits, the following shall apply:
Posted Speed
Design Speed
Length Per Percent Change in Slope
Crest Curves
Sag Curves
25 mph
30 mph
30 feet
40 feet
50 mph
55 mph
185 feet
115 feet
d. Undulating and broken back gradelines are to be avoided.
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 146
e. The provision of street grades which do not meet the minimum permitted or which exceed the maximum permitted may be allowed only as approved by the Planning Board.
2. Intersections.
a. Minimum intersection angle - Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible for a centerline distance of fifty (50) feet.
b. Minimum centerline offset of adjacent intersections - New intersections along one side of an existing street shall, if possible, coincide with any existing intersection on the opposite side of each street. However, where not feasible, use of "T" intersections with offsets at least two hundred (200) feet between centerlines shall be encouraged.
c. Minimum curb radius - Intersections shall be rounded at the curbline, with the street having the highest radius requirement as shown in Exhibit 4 determining the minimum standard for all curblines.
d. Grade - Intersections shall be designed with a flat grade wherever practical. Maximum grade within intersections shall be two percent (2%) for a distance of fifty (50) feet from the extended curb line.
e. Minimum centerline radius; minimum tangent length between reverse curves; and curb radii - Requirements shall be as shown in Exhibit 4.
f. A level of service analysis should be made at all proposed intersections which would allow traffic from a development to exit onto an existing street. When average peak hourly delays of more than twenty-five (25) seconds are expected, the intersection shall be designed with separate left and right exit lanes. When appropriate, through traffic may be incorporated into one of the turn lanes.
Exhibit 4. Street Grade and Intersection Standards
Intersection Standard
Low Density
Residential
Street
Local
Residential
Street
Minor
Collector
Major
Collector
Minimum Grade
0.75%
0.75%
0.75%
0.75%
Maximum Grade
8.0%
8.0%
8.0%
8.0%
Maximum Grade within 50 ft. of Intersection
2.0%
2.0%
2.0%
2.0%
Minimum Centerline Radius
100 ft.
100 ft.
150 ft.
300 ft.
Minimum Tangent Length between
Reverse Curves
50 ft.
50 ft.
100 ft.
150 ft.
Curb Radii
25 ft.
25 ft.
30 ft.
35 ft.
Source: Model Subdivision and Site Plan Ordinance, Listokin and Baker, Center for Urban Policy Research, Rutgers University, 1987.
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 147
3. Pavement.
a. The minimum total pavement thickness for residential and minor collector streets shall consist of two (2) inches of FABC Mix I-5 surface course over four (4) inches of bituminous stabilized base course Mix I-2 over six (6) inches of dense aggregate or soil aggregate I-5. Higher order streets shall be site specifically designed.
b. The applicant will be permitted to reduce the stabilized base and dense aggregate thickness based on laboratory CBR tests. These tests and the pavement design may be submitted to the Township Engineer for review in the review phase or well in advance of construction. However, in no case shall the total bituminous pavement thickness be reduced less than four (4) inches in thickness.
c. Subgrade shall be compacted to a density not less than ninety-five (95) percent of the maximum density.
D. Curbing.
1. Curbing shall be required for drainage purposes, safety, and delineation and protection of the pavement edge. Curb requirements are set forth in Exhibit 5.
2. Additionally, curbing may be required for: storm water management; road stabilization; to delineate parking areas; ten (10) feet on each side of drainage inlets; at intersections; at corners; and at tight curve radii of less than twenty-five (25) feet.
3. Curbs shall be constructed according to the specifications set forth below. Asphalt curbs are not permitted.
a. The standard curb section used shall be twenty (20) feet in length. All concrete used for curbs shall be prepared in accordance with the New Jersey Department of Transportation, Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction (latest edition), except that the dimension shall be six (6) inches by eight (8) inches by eighteen (18) inches, and white concrete will not be required.
b. Curbs and/or combination curbs and gutters shall be constructed of Class B Concrete, air-entrained (3,700 p.s.i.). Curbs and/or curbs and gutters shall be constructed prior to the construction of the pavement.
c. Where drainage inlets are constructed, but curbs are not required, curbing must be provided at least ten (10) feet on each side of the inlet.
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 148
EXHIBIT 5. RIGHT-OF-WAY REQUIREMENTS AND DIMENSIONS
Street Cartway Total Right- Category Width Curb Sidewalk Tree Easement of-Way Width
Low Density Residential 30' Yes 2 sides 5' each side 50'
(Cul-de-sac: R-40 and R-22)
Local Residential 34' Yes 2 sides 10' each side 50'
Minor Collector 32' Yes 2 sides 5' each side 60'
Major Collector 60' Yes 2 sides 10' each side 80'
Arterial 64' Yes 2 sides 10' each side 100'
Note: Where traffic conditions warrant, shoulders and/or medians may be eliminated at intersections of major collector and arterial streets and the remaining cartway utilized to provide a fifth, left-turn lane.
Source: Model Subdivision and Site Plan Ordinance, Listokin and Baker, Center for Urban Policy Research, Rutgers University, 1987.
______________________________________________________________________________
d. Curbing shall be designed to provide a curbcut and ramp for wheel chairs and/or bicycles at each intersection and elsewhere when required by the design of the development. Where one of the two streets at an intersection is a collector or arterial road, the ramp shall be oriented to the lower use roadway.
E. Sidewalks.
1. Sidewalks shall be required depending on road classification and intensity of development in accordance with the requirements set forth in Exhibit 5.
2. Sidewalks are generally required in all multi-family residential and commercial developments and in other areas where pedestrian circulation may be anticipated.
3. In conventional developments, sidewalks shall be placed in the right-of-way, parallel to the cartway as shown in Exhibit 6, unless an exception has been permitted to preserve topographical or natural features, to provide visual interest, or unless the applicant shows that an alternative pedestrian system provides safe and convenient circulation.
4. In planned developments, sidewalks may be located away from the road system to link dwelling units with other dwelling units, the street, and onsite activity centers such as parking areas and recreational areas. They may also be required parallel to the street for safety and other reasons.
5. A pedestrian way easement (ten [10] feet wide) may be required by the Planning Board through the center of blocks more than six hundred (600) feet long to
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 149
provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping, or other community facilities. A path within the easement may be constructed of concrete, asphalt, gravel, dirt or grass, to the discretion of the Planning Board.
6. Sidewalks shall be constructed according to the specifications set forth below:
a. Sidewalks shall be a minimum of four (4) feet wide and four (4) inches thick except at points of vehicular crossing where they shall be at least six (6) inches thick. At vehicular crossings, sidewalks shall be reinforced with 6 x 6 #10 WWF reinforcement or an equivalent.
b. Concrete sidewalks shall be Class B concrete, having a twenty-eight (28) day compressive strength of 3,700 p.s.i.
F. Bikeways.
1. Bicycle paths, separate from required development sidewalks, may be provided as part of a planned development or in other sections of the Township where they connect with similar facilities, at the discretion of the Planning Board.
2. Bicycle lanes, where provided, shall be placed in the outside lane of a roadway, adjacent to the curb or shoulder. When on-street parking is permitted, the bicycle lane shall be between the parking lane and the outer lane of moving vehicles. Lanes shall be delineated with markings, preferably striping. Raised reflectors or curbs shall not be used.
3. Bikeways shall be constructed according to the specifications set forth below:
a. Bicycle paths - Dimensions and construction specifications of bicycle paths shall be determined by the number and type of users and the location and purpose of the bicycle path. A minimum six (6) feet paved width should be provided.
1) Choice of surface materials including bituminous mixes, concrete, and soil cement shall depend on use and users of the path.
2) Gradients of bike paths should generally not exceed a grade of five percent (5%), except for short distances.
b. Bicycle lanes - Lanes shall be a minimum of six (6) feet wide.
c. Bicycle-safe drainage grates shall be used in the construction of all streets.
G. Utility areas.
1. Utilities shall generally be located in a utility easement adjacent to the edge of the right-of-way in the front yard area of adjoining lots. In general, this easement should contain electrical power and telecommunications cable but may contain
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 150
other utilities. Other utilities such as public water, public sanitary and storm sewers and natural gas distribution shall generally be located underneath the cartway except in unusual circumstances. The minimum width of the easement shall be ten (10) feet but shall be wide enough to accommodate the utilities proposed in the development in accordance with utility company requirements. [Ord. 0.1.10, Feb, 22, 2010]
2. The area in which the utilities are placed shall be planted with grass, ground cover, and/or treated with other suitable cover material.
H. Shade tree easements.
1. Shade tree easements may be required where the planting strip between the sidewalk and curb is less than five (5) feet in width. For subdivisions with required building setbacks that establish a front yard, shade tree easements shall be required where the planting strip is less than five (5) feet in width. In locations where the installation of sidewalk in the right-of-way would result in a planting strip less than five(5) feet in width, the sidewalk may be wholly or partially located in a pedestrian access easement adjacent and parallel to the right-of-way. Any necessary utility easement in this circumstance shall be located adjacent and parallel to the pedestrian access easement on the side most distant from the right-of-way. Dual purpose easements for utility and pedestrian access easements shall be permitted. In commercial areas where wide sidewalks and tree wells may be used, no shade tree easement will be required if sufficient volume for a tree well is provided in accordance with §31.C. The shade tree easement is necessitated by such circumstances, the utility area for electricity and other cabling, as indicated in paragraph –G, above, shall be located between the curb and sidewalk or in a second easement between the shade tree easement and the building. The minimum width of the easement shall be ten (1) feet but shall be wide enough to accommodate the utilities proposed in the development in accordance with utility company requirements. [Ord. 0.1.10, 2/22/10]
2. A shade tree easement, as required in Exhibit 5, shall be granted to the Township for the purpose of providing adequate room for the planting of shade trees along public streets where such an area does not exist within the dedicated right-of-way.
3. Maintenance of all trees and other plantings within a shade tree easement shall be the responsibility of the property owner.
4. No property owner shall be permitted to cut down or otherwise remove a shade tree within a shade tree easement without first securing the permission of the Township.
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 151
Exhibit 6
Street Profiles For Deptford Township
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 152
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 153
I. Rights-of-Way.
1. The right-of-way shall be measured from lot line to lot line and shall be sufficiently wide to contain the cartway, curbs, shoulders, sidewalks, graded areas, and utilities. Right-of-way requirements are shown in Exhibit 5 and displayed graphically in the street profiles in Exhibit 6.
2. The right-of-way width of a new street that is a continuation of an existing street shall in no case be continued at a width less than the existing street.
3. The right-of-way shall reflect future development as indicated by the Master Plan.
4. Where development is proposed on an existing street which has less than the minimum required right-of-way as shown in Exhibit 5 of this chapter or in the Master Plan and/or the Official Map, the applicant shall offer a dedication of the additional right-of-way on his half of the street (from centerline) which would be required to meet the required right-of-way standard.
5. Culs-de-sac shall have a right-of-way radius of sixty (60) feet and a cartway radius of fifty (50) feet.
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 154
J. Lighting.
1. Lighting for safety shall be provided at intersections, along walkways, at entryways, between buildings, and in parking areas.
2. Street lights in residential areas must be installed at either end of all curves with a radius less than three hundred fifty (350) feet or an internal angle greater than thirty (30) degrees or at any location where there is a change in horizontal alignment.
3. Street lights in residential areas must be installed with a minimum foot candle of 1.0 over the full area of the intersection.
4. The maximum footcandle level should not exceed 0.25 footcandles over the right-of-way line.
5. The maximum height of residential street lighting standards shall not exceed the maximum building height permitted, or thirty (30) feet, whichever is less.
6. Light poles, if required, should be installed on the same side of a straight roadway in order to reinforce the direction of circulation alignment. A staggered layout should be discouraged.
7. If cobra head type of luminaire is proposed, the recessed cobra luminaires should be used whenever possible.
8. Light shields shall be placed on all lighting standards so as to provide proper lighting without hazard to drivers or nuisance to residents. The design of lighting standards shall be of a type appropriate to the development and the municipality.
K. Underground wiring.
1. All electric, telephone, television, and other communication facilities, both main and service lines servicing new developments, shall be provided by underground wiring within easements or dedicated public rights-of-way, and installed in accordance with the prevailing standards and practices of the utility or other companies providing such services.
2. Lots which abut existing easements or public rights-of-way where overhead electric or telephone distribution supply lines and service connections have heretofore been installed may be supplied with electric and telephone service from those overhead lines, but the service connections from the utilities' overhead lines shall be installed underground. In the case of existing overhead utilities, should a road widening, an extension of service, or other such condition occur as a result of the subdivision and necessitate the replacement or relocation of such utilities, such replacement or relocation shall be underground.
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 155
3. Year-round screening of any utility apparatus appearing above the surface of the ground, other than utility poles, shall be required.
L. Signs within rights-of-way.
1. Design and placement of traffic signs shall follow the requirements specified in Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways, published by the U. S. Department of Transportation and adopted by the N. J. Department of Transportation.
2. At least two (2) street name signs shall be placed at each four-way street intersection and one at each "T" intersection. Signs shall be installed under light standards and free of visual obstruction. The design of street name signs shall be consistent and of a uniform size and color appropriate to the community, and erected in accordance with Township standards.
3. Site information signs in planned developments shall follow a design theme related and complementary to other elements of the overall site design. See §30 for additional signage standards.
M. Sight triangles and sight distance.
1. Sight triangles in conformance with the Township's current standards as noted in §41. should be specified.
2. Sight distance conforming to New Jersey Department of Transportation standards should be provided. Sight distance is measured ten feet behind the proposed or future curb line based on an eye level of 3.5 feet and an object height of 4.25 feet. For a 30 mph design speed, 350 foot of sight distance should be provided.
N. Underdrains.
1. A piped underdrain system is required under roadways unless the applicant can demonstrate a well drained and dry subgrade. Cleanouts with traffic bearing covers should be provided at 250 foot intervals.
O. Street Names.
1. Proposed names for any new streets or for the extensions of existing streets must be approved by the Township's Tax Assessor.
§ 27. Off-street parking.
A. General regulations.
1. Every use, activity, or structure, in all zoning districts, shall provide sufficient space for access and off-street standing, parking, circulation, unloading, and
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 156
loading of motor vehicles in a quantity equal to not less than the sum of all applicable standards as provided for in this Section.
2. The provisions of this Section shall be complied with each time a use or structure is expanded or changed.
B. Design standards.
1. Every off-street parking space shall be provided with direct access to a street by means of an aisleway, driveway or similar paved, dustless, all weather surface. Parking spaces may not be stacked one behind another without such direct vehicular access. The parking space is intended to be sufficient to accommodate the exterior extremities of a vehicle, whether wheel blocks are installed within the parking space to prevent the bumper from overhanging one end of the space.
2. Each parking space shall be constructed of either a bituminous or Portland cement concrete surface, laid over a compacted gravel or crushed stone base course as per Township standards.
a. Areas of ingress or egress, loading and unloading, major circulation aisles and other areas likely to experience similar heavy traffic or truck traffic are to be constructed in accordance with the pavement standards for residential and minor collector streets (see Section 26.C.3.).
b. Parking stalls and areas likely to experience light traffic shall be paved with a minimum of a two (2) inch FABC Mix I-5 surface course on a three (3) inch bituminous stabilized base course.
c. Subgrade shall be compacted to a density not less than ninety-five (95) percent of the maximum density.
d. Rigid pavements (Portland Cement) shall be designed for the specific site. At a minimum, a six (6) inch reinforced slab over a six (6) inch dense graded aggregate is to be used.
3. The width and length of each parking space shall be measured perpendicular to each other regardless of the angle of the parking space to the access aisle or driveway. Each parking space shall not be less than eighteen (18) feet in length, nor less than nine (9) feet in width, provided however that:
a. Where the proposed use is likely to involve the circulation of shopping carts within the parking area, the width of the parking space shall be not less than ten (10) feet.
b. Parking for the Disabled. Spaces shall be in close proximity to the main entrance of the building and the number, location, size and marking of such spaces, shall conform to the design requirements required by the State of New Jersey "Barrier Free Design" (N.J.S.A. 52:32 12).
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 157
4. The width of an access aisle shall not be less than the following, however, where the angle of parking is different on both sides of the aisle, the larger aisle width shall prevail:
Angle of Parking One Way Aisle Two Way Aisle
90° 22 feet 24 feet
60° 18 feet 24 feet
45° 15 feet 24 feet
Parallel 12 feet 24 feet
5. The maximum gradient across any parking space shall not exceed six percent (6.0%).
6. No parking space, aisleway, or driveway (other than entrance and exit drives) may be located within twenty (20) feet of a public street. Individual district regulations may prescribe greater setbacks from public streets.
7. The center line of any access drive shall be set back from the street line of an intersecting street at least seventy-five (75) feet or one-half (1/2) the lot frontage, whichever is greater, except that in no case need the setback distance exceed two hundred (200) feet.
8. Continuous open driveways accessing single family residences in excess of sixteen (16) feet shall be prohibited.
9. All parking lots shall be connected to the use or structure which it is intended to serve by means of a sidewalk. A system of sidewalks and/or walkways shall be provided within parking lots of fifty (50) or more spaces to provide effective internal pedestrian circulation.
10. Any parking lot serving a use which typically provides shopping carts shall provide one (1) or more cart carrels for the return of the shopping carts.
11. Required off-street parking may be provided on a lot other than the lot which generates the parking demand provided that, at the closest point, the lots are within three hundred (300) feet of each other and that the remote parking lot is permanently controlled by the owner of the lot containing the parking generator.
12. For mixed-use developments, a shared parking approach to the provision of off-street parking shall be permitted following the methodology described in the publication Shared Parking (Urban Land Institute and Barton Aschman Associates, Inc., Urban Land Institute, 1984).
13. No parking shall be provided within five (5) feet of any structure.
14. All parking spaces shall be marked by painted lines, each at least four (4) inches in width and extending along the full length of the front and both sides of the space unless otherwise delineated by curbing. The painted line strip shall be
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 158
centered between two adjacent spaces and half the width of the painted strip may be included within the required size of the parking space.
C. Handicapped parking.
1. Every parking lot containing two (2) or more spaces shall provide handicapped parking spaces calculated according to the following schedule or in conformance with the N.J. Barrier Free Access Code, whichever is greater. Decimals resulting from the following calculations shall always be rounded up to the next highest whole number.
Total Parking Spaces Minimum Required Handicapped Spaces
2 - 19 spaces: One (1) space
20 - 49 spaces: Two (2) spaces
50 or more spaces Three (3) spaces plus an additional two percent
(2%) of the total parking spaces provided.
2. Handicapped spaces shall be located in close proximity to principal uses and shall be provided barrier free access to the same. Where multiple principal uses are to be served by a common parking lot, handicapped spaces shall be proportionately distributed through the parking lot.
3. Handicapped spaces shall be marked by both a "handicapped parking" sign and penalty sign, and by pavement markings as prescribed by the State of New Jersey.
D. Required off-street parking by use.
Decimals resulting from the following calculations shall always be rounded up to the next highest whole number. Square feet shall refer to gross leasable square feet or, if unknown, ninety percent (90%) of the gross square footage of the building. Outdoor garden centers or other typical outdoor display areas accessible to the general public should be included in the off-street parking calculation. Basements and attic areas which are used exclusively for storage may be calculated according to the standard for warehousing.
1. Dwelling unit, other than senior citizen: Two (2) spaces per unit.
2. Dwelling unit, senior citizen: One (1) space per unit.
3. Hotel, motel, inn, or boarding house: One (1) space per rental room plus one (1) space for each employee on the largest shift. A restaurant use which is open to the public shall be calculated separately.
4. Restaurant: One (1) space per every fifty (50) square feet of floor area devoted to patron use.
5. Church, synagogue, or other place of worship: One (1) space per every sixty (60) square feet of floor area devoted to patron use or one (1) space per every four (4)
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 159
permanently fixed seats. (When pews are used instead of individual seats, one (1) permanently fixed seat shall equal twenty-two (22) inches of a pew.)
6. Theater, lodge hall, funeral home, or similar place of assembly: One (1) space per every fifty (50) square feet of floor area devoted to patron use or one (1) space per every three (3) permanently fixed seats.
7. Retail store or personal service establishment, other than in a shopping center of one hundred thousand (100,000) or more square feet: Five (5) spaces for every one thousand (1,000) square feet.
8. Shopping center of one hundred thousand (100,000) or more square feet: Four and one-half (4.5) spaces for every one thousand (1,000) square feet.
9. Office, other than dental or medical office: Four and one-half (4.5) spaces for every one thousand (1,000) square feet.
10. Dental or medical office: Five and one-half (5.5) spaces for every one thousand (1,000) square feet.
11. Bank or office of a financial institution: Four and one-half (4.5) spaces for every one thousand (1,000) square feet.
12. Warehouse or distribution facility: One (1) space for every two thousand (2,000) square feet.
13. Industrial plant or laboratory: Two (2) spaces per every one thousand (1,000) square feet or one (1) space for every two (2) employees on the largest shift, whichever is greater.
14. Gasoline station, without service bays: One (1) space for every employee on the largest shift, but in no case less than three (3) spaces.
15. Automobile service facility with bays for maintenance or repair: One (1) space for every two (2) employees on the largest shift, plus four (4) spaces for each service bay.
16. Convalescent or nursing home: Three-quarters (0.75) spaces per bed.
17. Swimming clubs: Twenty-five (25) spaces per every one thousand (1,000) square feet of pool area.
18. Health Club or Spa: Seven (7) spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet.
19. School: nursery, elementary, or middle school; day care center: One (1) space per every employee plus two (2) spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area.
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 160
20. School: high school or trade school: One (1) space per every employee plus one-quarter (0.25) spaces per student.
21. Planned commercial developments: Four and one-half (4.5) spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet, except the required number of parking spaces may be reduced to four (4) spaces per one thousand (1,000) square ft. where complementary land uses permit shared parking pursuant to –B.12, above. [Ord. O.5.08, 4/7/08]
22. Health care facility, including associated medical offices and clinics: Four and one-half spaces for every one thousand (1,000) square feet, which may be reduced to no less than four spaces for every one thousand (1,000) feet pursuant to the provisions of –B.12, hereinabove. [Ord. O.3.14, 2/25/14]
E. Other building or use not specified: Adequate parking as determined by the board of jurisdiction. [Ord. O.5.08, 4/7/08]
F. Driveway Size.
1. Any structure must be accessible by means of a driveway that complies with the provisions of this Ordinance. Driveways shall be so laid out that it is possible to turn all vehicles on the lot and that it is not necessary to back any vehicle into a street, or any lot fronting on other than residential access streets.
2. Location of Driveways.
a. Design.
1) All entrance and exit driveways shall be located to afford maximum safety to traffic, provide for safe and convenient ingress and egress to and from the site, and to minimize conflict with the flow of traffic.
2) Any exit driveway or driveway lane shall be so designed in profile and grading and located to provide the following minimum sight distance measured in each direction. The measurements shall be from the driver's seat of a vehicle standing on that portion of the exit driveway that is immediately outside the edge of the road right-of-way.
Allowable Speed
Required Sight Distance in Feet
25 MPH
150
30 MPH
200
35 MPH
250
40 MPH
300
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 161
45 MPH
350
50 MPH
400
3) Where a site occupies a corner of two intersecting roads, no driveway entrance or exit shall be located within 50-feet of the point of tangency of the existing or proposed curb radius of that site.
4) No part of any nonresidential driveway shall be located within a minimum of ten feet of a side property line. However, the Planning Board may permit a driveway serving two or more adjacent sites to be located on or within ten feet of a side property line between the adjacent sites.
5) Where two or more driveways connect a single site to any one road, a minimum clear distance of 200-feet measured along the right-of-way line shall separate the closest edges of any two such driveways. Where such development fronts an arterial street, access to parking and service areas, where practicable, shall be provided by a single access to the arterial street.
Where a development fronts on a principal, major or minor arterial or a major collector, a combined one point of access and egress to parking and service areas shall be provided except where large frontages (1,000-feet or larger) are involved. In those instances where two or more driveways connect a single site to any one road, a minimum clear distance of 300-feet measured along the right-of-way line shall separate the closest edges of any two such driveways.
3. Driveway angle.
a. Two way operation: Driveways used for two way operation shall intersect the road at an angle to as near 90 degrees as site conditions will permit and in no case will be less than 60 degrees.
b. One way operation: Driveways used by vehicles in one direction of travel (right turn only) shall not form an angle smaller than 45 degrees with a road, unless acceleration and deceleration lanes are provided.
c. The required maximum and minimum driveway dimensions’ are indicated below. Driveways serving large volumes of daily traffic or traffic of over 15% truck traffic shall be required to utilize high to maximum dimensions.
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 162
One-way Operation
Driveway Width
(in feet)
Two-way Operation
Driveway Width
(in feet)
3-10 Family Residence
10-25
15-25
10 Family or over
15-25
20-35
Commercial or Industrial
15-30
25-35
* All driveways shall be five feet wider at the curb line and this additional width shall be maintained for a distance of 20-feet into the site.
§ 28. Off-Street loading.
A. Off-street loading shall be provided as follows.
1. Off-street loading berths shall be provided in accordance with the following schedule:
Gross Square Footage Gross Square Footage At
At Which First Off-Street Which Each Additional
Use Loading Berth is Required Loading Berth is Required
Manufacturing and Warehouse 5,000 40,000
Storage 10,000 25,000
Commercial, Wholesale 10,000 40,000
Commercial, Retail 10,000 20,000
Service Establishment 10,000 40,000
Restaurant 10,000 25,000
Office or Bank 10,000 100,000
Hotel 10,000 100,000
School 10,000 100,000
Hospitals and Nursing Homes 10,000 100,000
Auditoriums and Arenas 10,000 100,000
2. Notwithstanding the schedule above, at least one (1) off-street loading space [ten (10) feet wide and twenty-five (25) feet long] should be designated for all non-residential uses or residential uses such as nursing homes which receive or deliver shipments of goods. The Planning Board may require additional loading spaces based upon the applicant's testimony at the time of site plan approval.
B. Design standards.
1. Off-street loading shall be either a bituminous or Portland cement concrete surface laid over a compacted gravel or crushed stone base course as per the standards of the Township Engineer.
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 163
2. The standard off-street loading berth shall be fourteen (14) feet wide, sixty (60) feet deep, and shall have an apron area of sixty (60) feet. This yields a dock approach area of one hundred twenty (120) feet. The berth shall have a vertical clearance of fifteen (15) feet.
3. The Planning Board may reduce the off-street loading requirement for offices, small retail stores, and similar uses to a space ten (10) feet wide and twenty-five (25) feet long upon testimony that deliveries will be principally by means of a van or similar small truck.
4. The standard off-street loading berth (14' x 60') shall be provided only in a side or rear yard and shall be screened from the view of public streets and adjacent residential uses or districts.
5. Off-street loading areas shall not be used for the collection of trash or refuse.
C. Commercial drive-through customer service stacking areas.
1. Every commercial facility providing drive-through customer service areas shall provide a stacking lane, ten (10) feet wide by one hundred twenty (120) feet long, for each window, door, canopy, or similar drive-through facility.
2. Each stacking lane shall be provided entirely on the lot of the subject facility and shall not occur within twenty (20) feet of a street or property line.
3. The stacking lane shall not block or cross normal vehicular or pedestrian circulation patterns.
4. A bypass route should be provided for vehicles exiting the stacking lane.
§ 29. Lighting.
A. Street lighting of a type supplied by the utility company and of a type and number approved by the Planning Board shall be provided for all street intersections and along all arterial, collector and local streets and anywhere else deemed necessary for safety reasons. Wherever electric utility installations are required to be underground, the applicant shall provide for underground service for street lighting. Specific street lighting standards for residential areas are provided in §26.
B. All parking areas and walkways thereto and appurtenant passageways and driveways serving commercial, public, office, multi-family residential or other uses having common off-street parking and/or loading areas shall be adequately illuminated for security and safety purposes. The lighting plan in and around the parking areas shall provide for nonglare lights focused downward.
C. Standards for illumination.
1. The minimum level of lighting in any portion of the parking lot shall be not less than one-quarter (0.25) foot candles. The average level of lighting within the parking lot shall be not less than one-half (0.5) foot candles. The maximum level
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 164
of lighting in any portion of the parking lot shall be not greater than two (2) foot candles.
2. The minimum level of lighting in along any portion of walkway not part of a parking lot shall be not less than one-half (0.5) foot candles. The maximum level of lighting along any portion of walkway not part of a parking lot shall be not greater than two (2.0) foot candles.
3. The level of lighting at all intersections between access drives and streets shall be not less than one (1.0) foot candles.
4. The maximum level of lighting on any non-residential site in the Township shall be fifteen (15) footcandles for specific uses where visual tasks are performed or where security is a concern.
5. The maximum level of lighting on any residential site in the Township shall be ten (10) footcandles for specific uses where visual tasks are performed or where security is a concern.
D. All lighting fixtures shall be shielded so that all light is contained on the subject property and does not spill over to adjacent properties. Any outdoor lighting shall be shown on the lighting plan in sufficient detail to allow a determination of the effects upon adjacent properties, traffic safety and overhead sky glow. The objectives of these specifications is to minimize undesirable off-premise effects. To achieve these requirements, the intensity of such light sources, the light shielding and similar characteristics shall be subject to site plan approval.
E. Lighting standards shall not exceed a height of twenty-five (25) feet in non-residential districts. Bollard lighting is encouraged for pedestrian walkways.
§ 30. Signs. [Ord. O.24.10, 12/6/10]
A. Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this section is to encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication, to maintain an aesthetically pleasing environment and the Township's ability to attract economic development and growth, to protect and improve pedestrian and vehicular safety, to minimize the potential adverse effects of signs on nearby public and private property, to protect the expressive rights of all persons within the scope of applicable law and to enable the fair and consistent application of the regulations contained herein.
B. Relation to Unified Development Ordinance. Signs shall be permitted as accessory uses and structures in all zoning districts within the jurisdiction of this Ordinance. Signs may be used, erected, maintained, altered, relocated, removed, or demolished only in compliance with the provisions of this section and any and all other ordinances and regulations of the municipality relating to the use, erection, maintenance, alteration, moving, or removal of signs or similar devices. Sign definitions are found in §2 of this Ordinance. In the event of conflicting regulations, the most restrictive shall apply.
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 165
C. Sign Permit. A sign permit shall be required for the installation or alteration of all signs, unless exempted from such requirements under §30.I of this section, in accordance with the following requirements:
1. Application requirements. All applications for sign permits shall be made to the Zoning Officer on forms provided by the municipality. All applications shall be signed by the owner of the sign and the property owner on whose premises the sign is to be erected, or duly authorized agent. All applications shall contain a sketch of the proposed sign, drawn to scale, the area of the sign, and the location where the sign will be attached to a building or a plot plan showing the location of the proposed sign with dimensions to the nearest building and lot lines, depending on the type of sign. A color photograph, no smaller than 2" x 3" or larger than 8" x 10" shall be submitted for each existing sign on the premises. All applications shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee. Such fee and sign application shall be in addition to any fee and application required pursuant to Chapter X, Building and Housing, of the Code of the Township of Deptford. For purposes of this section, the Zoning Officer shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the sign permit application in accordance with the time requirements of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-18. The issuance of a sign permit shall allow the applicant to apply for a building permit, should a building permit be required for the sign installation by the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23-1 et seq.).
2. Sign permit invalidation. Any of the following events or actions shall cause a sign permit to be invalidated:
a. An invalidation of a Certificate of Occupancy for the use to which the sign relates.
b. An alteration in the area of a sign, the shape of a sign or structure of the sign support.
c. Vacation of the premises by the user to which the sign relates.
d. Abandonment pursuant to §30.C.4 of this section.
3. Effect of invalidation.
a. For a period of not more than six months, a sign may continue to be displayed once its permit has become invalid provided the property is being actively marketed for a new owner or tenant. In any other instance, the sign shall be removed within thirty (30) days of the permit invalidation. Internally illuminated box signs shall be considered to meet the requirement for removal if the message is turned to face the interior of the box. At no time shall the lighting elements of the sign box be visible to passersby.
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 166
b. It shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance for each and every day that a sign with an expired permit is displayed. In addition to the remedies stated above, signs which continue to be displayed in violation of this Ordinance shall be subject to removal and the owner shall be liable for the full costs of such removal and disposal.
4. Abandonment. If a sign advertises a business, service, commodity, accommodation, attraction, or other enterprise or activity that is no longer operating or being offered or conducted for a period of time greater than six (6) months, that sign shall be considered abandoned and shall, within thirty (30) days after such abandonment, be completely removed by the sign owner, owner of the property where the sign is located, or other party having control over such sign. In this context, a seasonal business such as a farm stand shall be considered operational even though closed for a period not to exceed nine (9) months.
D. Sign Area Calculation. For the purposes of this section, "sign area" shall mean the area expressed in square feet, within a rectangle enclosing the extreme limits of writing, symbols, logos, letters, figures, emblems, or other representations plus all material or color forming an integral part of the sign or used to differentiate the sign from the background against which it is placed, provided that:
1. In the event a sign is designed with more than one face, the area shall be computed by including only the maximum surface display area of one face, provided that the message is the same on each face. For round, triangular or other non-standard signs, the size shall be computed by the area that may be viewed from one vantage point expressed as a single plane, provided that;
1. The supports, uprights, skirting or other structure on which any sign is attached or supported shall not be included in the calculation of sign area unless such structure is designed in such a manner as to form an integral part of the sign or conveys meaning;
2. The area of lamps, neon tubing, or other artificial illumination visible on a sign face shall be counted as part of the total allowable sign area. The area of lamps trained on a sign to provide external illumination, however, shall not be included in this calculation.
E. Illumination. Signs exempt from permits in accordance with §30.I shall not be illuminated, unless specifically permitted. Any other sign may be illuminated, unless otherwise prohibited. Illuminated signs shall conform to the following provisions:
1. Where illuminated signs are permitted and approved, illumination may be provided by fluorescent tubes or compact fluorescent bulbs, LED spotlights or internal illumination, metal halide, mercury-vapor, or quantum dot lamps, but not incandescent bulbs. Neon, LED tube lights or similar lighting types shall not be permitted as a means of illumination. Regardless of the type of illumination employed, all illuminated signs shall be properly shielded and so located as to
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 167
prevent glare or blinding effects upon motorists or cause a nuisance to residents on the premises of their home in the nearby vicinity of the sign lighting.
2. Signs capable of illumination shall be turned off between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following morning, unless the business or uses advertised are open to the public later than 10:00 p.m. or earlier than 7:00 a.m., in which event any such establishment may keep a sign illuminated during business hours, only.
F. Maintenance. All signs shall be maintained in good order with periodic painting, repairs and cleaning. In the event that the Zoning Officer of the municipality determines that any sign has fallen into a state of disrepair, has become dilapidated or constitutes a safety hazard, the sign owner and property owner shall be given written notice to correct the condition within thirty (30) days from the date of the mailing of the notice. Failure to correct the condition or file an appeal within the time provided shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance. The Township shall have the right to recover from said owner the full costs of the removal and disposal of such signs should the owner fail to heed the correction notice. Signs shall conform to the requirements of the Uniform Construction Code and any property maintenance code of the municipality.
G. General Provisions.
1. Items of information. Permanent freestanding signs and wall signs closer than thirty-five (35) feet to the right-of-way of a principal arterial, secondary arterial or collector road as indicated on the Circulation Map of the Master Plan shall not contain more than nine (9) items of information.
2. Official sign imitation. No sign shall be erected that is of such character, form, shape or color that it imitates or resembles any official traffic sign, signal or device, when placed in a location or setting ordinarily used to give official vehicular directional information and is likely to confuse motorists. Viewpoint signs characterized by parody content under §30.I.13 are exempted from this restriction.
3. Permitted uses. No sign shall be erected containing a message that states or implies that a property may be used for any purpose not permitted in the zoning district or by duly authorized variance in which said sign is located under the provisions of this Ordinance.
4. Prohibited placement. No sign shall be placed on any tree, telegraph, electric light, or public utility pole, or upon rocks or other natural features, or within a public right-of-way, except as permitted in sub-paragraphs -5 and -6, below. Signs placed illegally in such locations shall be subject to removal by the municipality.
5. Public property and rights-of-way. Any sign installed or placed on public property, except in conformance with the requirements of this section, shall be forfeited to the public and subject to removal. In addition to other remedies that
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 168
may be imposed under this Ordinance, the municipality shall have the right to recover from the owner or person placing such sign the full costs of removal and disposal of such sign. No sign other than traffic control or similar official governmental signs shall be erected within or project over the right-of-way of any public street or sidewalk, except as otherwise provided. Any sign located along the right-of-way of a State or Federal highway shall comply with any more restrictive requirements of the State and Federal government.
6. Street numbering. Street numbering shall be required for every dwelling unit and non-residential building. Residential uses shall be identified with numbers of lettering at least four (4) inches in height. Non-residential uses shall be identified with numbering or letters at least six (6) inches in height. Such signage shall not be included in the sign area nor sign number limitations. Street numbering shall be located within three (3) feet of the main entrance, on a mailbox or lamppost on the same lot as the building, or incorporated into an approved freestanding sign.
7. Corporate franchise signs. Signs identifying franchise operations or corporation logos shall conform to the criteria for all other signs in the Township of Deptford.
8. Planned development. Whenever planned development is proposed, the Board of Jurisdiction may approve a comprehensively designed signage plan with coordinated colors, styles, sizes, setbacks and allowed number of signs that deviate from the requirements of this section in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45a and -65c.
9. Relief and sign face distance. Excepting viewpoint signs under §30.I.13, no sign shall contain characters or graphics exceeding three (3) inches in relief from the sign face. The maximum distance between the faces of a double-faced sign shall not exceed twenty-four (24) inches. No wall sign shall project more than twelve (12) inches from the plane of the attaching surface.
10. Sight distance and visual impediment. No sign shall be erected within the clear sight distance triangle as otherwise established in this Ordinance, unless the topmost portion of such sign is less than thirty (30) inches high. In no case shall any sign be so erected that it impedes the vision of motorists or pedestrians in the course of driving or walking in such a manner that it endangers their safety or the safety of others.
11. Unlawful cutting of trees or shrubs. No person may, for the purpose of increasing or enhancing the visibility of a sign, damage, trim, destroy, or remove any trees, shrubs, or other vegetation located:
a. Within the right-of-way of any public street or road, unless the work is done pursuant to an approved site plan or subdivision plat.
b. On property that is not under the ownership or control of the person undertaking or responsible for such work, unless the work is done
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 169
pursuant to the express authorization of the person owning the property where such trees or shrubs are located and is not otherwise in violation of this Section and Section 31 of the Ordinance.
c. In any area where such landscaping is required to remain under any Board approval or permit issued under this Ordinance or other Ordinance of the municipality.
12. Design standards. The guidelines for the design of signs are contained in this sub-section. Any relief required from this sub-section shall be pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-51.
a. Signs should strengthen the architectural diversity of the municipality's buildings. Signs which obscure or are of a different architectural style than the building's architecture should be avoided. Signs should be integrated with a building's architecture in terms of form, materials, color, and size.
b. Signs should be appropriate for the era in which the building was constructed.
c. Signs should not alter the way in which a building functions.
d. Designers should strive for creativity in the form and variety of signage within the size limitations set forth herein.
e. Designers are strongly encouraged to include symbols, images, and other graphic objects to convey the type of establishment using the sign.
f. The typeface used to represent words should convey the character of the establishment and the era of the building.
g. Contrast. The contrast of a sign's lettering and symbols with its background should be disparate to convey legibility.
h. The background of internally illuminated signs should not be lighted but only the individual letters, logos, or symbols that convey the sign's message.
i. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the municipal, county, state or federal government.
H. Prohibited Signs. All signs not permitted by this Ordinance are hereby prohibited, with the following signs specifically prohibited, unless they are viewpoint signs (see §30.I.13) and comply with –H.5, –H.6, –H.8, –H.10 and –H.16, below:
1. Flashing, blinking, occulting, twinkling, animated, moving, or projected signs of any type, with the exception of advisory information displays as otherwise
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 170
permitted, and commercial or institutional holiday displays erected and operating for a period not to exceed forty-five (45) days.
2. Banners, pennants, streamers, pinwheels and similar devices; balloon signs and other inflated signs and searchlights displayed for the purpose of attracting the attention of pedestrians and motorists.
3. Portable signs, including vehicle signs, unless otherwise excepted. Vehicle signs shall not include signage on commercially licensed vehicles with current vehicle registration used in the normal course of business and legally parked or garaged at the business, owner’s or employees’ premises.
4. Signs which emit smoke, visible vapors or particles, sound or odor.
5. Signs that emit electromagnetic radiation outside the wavelengths of visible light which is measurable beyond the property boundary.
6. Signs which cause interference with radio, two-way radio, television or mobile telephone reception, motor vehicle or computer wireless signal transmission, or with medical devices.
7. Any sign attached or affixed to the roof of a building, or a wall sign that projects above the lowest level of a roof or beyond the corner of a wall.
8. Any sign which:
a. the average person, applying contemporary community standards would find that the sign, taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest; and
b. hat the sign depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way, sexual conduct specifically defined by the applicable state law; and
c. that the sign, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value.
9. Signs which attempt to imitate or otherwise cause confusion with existing signs erected by any governmental board, body or agency, excepting viewpoint signs whose content is based on parody.
10. Any sign so erected, constructed, or maintained as to obstruct any fire escape, window, door, or other opening used as a means of ingress and egress or which prevents adequate light and air to the interior of any building, or which obstructs the access of firefighters or other emergency personnel to a premises.
11. A series of two or more signs placed in a line parallel to a street each of which comprises a part of a single commercial message or clause thereof.
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 171
12. Signs attached, affixed or painted on trees, fences, utility poles, light poles, signs attached to other signs. This subsection shall not be construed to prohibit the placement of directional signs which identify the general location of parking areas in large parking lots or to communicate an emergency or hazard to persons upon the premises.
13. Off-premise signs with a commercial message, the predominating content of which directs attention to an off-premises business unrelated to the business premises upon which the sign is located, and the sign is erected in addition to other or existing commercial signage upon the same premises; or, if it is erected upon non-commercial premises, unless otherwise excepted.
14. Billboards and billboard-type commercial displays, whether of permanent, semi-permanent, or mobile construction, except where zoned as a permitted use or by approved variance application and subsequent approved site plan.
15. Signs where the message is changed by electronic or electro-mechanical means, excepting advisory information signs.
16. Any sign which is in disrepair so as to constitute blight, or any sign which is unstable, insecure or otherwise defective so as to present a hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic or to entrants upon the premises.
I. Signs Allowed Without Permit. The following signs shall be allowed without the issuance of a permit:
1. Emergency. Emergency warning signs erected by a governmental agency, public utility, pipeline company, telecommunications company, public carrier or duly authorized contractor. Such signs may be illuminated.
2. Flags. Any non-commercial viewpoint sign that is a flag or pennant may be displayed or flown, provided that such flag shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet in area and shall not be flown from a pole that exceeds forty (40) feet in height. No provision of this section shall be held applicable to flags, banners or pennants used or displayed as a means of non-commercial viewpoint communication by any person attending parades, rallies, demonstrations, or other activities of non-commercial viewpoint expression. For commercial and non-profit institutional uses no more than five (5) flags shall be flown or suspended from poles along any frontage of a property. Flags displayed inside windows or flags of two (2) square feet of sign area or less shall be exempted from these restrictions. Any other flags shall be considered freestanding signs and shall be governed by such regulations that may apply in the applicable zoning district in which such flag is located. Flags may be illuminated.
3. Governmental. Signs posted by governmental agencies.
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 172
4. Historic markers. Historic tablets, cornerstones, memorial plaques and emblems which are installed or installed under the direction of government agencies or civil or religious organizations, provided that the sign does not exceed eight (8) square feet in area.
5. Incidental signs. Non-illuminated or internally illuminated incidental signs. Any such sign shall not exceed two (2) square feet in area.
6. Name and Address. Name and address signs attached to the façade or door of a building, lamp post or on a mailbox, provided that the size of the sign does not exceed one and a half (1½) square foot. Address numbers and letters shall be a minimum height of four (4) inches for residential uses, except that buildings in apartment complexes shall meet the non-residential requirement. Non-residential uses shall have minimum number and letter heights of six (6) inches.
7. Public notice. Any sign providing public notice required by a valid and applicable federal, state, or local law, regulation, court order or ordinance.
8. Public transportation. Signs indicating public transportation stops when installed by the municipality or a public transportation operating entity.
9. Temporary signs pursuant to the requirements of §30.J, with the exception of banner signs over public rights-of-way.
10. Traffic control. Temporary and permanent traffic signs and signals installed by the municipality, county and state for the purpose of directing and regulating the flow of traffic.
11. Trespassing and warning. Trespassing signs; signs indicating the private nature of a road, driveway, or premises; and signs prohibiting or otherwise controlling the fishing or hunting upon particular premises, and signs warning of a hazard or risk to entrants upon a particular premises, provided that the sign area shall not exceed two (2) square feet.
12. Vending. Illuminated and non-illuminated signs which are an integral part of vending machines, including motor fuel pumps.
13. Viewpoint. A viewpoint sign shall conform to the following requirements:
a. Viewpoint signs in residential zones shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet, the dimension shall not exceed four (4) feet on any side and they shall not exceed six (6) feet in height. The total sign area of the total array or assemblage of signs or expressive décor upon a premise shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet.
b. Viewpoint signs shall be permitted in all other zones provided that such signs do not exceed the dimensions or total sign area otherwise permitted for commercial signage upon the premises.
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 173
c. Such signs shall be exempt from the requirement limiting the number of items of information as otherwise required; the style and design standards, type size, changeable copy, setback and quantity requirements; all content regulations within the scope of protected speech; and any other requirements in conflict with federal and state common law protecting expressive activity and viewpoint communication.
d. Any viewpoint sign installed or placed on public property including public rights-of-way, excepting such public property which the Township may designate for such use, shall be forfeited to the public and subject to removal and no viewpoint sign shall be placed upon private property except with the consent of the owner or tenant.
e. Viewpoint signs shall not be constructed, held, installed or erected so as to present a hazard to the safe transit of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to impede the free and safe ingress or egress from any premises.
f. Any portable viewpoint sign or display, although unrestricted as to style, design, dimensions, or content, shall at all times be under the firm and secure control of the operator(s), or be otherwise secured so as to not present a hazard to persons or property.
g. Viewpoint signs may be illuminated subject to the conditions of subparagraph -e above.
J. Temporary Signs. Temporary signs as indicated below shall be allowed without the need to first obtain a sign permit, provided that the following regulations are met:
1. Contractor’s signs. Temporary signs of contractors, mechanics, painters, and/or artisans, shall be permitted during the period of work on the lot on which the contracting work is being performed. Contracting signs shall conform to the size limitations for real estate signs. They shall be removed within seven (7) days of the completion of the work to which the sign relates. Pursuant to §30.G.5, no contracting sign shall be placed within a public-right-of-way. Signs placed illegally in such locations shall be subject to removal by the municipality.
2. Grand opening, under new management, business relocation, bankruptcy and final closing signs. Grand opening, “under new management”, business relocation and bankruptcy, final closing/liquidation signs shall be permitted for a period of time not to exceed thirty (30) days from the initial opening of a new business or a change in the ownership or tenancy of the premises on which the sign is located. Bankruptcy and final closing/liquidation signs shall be permitted for the duration of the pendency of a bankruptcy proceeding with respect to a particular premise, or as directed by the Bankruptcy Court. Grand opening, bankruptcy and final closing signs may be wall signs, freestanding signs, or banners. Business relocation or “Under New Management” signs may be wall or window signs. All signs shall not exceed the total sign area permitted on the premises for permanent
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 174
wall signs. Relocation signs shall be permitted in addition to any permanent signage allowed. Relocation signs shall be restricted to the present location of the relocating business and the future location of the relocating business. No provision herein shall be construed to operate in conflict with any supervening federal or state statute, or administrative regulations pertaining to bankruptcy or business liquidations.
3. Project development. One sign announcing the name of the project developer, architects, engineers, contractors, and/or financing institution shall be permitted at a site under construction, alteration or repair, provided the sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area. The sign shall be removed before any certificate of occupancy is issued for non-residential uses and when seventy-five percent (75%) of the certificate of occupancies for residential uses has been issued. Such signs shall be exempt from the requirement limiting the number of items of information as otherwise required.
4. Public functions. Signs advertising public functions; providing public service or information; or any events for non-commercial purposes shall be permitted for a period of thirty (30) days prior to and during the event and shall be removed within five (5) days after the event. The sign may be erected either on the premises of the event or as a banner, provided that the location of the banner is approved by the governmental authority with jurisdiction if suspended over a public right-of-way. A sign erected on the premises shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet and eight (8) feet in height. Banners may project over a right-of-way provided that the lowest edge of the sign is a minimum of seventeen (17) feet six (6) inches above the highest part of the cartway. Banners over a right-of-way shall not exceed sixty (60) square feet in area.
5. Real estate. One real estate sign announcing the sale, rental or lease of the premises on which the sign is located shall be permitted per street frontage. The maximum size of the sign shall be in accordance with the following schedule:
Residential zones excluding multi-family zones: 6 sf.
Commercial zones and multi-family residential zones: 32 sf.
Industrial zones: 32 sf.
All real estate signs shall be removed within seven (7) days after closing or settlement on said property or the execution of the lease.
Off-tract directional real estate signs identifying an open house shall also be permitted. Signs may not exceed three (3) square feet per side. Signs shall only be installed with the consent of the property owner(s). Signs may be installed for a period of time up to twelve (12) hours preceding the open house and shall be removed the same day. Pursuant to §30.G.5, no real estate sign shall be placed
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 175
within a public-right-of-way. Signs placed illegally in such locations shall be subject to removal by the municipality.
6. Special events. Special event signs in conjunction with a temporary use permit issued by the Township Council. Such signs shall be permitted for the duration of the temporary use permit.
7. Window signs. Window signs and other signs located within the outer face of a building and visible to the outside shall be permitted, provided that all of the signs individually or collectively do not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of all available window space or ten percent (10%) of the total façade area, whichever is less. Window signs may be displayed for a period of time not to exceed two (2) months. No window sign, excepting a business relocation sign or real estate sign shall be permitted whenever the subject premises ceases to be occupied by a tenant, owner, or other entity.
8. Yard and garage sale signs. Yard and garage sale signs shall not exceed four square feet in area and four (4) feet in height; shall not be erected more than seven (7) days prior to such sale; and shall be removed within forty-eight (48) hours after the event has ceased. No premise shall be permitted to erect such signs more than two (2) times in any calendar year. No more than eight (8) signs shall be permitted to be installed. No sign shall be attached to a utility pole or traffic sign or signal. Signs may be placed on private property with the permission of the land owner.
K. Sign Regulations by Type of Sign. The following regulations pertain to specific types of signs used for non-residential purposes. In addition to these regulations, where the signs are allowed and other standards specific to individual zoning districts are found in §30.L.
1. Advisory information sign requirements. Advisory information signs shall comply with the following requirements:
a. Advisory information signs shall be permitted in any district in which commercial uses are permitted, provided that they do not encompass more than twenty percent (20%) of the allowable sign area for the type of sign, upon which they are placed, not to exceed four (4) sf. in sign area.
b. Advisory information signs shall be permitted in addition to any other allowable signage for the property.
c. The advisory information display may alternate, provided that the period of time that one display is shown is not less than one second.
2. Awning sign requirements. Awning signs, where permitted, shall comply with the following provisions and any more specific regulations in this section:
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 176
a. An awning sign shall only be permitted in lieu of an allowed wall sign, except as permitted in subparagraph -e, below.
b. Sign letters shall be aligned with the lower edge of the awning and shall not extend higher than the vertical flap or one-fifth of the arc of the curve, whichever may be the case, but in no event shall the lettering height exceed nine (9) inches.
c. Company logos or symbols may be placed on the sloped portion or upper curved area of the awning.
d. For the purposes of this subsection, the sign area shall be the total of the lettering and logo or symbol, computed separately, in accordance with §30.D.
e. An awning sign that is part of an entrance canopy, where the long axis of the canopy is perpendicular to the face of the building, may be used in conjunction with a wall sign. The sides of the canopy may be lettered as permitted in subparagraph -b, above, except that any lettering shall be no higher than six (6) inches. The end of a canopy that is parallel with the façade of the building shall be permitted a sign or symbol not exceeding twenty (20) square feet in area.
3. Changeable copy sign requirements. Changeable copy signs, where permitted, shall comply with the following provisions and any more specific regulations in this section:
a. Changeable copy signs shall be allowed only as an integral part of a freestanding or wall sign. The area of a changeable copy sign shall be included in the sign area calculation for the freestanding or wall sign and shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total sign area, excepting movie theater marquee signs.
b. Changeable copy signs shall not be permitted on temporary or portable signage.
c. Copy shall not be changed more than once every twenty-four (24) hours, excepting advisory information displays. Changeable copy signs that are changed more frequently shall be considered animated signs and consequently prohibited.
d. Changeable copy signs may not be located in any residential zoning district, excepting institutional uses in such districts.
e. The maximum number of lines of changeable copy shall be four (4) lines.
f. The minimum height of changeable copy letters shall be four (4) inches.
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 177
g. No changeable copy sign, excepting advisory information signs, shall be changed by electronic or electro-mechanical means.
4. Directional sign requirements. Directional signs shall comply with the following requirements:
a. Directional signs for indicating the path of pedestrian or vehicular traffic from a public street shall meet the following regulations:
1) The sign shall not be located within fifty (50) feet of the tract perimeter.
2) The sign shall be freestanding.
3) Such signs shall be exempt from the limitation on items of information for pedestrians systems and for motorists if located at a stop or yield sign.
4) Any such sign shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area or six (6) feet in height.
5) Such signs are intended for large retail, office park, research and development, and institutional complexes but may be appropriate in other circumstances as approved by the Board of Jurisdiction.
5. Directory sign requirements. Directory signs shall comply with the following requirements:
a. The sign shall be located within the site or complex so as to allow motorists to leave the flow of traffic and safely read the directory; or, shall be placed at the main entrance to a building.
b. The sign shall contain a site map or floor plan diagram, as the case may be, indicating the location of the buildings or offices listed on the directory.
c. Any such sign shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in sign area for building mounted signs and sixteen (16) square feet in area for freestanding signs.
d. A freestanding directory sign shall not exceed six (6) feet in height.
e. Directory signs shall be exempt from the limitation on items of information established in §30.G.1.
6. Freestanding sign requirements. Freestanding signs, where permitted, shall comply with the following provisions and any more specific regulations herein:
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 178
a. The sign area limitations and requirements in Table 30.1 shall apply to all freestanding signs (minimum letter height shall apply to the primary message on the sign):
Table 30.1 Freestanding Sign Area.
No. of
Travel
Lanes
Posted
Speed
Limit
(MPH)
Maximum Sign Area
Minimum
Letter
Height*
No Residential Use Abutting Side Yard or Across the Street
Residential Use Abutting Side Yard
2-3
0-25
50 sf.
30 sf.
5 in.
26-45
75 sf.
40 sf.
8 in.
46+
100 sf.
50 sf.
12 in.
4-5
0-45
60 sf.
40 sf.
10 in.
46+
120 sf.
80 sf.
15 in.
6 or More
0-45
75 sf.
50 sf.
11 in.
46+
150 sf.
100 sf.
16 in.
* - Of the primary message on the sign.
b. Bonus for individual letter sign types. The sign area limitations in §30.K.6.a may be increased by ten percent (10%) when the message consists of individual back lighted letters or symbols.
c. No freestanding sign; except directional signs, real estate signs and viewpoint signs; shall be permitted if the building line is less than thirty-five (35) feet from the street line.
d. No freestanding sign or any part thereof shall be located closer than ten (10) feet to any lot line, excepting directional signs. Within specific zoning districts a greater setback may be required.
e. Any new freestanding commercial sign shall be a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from any existing adjacent freestanding sign, excepting directional, directory and temporary signs.
f. Freestanding signs; except directional signs, directory signs, real estate signs and viewpoint signs; shall be permitted only in a front yard.
g. No freestanding sign shall block the view of any existing signs. All signs shall be placed in a location which will allow sufficient reaction time for drivers on the adjacent road(s) to safely exit the street into the entrance driveway or roadway to the site.
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 179
h. No freestanding sign, except viewpoint signs and real estate signs, shall be directed towards a street from which the property does not have direct access.
i. Freestanding signs shall not exceed a height of twelve (12) feet and may be lower for specific freestanding sign types and in particular zoning districts.
j. Freestanding signs, excepting directional signs, shall be skirted to enclose the supporting pole or pylon of the sign. The skirting shall extend the full dimensions of the sign at its lower edge from ground to sign. The skirting shall not be included in the sign size calculation unless it displays a message.
k. The base of the freestanding sign shall be liberally landscaped with a combination of shrubs, ground cover, flowers, or other plant material.
7. Menu sign requirements. The following menu signs shall be permitted.
a. Wall-mounted. Restaurants or other eating establishments, taverns and bars may erect one (1) menu sign at each main entrance up to a total of two (2) signs. Each shall sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area.
b. Drive-thru. Restaurants with a drive-thru facility shall be permitted two freestanding menu signs oriented to the motorist in the drive-thru lane. Any such sign shall not be legible from the public right-of-way. Each sign shall not exceed sixty-four (64) square feet in area and eight (8) feet in height.
8. Off-premise sign requirements. Off-premise signs, where permitted, shall comply with the size and location limitations for freestanding signs, unless otherwise modified.
9. Projecting sign requirements. Projecting signs shall comply with the following requirements.
a. The minimum height clearance of the lower edge of any such sign shall be nine (9) feet.
b. The minimum distance between any edge of the sign and a building façade shall be six (6) inches.
c. The maximum distance of any portion of the sign from the building façade shall be six (6) feet, six (6) inches.
d. The face of a projecting sign shall be mounted perpendicular to the building façade or if mounted at the corner of a building, one hundred thirty-five degrees (135º) of the horizontal plane of façade.
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 180
e. No projecting sign shall be suspended over a public or private right-of-way unless approved by the Board of Jurisdiction with appropriate public safety protections.
10. Wall sign requirements. Wall signs shall comply with the following provisions.
a. Size Limitation. Unless otherwise modified herein, no wall sign shall exceed five percent (5%) of the total façade area to which it is attached. Additional limitations may apply in a specific zoning district.
b. One wall sign per building, ground level store in a shopping center, or establishment in a business or industrial park shall be permitted. Where the building is located on a corner lot, a second wall sign shall be permitted provided:
1) The message is the same on both signs;
2) The sign does not face a limited access highway.
b. Location on buildings. The placement of wall signs shall be as follows:
1) Above the first floor windows; or
2) Below a parapet, mansard roof, or pent roof; or
3) Beside the main entrance.
4) No wall sign shall be permitted on the rear façade of a building except for name and address signs, and incidental signs, if no public access is provided.
c. Bonus for individual letter sign types. The sign area limitations in §30.K.10.a may be increased by ten percent (10%) when the message consists of individual letters or symbols and by twenty percent (20%) when the message consists of individual back lighted letters or symbols.
L. Sign Regulations by Zoning Districts. In addition to these regulations, other standards specific to the type of sign also apply (see §30.K).
1. Signs Permitted in the R-6, R-6A, R-10, R-10A, R-20, R-40, AR-1, and AR-2 Districts.
a. Any sign allowed without permit, pursuant to §30.I.
b. Residential uses. One freestanding development sign for each collector or arterial roadway that provides access to the neighborhood or residential complex, provided that:
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 181
1) The sign is owned and maintained by a homeowner's or condominium association, or other duly constituted organization approved by the Board of Jurisdiction; or, the sign is owned by a private entity with responsibility for maintenance.
2) Each sign shall not exceed a height of five (5) feet and shall meet the size limitations for freestanding signs (see Table 30.1).
3) At an approved rental or sales office, one freestanding non-illuminated sign shall be permitted not to exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area and more than five (5) feet in height. Such sign shall be removed with the removal of the temporary office.
4) Real estate signs.
c. Commercial uses. One freestanding sign not to exceed ten (10) square feet in area or four (4) feet in height and one directory sign attached to the façade of the building.
d. Agricultural uses. Agricultural uses with farm stands may have two (2) freestanding signs, each not larger than twelve (12) square feet in area and not exceeding eight (8) feet in height in reasonable proximity to the stand. Such signs may have changeable copy. In addition, one wall sign no larger than sixteen (16) square feet in area may be erected on the farm stand where the products are sold.
e. Institutional and recreational uses. The following signs shall be permitted for institutional and recreational uses within the subject districts:
1) One freestanding sign not exceeding twenty-four (24) square feet in area and five (5) feet in height.
2) Freestanding signs shall be set back from all streetlines thirty (30) feet or half the distance between the building and the street, whichever is less.
3) One wall sign per building in accordance with §30.K.10 and not to exceed forty (40) square feet in area.
4) One changeable copy sign pursuant to §30.K.3 not to exceed eighteen (18) square feet in area.
5) Directional signs pursuant to §30.K.4.
6) Directory signs pursuant to §30.K.5.
2. Signs Permitted in the AR-3, AR-4, RM-1, RM-2, PUD and PVD-1 Districts. [Ord. O.3.14, 2/25/14]
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 182
a. Any sign allowed without permit, pursuant to §30.I.
b. One freestanding development sign for each collector or arterial roadway that provides access to the neighborhood or residential complex, provided that:
1) The sign is owned and maintained by the landowner or a homeowner's or condominium association, or other duly constituted organization approved by the Board of Jurisdiction; or, the sign is owned by a private entity with responsibility for maintenance.
2) Each sign shall not exceed a height of five (5) feet and shall meet the size limitations for freestanding signs (see Table 30.1).
3) At an approved rental or sales office, one freestanding non-illuminated sign shall be permitted not to exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area and more than five (5) feet in height. Such sign shall be removed with the removal of the temporary office.
4) Real estate signs, the sole purpose of which is to direct the public to housing or land development shall be permitted four (4) temporary freestanding non-illuminated signs at key intersections. Each sign shall not exceed fifteen (15) square feet in area and eight (8) feet in height above ground.
c. One freestanding sign for each collector or arterial roadway that provides access to a health care facility, medical office, medical clinic or child care center pursuant to §30.K.6, except that two such freestanding signs shall be permitted should the linear foot of street frontage exceed one thousand (1,000) feet. Any such second sign shall be separated from the first sign by a minimum of four hundred (400) feet.
d. One wall sign per building in accordance with §30.K.10 and not exceeding six (6) square feet in area, except that in the case of a health care facility the sign shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet.
1) For health care facilities, medical offices or medical clinics containing more than one office, service or use, one additional sign for each office, service, or use shall be permitted, not to exceed thirty (30) square feet for each sign.
e. One changeable copy sign pursuant to §30.K.3 not to exceed eighteen (18) square feet and which sign shall be permitted in addition to other permitted freestanding signs.
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 183
f. Advisory information signs pursuant to §30.K.1 for health care facilities only.
g. Awning signs pursuant to §30.K.2 in the AR-3 and AR-4 districts, only.
h. Directional signs pursuant to §30.K.4.
i. Directory signs pursuant to §30.K.5.
j. Campus identification signs for a health care facility shall be permitted at a rate not to exceed two (2) per acre and shall not be displayed closer than 50 feet to a tract perimeter. The location of any such signs shall be fixed upon an approved site plan.
k. Other commercial uses, where permitted, shall conform to the requirements for the TC-1 district.
3. Signs Permitted in the TC-1, TC-2, C-1, C-2 and O Districts.
a. Any sign allowed without permit, pursuant to §30.I.
b. One freestanding sign per premises pursuant to §30.K.6 and not exceeding six (6) feet in height.
c. Wall signs in accordance with §30.K.10 and not exceeding twenty (20) square feet, whichever is less, for each building or ground level establishment.
d. Advisory information signs pursuant to §30.K.1.
e. Awning signs pursuant to §30.K.2.
f. Directional signs pursuant to §30.K.4.
g. Directory signs pursuant to §30.K.5.
h. One projecting sign per building or ground level retail establishment in lieu of a freestanding sign not to exceed eighteen (18) square feet in area.
4. Signs Permitted in the BC-1, BC-2, BC-3 and BC-4 Districts.
a. Any sign allowed without permit, pursuant to §30.I.
b. One freestanding sign for each collector or arterial roadway that provides access to the building or complex, pursuant to §30.K.6.
c. Freestanding signs shall be set back from all property lines a minimum distance of fifteen (15) feet.
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 184
d. Wall signs shall conform to §30.K.10 and shall not exceed sixty (60) square feet, whichever is less, excepting shopping centers.
e. Wall signs for shopping centers shall conform to §30.K.10 and the following requirements:
1) Where a principal use occupying at least seven hundred fifty (750) but less than ten thousand (10,000) gross square feet of segregated area has direct access from the outside, a wall sign not exceeding sixty (60) square feet in area, whichever is less, shall be permitted.
2) Where a principal use occupying at least ten thousand (10,000) but less than fifty thousand (50,000) gross square feet of segregated area has direct access from the outside, a wall sign not exceeding one hundred (100) square feet in area, whichever is less, shall be permitted.
3) Where an individual establishment in a shopping center is fifty thousand (50,000) gross square feet or more, the area of the wall sign may increase to not more than four hundred (400) square feet, whichever is less.
f. Movie theatre and performing arts theatres shall be permitted one freestanding marquee sign in accordance with §30.K.6 and one marquee sign attached to a building not to exceed two hundred (200) square feet. Marquee signs attached to a building shall be exempt from the relief and sign face distance requirements under §30.G.9.
g. Advisory information signs pursuant to §30.K.1.
h. Awning signs pursuant to §30.K.2.
i. Directional signs pursuant to §30.K.4.
j. Directory signs pursuant to §30.K.5.
k. Automobile service stations shall be permitted the following additional signs:
1) A changeable copy sign on each fuel dispensing pump not to exceed four (4) square feet in area;
2) A changeable copy sign on a freestanding sign containing the primary message of the use not to exceed eighteen (18) square feet in area.
3) Two (2) canopy signs not to exceed forty (40) square feet each in area.
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 185
5. Signs Permitted in the ROM, Flex, I-1 and I-2 Districts.
a. Any sign allowed without permit, pursuant to §30.I.
b. One freestanding sign for each collector or arterial roadway that provides access to the building or site complex pursuant to §30.K.6 and not exceeding ten (10) in height.
c. Freestanding signs shall be set back from all street lines a minimum of thirty (30) feet in the ROM and Flex districts.
d. Wall signs shall conform to §30.K.10 and the following requirements:
1) Where a principal use occupying at least one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of segregated area has direct access from the outside, a wall sign not exceeding twenty (20) square feet in area, whichever is less, shall be permitted.
2) Where a principal use occupying at least ten thousand (10,000) but less than fifty thousand (50,000) gross square feet of segregated area has direct access from the outside, a wall sign not exceeding one hundred (100) square feet in area, whichever is less, shall be permitted.
3) Where an individual establishment in a business or industrial park is fifty thousand (50,000) gross square feet or more, the area of the wall sign may increase to not more than two hundred (200) square feet, whichever is less.
6. Signs Permitted in the INS District.
a. Any sign allowed without permit, pursuant to §30.I.
b. One freestanding sign in accordance with §30.K.6, not exceeding six (6) feet in height.
c. Freestanding signs shall be set back from all street lines a minimum of fifteen (15) feet.
d. One wall sign per building in accordance with §30.K.10, not to exceed sixty (60) square feet.
e. Advisory information signs pursuant to §30.K.1.
f. Awning signs pursuant to §30.K.2.
g. One changeable copy sign pursuant to §30.K.3 not to exceed eighteen (18) square feet.
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 186
h. Directional signs pursuant to §30.K.4.
i. Directory signs pursuant to §30.K.5.
M. Non-Conforming Signs.
1. Subject to the remaining restrictions of this section, non-conforming signs that were otherwise lawful on the effective date of this Ordinance may be continued except as provided below.
2. No person may engage in any activity that causes an increase in the extent of nonconformity of a non-conforming sign. No non-conforming sign may be enlarged or altered in such a manner as to aggravate the non-conforming condition, nor may illumination be added to any non-conforming sign.
3. A non-conforming sign may not be moved or replaced except to bring the sign into complete conformity with this Ordinance.
4. If a non-conforming sign is destroyed by natural or man-made causes, it may not thereafter be repaired, reconstructed, or replaced except in conformity with all the provisions of this Ordinance, and the remnants of the former sign structure shall be cleared from the land. For purposes of this section, a non-conforming sign is ‘destroyed’ if damaged to an extent that the cost of repairing the sign to its original state immediately prior to the destruction or replacing it with an equivalent sign equals or exceeds fifty (50%) of the equalized assessed value of the sign so damaged.
5. If a building to which a non-conforming sign is attached or to which it relates is demolished or destroyed by natural or man-made causes, the non-conforming sign shall be brought into conformance with the provisions of this section.
6. The message of a non-conforming sign may be changed provided the following conditions are met:
a. The sign has a valid sign permit; and
b. No structural alteration of the sign occurs; and
c. No non-conforming aspect of the sign is increased or enlarged, and
d. No new non-conformity with the provisions of this section is introduced.
7. Subject to the other provisions of this section, non-conforming signs may be repaired and renovated as long as the cost of such work does not exceed within any twelve (12) month period fifty (50%) of the equalized assessed value of such sign.
§ 31. Landscape, Buffer and Tree Protection Standards. [Ord. 0.1.10, 2/22/10]
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 187
A. General Requirements for Landscaping. The following general requirements shall apply to the installation and design of landscapes and shall be the minimum necessary to promote aesthetic and pleasing views and the general welfare:
1. All land areas not covered with buildings, parking, or other impervious surfaces shall be landscaped with suitable materials. Landscaping shall consist of trees, shrubs, ground cover, perennials, and annuals singly or in combination and may include inanimate materials such as rocks, water, sculpture, art, walls, fences, and paving materials.
2. A landscape design shall be provided as part of site plan and subdivision submissions in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. Every applicant for subdivision or site plan approval shall comply with the minimum standards as set forth in this section.
3. The Board of Jurisdiction may require additional landscaping beyond the requirements herein in order to create a desirable visual environment and an appropriate landscaping scheme for the site given the existing conditions and the proposed development.
4. Where an application for development is for a residential subdivision only, the minimum standards shall apply only to street trees and to common open space, storm water management facilities and areas proposed to be dedicated to the public; however, additional plantings or landscaping elements shall be required in the subdivision where necessary for climate control, reduce energy consumption, to create privacy, and to screen ground-mounted utilities.
5. All landscape plants shall be typical in size and weight for their species and shall conform to the standards of the American Association of Nurserymen for quality and installation.
6. All plants shall be tolerant of specific site conditions. The use of indigenous species is strongly encouraged. No plant may be installed that is listed as an invasive alien species in NJDEP’s Overview of Nonindigenous Plant Species in New Jersey (February 2004), as it may be amended or superseded.
7. Landscape screening is required to visually buffer all trash enclosures, above ground propane tanks, utility boxes, ground-mounted HVAC equipment and other similar structures.
8. Plants with pervasive root systems shall not be located where they may cause damage to drainage pipes or other underground utilities and storm water management facilities and should generally be planted no closer than ten (10) feet measured horizontally from such underground utility.
B. Design Guidelines. The following guidelines shall be followed in the design of landscaping and streetscape plans.
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 188
1. In the design of a landscape plan, plantings shall be provided in the varieties, quantities and site locations necessary to:
2. Reduce glare and reflection;
3. Buffer noise and objectionable views;
4. Complement or improve upon existing landscaping on adjoining properties;
5. Provide moisture retention, soil stabilization, wind breaks and air purification;
6. Moderate ground surface, building and stream water temperatures; and
7. Provide seasonal color variety.
8. In the landscape design of sites, areas shall be designated for retaining existing trees and the replacement of trees cleared from the site in accordance with §31.L.
9. Landscaping shall be located to provide effective climatic control. The east and west walls of a building should be the most heavily vegetated to shade for summer sun and the north to northwest area for winter prevailing winds. The southerly facing side of a building should be shaded from summer sun but open for solar gain during the winter.
10. Plant's susceptibility to disease, their colors, textures, shapes, blossoms, and foliage characteristics shall be considered in the overall design of a landscape plan.
11. Local soil conditions and water availability shall be considered in the choice of landscaping.
12. In the design process, the eventual maturity of the plant shall be considered for its effect on circulation patterns, solar access, site lighting, drainage, emergency access and relationship to buildings and the streetscape.
C. Tree and Shrub Requirements.
1. Street Trees. When new streets are proposed, street trees shall be installed on both sides of all streets in accordance with an approved landscape plan. Street trees shall be provided along all street frontages lacking existing trees that meet the standards herein whenever an application for development is submitted and approved. However, street trees shall not be required along the frontage of a limited access highway (see Tables 3.17 and 3.18 for buffering requirements adjacent to limited access highways). Trees shall be spaced evenly along the street between the curb and sidewalk. Where the distance between the curb and sidewalk is less than five (5) feet, sidewalks should be placed in a public access easement outside of the right-of-way to create a planting strip at least five (5) feet wide to facilitate street tree growth in accordance with §26.H. In commercial
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 189
areas with wider sidewalks that extend to the curb, trees shall be placed in tree wells with root guard systems. Such tree wells shall have sufficient soil volume to support tree growth as follows:
Tree Size at Maturity Soil Volume
(Height in feet) (in cubic feet)
Large trees (45'+) 200
Medium-sized trees (30'-45') 150
Small trees (to 30') 100
Areas under sidewalks may be used to meet the soil volume requirement provided no more than 50% of the volume is located under such hard paving.
1. Spacing. When trees are planted at predetermined intervals along streets, spacing shall depend on tree size.
Tree Size at Maturity Planting Interval
(Height in feet) (in feet)
Large trees (45'+) 40
Medium-sized trees (30'-45') 30
Small trees (to 30') 20
Trees may be planted closer together in order to avoid interference with utilities, roadways, sidewalks, sight easements, street lights and street furniture.
2. Street tree type. Tree type may vary depending on overall effect desired but as a general rule, all trees shall be large deciduous trees except as needed to achieve special effects. Tree selection shall be approved by the Board of Jurisdiction in accordance with Tables 31.1, 31.2 and 31.3. Alternate selections may be approved at the discretion of the Board of Jurisdiction. Within any landscape design, oaks shall be limited to no more than fifteen percent (15%) of the total number of trees to limit the incidence of bacterial leaf scorch disease.
Table 31.1 Recommended Small Street Trees.
Botanical Name
Common Name
Minimum
Planting Size
Acer campestre
Hedge Maple
2½” -3” cal.
Acer ginnala
Amur Maple
2½” -3” cal.
Amelanchier x hydrida ‘Cumulus’
Cumulus Shadblow
2-2½” cal.
Acer buergeranum
Trident Maple
2½” -3” cal.
Crataegus phaenopyrum ‘Princeton Sentry’
Princeton Sentry Hawthorne
2½” -3” cal.
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 190
Botanical Name
Common Name
Minimum
Planting Size
Crataegus viridis ‘Winter King’
Winter King Hawthorne
2½” -3” cal.
Magnolia x lobneri ‘Merrill’
Merrill Magnolia
10'-12' ht.
Malus baccata ‘Jackii’
Jackii Crabapple
2”-2½” cal.
Malus x zumi ‘Calocarpa’
Zumi Crabapple
2”-2½” cal.
Syringa reticulata
Japanese Tree Lilac
10'-12' ht.
Table 31.2 Recommended Medium Street Trees.
Botanical Name
Common Name
Minimum
Planting Size
Acer saccharum ‘Legacy’
Legacy Sugar Maple
2½” -3” cal.
Celtis bungeana
Bunge Hackberry
2½” -3” cal.
Cladratis lutea
Yellowwood
2” -2½” cal.
Carpinus caroliniana
American Hornbeam
2½” -3” cal.
Malus baccata ‘Robinson’
Robinson Crabapple
2½” -3” cal.
Phellodendron amurense
Amur Corktree
2½” -3” cal.
Tilia cordata x. ‘Shamrock’
Shamrock Linden
2½” -3” cal.
Table 31.3 Recommended Large Street Trees.
Botanical Name
Common Name
Minimum
Planting Size
Acer rubrum ‘October Glory’
October Glory Red Maple
2½”-3” cal.
Acer rubrum ‘Red Sunset’
Red Sunset Red Maple
2½” -3” cal.
Celtis occidentalis ‘Magnifica’
Hackberry
2½” -3” cal.
Ginkgo biloba (male only)
Ginkgo
2½” -3” cal.
Platanus acerifolia ‘Bloodgood’
Bloodgood London Plane
2½” -3” cal.
Platanus occidentalis
Sycamore
2½” -3” cal.
Quercus coccinea
Scarlet Oak
2½” -3” cal.
Quercus marcocarpa
Bur Oak
2½” -3” cal.
Quercus phellos
Willow Oak
2½” -3” cal.
Quercus rubra
Red Oak
2½” -3” cal.
Sophora japonica ‘Regent’
Scholartree
2½” -3” cal.
Tilia tomentosa 'Green Mountain'
Silver linden
2½” -3” cal.
Ulmus parvifolia
Chinese elm
2½” -3” cal.
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 191
Botanical Name
Common Name
Minimum
Planting Size
Zelkova serrata ‘Village Green’
Village Green zelkova
2½” -3” cal.
3. Additional Recommended Trees. Any of the trees noted in Tables 31.1, 31.2 and 31.3 may be used in the design of landscapes as well as their use as street trees. The following trees are recommended for site development purposes:
Table 31.4 Additional Recommended Trees
Botanical Name
Common Name
Minimum
Planting Size
Acer palmatum
Japanese Maple
6’-7’
Acer saccharum
Sugar Maple
2½”-3” cal.
Cedrus atlantica glauca
Blue Atlas Cedar
6'-8'
Cercidiphyllum japonicum
Katsura-tree
2½”-3” cal.
Cercis canadensis
Eastern Redbud
6’-7’
Chionanthus virginicus
Fringe Tree
6’-7’
Cornus kousa
Chinese Dogwood
2”-2½” cal.
Crataegus crusgalli inermis
Thornless Cockspur Hawthorn
2”-2½” cal.
Cryptomeria japonica
Cryptomeria
5'-6'
Fagus grandifolia
American Beech
2½”-3” cal.
Fagus atropinicea
Copper Beech
2½”-3” cal.
Gleditsia triacanthos inermis
‘Halka’ or ‘Skyline’
Halka or Skyline Honeylocust
2½”-3” cal.
Ilex opaca
American Holly
6’-7’
Koelreuteria paniculata
Golden Rain Tree
2”-2½” cal.
Liquidambar styraciflua
Sweetgum
2½”-3” cal.
Liriodendron tulipifera
Tulip Poplar
2”-2½” cal.
Metasequoia glyptostroboides
Dawn Redwood
8'-10'
Oxydendrum arboreum
Sourwood
6’-7’
Picea abies (excelsa)
Norway Spruce
5'-6'
Picea omorika
Serbian Spruce
5'-6'
Pinus strobus
White Pine
5'-6'
Pinus thunbergiana
Japanese Black Pine
5'-6'
Pinus virginiana
Virginia Pine
5'-6'
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 192
Botanical Name
Common Name
Minimum
Planting Size
Populus balsamifera
Balsam Popular
2½”-3” cal.
Prunus cerasifera
Flowering Plum
2”-2½” cal.
Prunus sargentii
Sargent Cherry
2”-2½” cal.
Prunus serrulata
White Cherry
2”-2½” cal.
Pseudolarix kaempferi
Golden Larch
8'-10'
Pseudotsuga menziesii
Douglas Fir
5'-6'
Quercus acutissima
Sawtooth Oak
2½”-3” cal.
Quercus palustris
Pin Oak
2½”-3” cal.
Tilia cordata 'Greenspire'
Greenspire Linden
2½”-3” cal.
Tilia tomentosa 'Green Mountain'
Silver Linden
2½”-3” cal.
Tsuga canadensis
Canadian Hemlock
5'-6'
Ulmus americana 'Delaware'
American Elm, 'Delaware'
2½”-3” cal.
4. Fall planting hazard. Certain trees have been identified as having a high degree of transplantation failure if planted during the fall season. These should be noted on the landscape plan for “Spring Planting Season Only”. These include all trees in the genus Betula, Carpinus, Crataegus, Pyrus, Quercus, excluding Q. Palustris, Zelkova and the species Ilex opaca, Liquidambar styraciflua, Liriodendron tulipifera, Salix babylonica and Tilia tomentosa.
5. Recommended shrubs. The following shrubs are recommended for use in the Township:
Table 31.5 Recommended Shrubs.
Botanical Name
Common Name
Minimum
Planting Size
Abelia grandiflora
Glossy Abelia
18”-24”
Aronia arbtutifolia brilliantissima
Red Chokeberry
2’-3’
Azalea delaware valley
Delaware Valley Azalea
18”-24”
Azalea exbury
Exbury Azalea
18”-24”
Azalea hino-crimson
Hino-Crimson Azalea
18”-24”
Azalea stewartsonia
Stewartson Azalea
18”-24”
Berberis julianae
Wintergreen Barberry
18”-24”
Clethra alnifloia
Summersweet
15”-18”
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 193
Botanical Name
Common Name
Minimum
Planting Size
Cornus alba sibirica
Siberian Dogwood
3’-4’
Cornus stolonifera lutea
Yellowtwig
3’-4’
Cotoneaster apiculata
Cranberry Cotoneaster
15”-18”
Cotoneaster salicifolia repens
Park Carpet Cotoneaster
15”-18”
Deutzia gracilis
Slender Deutzia
18”-24”
Euonymous fortunei vegetus
Bigleaf Wintercreeper
18”-24”
Fothergilla gardenii
Dwarf Fothergilla
15”-18”
Fothergilla major
Large Fothergilla
15”-18”
Hamamelis virginiana
Witch hazel
4’-5’
Hibiscus syriacus
Rose of Sharon
18”-24”
Hydrangea paniculata grandiflora
PeeGee Hydrangea
18”-24”
Hydrangea quercifolia
Oak Leaf Hydrangea
3’-4’
Ilex crenata hellerei
Dwarf Japanese Holly
18”-24”
Ilex glabra
Inkberry
18”-24”
Ilex glabra compacta
Compact Inkberry
18”-24”
Juniperus chinensis glauca hetzi
Hetz Juniper
2’-3’
Juniperus chinensis pfitzeriana compacta
Compact Pfitzer Juniper
18”-24”
Juniperus chinensis torulosa
Torulosa Juniper
4’-5’
Juniperus horizontalis bar harbor
Bar Harbor Juniper
18”-24”
Juniperus horizontalis plumosa
Andorra Juniper
18”-24”
Juniperus horizontalis wiltoni
Blue Rug Juniper
18”-24”
Juniperus sargenti
Sargent Juniper
15”-18”
Kalmia latiflora
Mountain Laurel
15”-18”
Leucothoe axillaris
Coast Leucothoe
18”-24”
Ligustrum ibolium
Ibolium Privet
2’-3’
Lonicera fragantissima
Winter Honeysuckle
2’-3’
Magnolia soulangiana
Saucer Magnolia
8’-10’
Magnolia stellata
Star Magnolia
6’-8’
Magnolia virginiana
Sweetbay Magnolia
6’-8’
Myrica pensylvanica
Northern Bayberry
4’-5’
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 194
Botanical Name
Common Name
Minimum
Planting Size
Philadelphus virginalis
Virginal Mockorange
2’-3’
Picea excelsa nidiformis
Birdnest spruce
#1 can
Pieris japonica
Japanese Andromeda
15”-18”
Pinus montana mughus
Mugho Pine
18”-24”
Potentilla fruticosa
Bush Cinquefoil
15”-18”
Pyracantha fiery cascade
Fiery Cascade Firethorn
18”-24”
Rhododendron catawbienese
Catawba Rhododendron
2’-3’
Rhododendron maximum roseum
Rosebay Rhododendron
2’-3’
Spirea vanhouttei
Vanhoutte Spirea
3’-4’
Spirea bumalda ‘anthony waterer’
Anthony Waterer Spirea
18”-24”
Spirea nipponica ‘Snowmound’
Snowmound Spirea
18”-24”
Syringa vulgaris
Common Purple Lilac
5’-6’
Taxus baccata repandens
English Yew
18"-24"
Taxus cuspidata densiformis
Dense Yew
3’-4’
Taxus media hicksi
Hicks Yew
18"-24"
Thuja occidentalis nigra
Dark American Arborvitae
5’-6’
Viburnum burkwoodi
Burkwood Viburnum
18"-24"
Viburnum carlesi
Fragrant Viburnum
3’-4’
Viburnum dentatum
Arrowwood
2’-3’
Viburnum pragense
Prague Viburnum
3’-4’
Viburnum rhytidophyllum
Leatherleaf Viburnum
5’-6’
Viburnum tomentosum
Doublefile Viburnum
5’-6’
6. Recommended Plants for Wet Conditions. The following plants are recommended for wetlands, flood plains, and stormwater management facilities:
Table 31.6 Trees and Shrubs Recommended for Wet Conditions.
Botanical Name
Common Name
Minimum
Planting Size
Acer negundo
Boxelder
2”-2½” cal.
Acer rubrum
Red Maple
2½”-3” cal.
Acer saccharinum
Silver Maple
2½”-3” cal.
Alnus serrulata
Smooth Alder
2”-2½” cal.
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 195
Botanical Name
Common Name
Minimum
Planting Size
Amelanchier alleghiensis
Allegheny Serviceberry
2”-2½” cal.
Amelanchier canadensis
Shadblow (Downy Serviceberry)
2”-2½” cal.
Aronia arbutifolia
Red Chokeberry
2’-3’
Aronia melanocarpa
Black Chokeberry
2’-3’
Betula nigra
River Birch
10’-12’
Betula populifolia
Gray Birch
10’-12’
Celphalanthus occidentalis
Buttonbush
2’-3’
Clethra alnifolia
Summersweet
18”-24”
Cornus amomum
Silky Dogwood
3’-4’
Cornus sericea
Red Osier Dogwood
3’-4’
Fraxinus pennsyanicum
Green Ash
2½”-3” cal.
Ilex glabra
Inkberry Holly
18”-24”
Ilex verticillata
Winterberry Holly
18”-24”
Itea virginica
Virginia Sweetspire
12”-15”
Lindera benzoin
Spicebush
18”-24”
Liquidambar styraciflora
Sweetgum
2½”-3” cal.
Magnolia virgineana
Sweetbay magnolia
6’-8’
Nyssa sylvatica
Black Gum (Tupelo)
2”-2½” cal.
Platanus occidentalis
Sycamore
3”-3½” cal.
Quercus bicolor
Swamp White Oak
2½”-3” cal.
Quercus palustris
Pin Oak
2½”-3” cal.
Rhododendron viscosum
Swamp Azalea
18”-24”
Rosa palustris
Swamp Rose
18”-24”
Salix discolor
Pussy Willow
3’-4’
Salix babylonica
Weeping Willow
2½”-3” cal.
Salix nigra
Black Willow
2”-2½” cal.
Sambucus canadensis
Elderberry
2’-3’
Vaccinium corymbosium
Highbush Blueberry
2’-3’
Viburnum dentatum
Arrowwood Viburnum
2’-3’
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 196
D. Buffers and Berms. Landscaping buffers are required to minimize and visually screen any adverse impacts or nuisances on a site or from any adjacent area. Berms may be used to achieve buffering effects in accordance with the regulations herein.
1. General requirements. Landscape buffers shall consist of a combination of deciduous trees, conifers, shrubs, berms, and if appropriate, fences or walls in sufficient quantities and sizes to perform their necessary screening function.
2. Buffers may be installed in required yard areas except for reverse frontage buffers where they shall be in addition to the required rear yard depth. Reverse frontage screening shall be required where the rear or side yards of residential dwellings or lots abut any arterial or major collector street. The minimum width of a landscape buffer for a reverse frontage residential lot shall be 15 feet. Fencing and walls shall not be permitted in a reverse frontage landscape buffer. See §40, Reverse Frontage Lots, for additional requirements.
3. Buffers shall be continuous except for access drives as approved by the Board of Jurisdiction. Storm water management facilities, parking, dumpster enclosures, accessory buildings or above ground structures, and similar encroachments shall not be permitted in the required buffer area.
4. The minimum width of a landscape buffer shall be determined by the proposed use of a property and the land uses and zoning district adjacent to it in accordance with Table 31.7, unless a specific standard is established within a particular zoning district.
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 197
Table 31.7 Required Minimum Buffer Widths.
Proposed Land Use
Adjacent Land Uses
Agriculture
Residential Type A (1)
Residential Type B (2)
Retail
Professional Office
Other Office
Institutional/
Quasi-public
Industrial
Limited Access Highway
Agriculture
None
75 ft.
100 ft.
50 ft.
50 ft.
50 ft.
50 ft.
50 ft.
None
Residential Type A (1)
75 ft.
None
25 ft.
40 ft.
25 ft.
50 ft.
50 ft.
100 ft.
50 ft.
Residential Type B (2)
75 ft.
50 ft.
None
25 ft.
25 ft.
50 ft.
50 ft.
100 ft.
50 ft.
TC-1/TC-2 Zone Uses
25 ft.
20 ft.
20 ft.
None
15 ft.
None
15 ft.
25 ft.
25 ft.
Retail
50 ft.
40 ft.
40 ft.
None
15 ft.
25 ft.
15 ft.
25 ft.
25 ft.
Professional Office
50 ft.
25 ft.
25 ft.
15 ft.
None
None
None
25 ft.
25 ft.
Other Office
50 ft.
50 ft.
50 ft.
25 ft.
None
None
None
25 ft.
25 ft.
Institutional/ Quasi-public
50 ft.
50 ft.
50 ft.
15 ft.
None
None
None
25 ft.
25 ft.
Industrial
25 ft.
100 ft.
100 ft.
25 ft.
25 ft.
25 ft.
25 ft.
None
15 ft.
Limited Access Highway
None
100 ft.
100 ft.
25 ft.
25 ft.
25 ft.
25 ft.
15 ft.
None
(1) - Residential Type A equals single family detached and semi-detached dwellings.
(2) - Residential Type B equals all other dwellings except those in institutional settings that include residential health care facilities, skilled nursing facilities and assisted living facilities. The Institutional category shall apply to these exceptions.
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 198
5. Plant densities and structure requirements. The density of plantings and the requirements for structures shall vary with the width of the buffer in accordance with the following and Table 31.8:
a. Any buffer 15 feet or less in width shall incorporate a fence or wall into the landscape design. The fence or wall shall be located on the side of the buffer with the most intensive use.
b. Fences and walls may be used to reduce the required width of and number of plants in the buffer in accordance with Table 31.9.
Table 31.8 Minimum Plant Density for Buffers
Required Buffer Width
Minimum Number of Required Plant Types per 100 Lineal Feet
Large or Medium Trees
Small or Ornamental Trees
Evergreens and Conifers
Shrubs
15 feet (1)
3
4
9
20
20 feet
4
6
10
24
25 feet
5
8
15
30
40 feet
6
9
18
36
50 feet
8
12
24
48
75 feet (2)
10
15
30
60
(1) - Buffers of this width or less shall incorporate an opaque fence or wall.
(2) - 20 thorny understory, 28 thorny shrubs, 28 hedgerow shrubs and 5 large or medium trees per 100 lineal feet may substitute for the plant types in this table for an agricultural buffer.
Table 31.9 Allowable Reductions in Buffer Widths and Plant Densities.
Required Buffer Width
Reduced Buffer Width with Fence or Wall(1)
Allowed Reduction in Number of Plants Required in Table 31.8 with Fence or Wall (2)
15 feet
None
None
20 feet
15 feet
20%
25 feet
20 feet
20%
40 feet
30 feet
25%
50 feet
40 feet
25%
75 feet
75 feet
None
(1) - Fence or wall shall be opaque and sufficient to visually obstruct the view of persons at ground level.
(2) - Allowed reduction shall be evenly distributed over all required plant types.
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 199
c. Existing vegetation may substitute for all or part of the required buffer plantings and may be accepted in lieu of new plantings at the discretion of the Board of Jurisdiction.
6. Berm Specifications.
a. Berms shall be required where the required landscape buffer width exceeds twenty-five (25) feet and there are parking lots that exceed fifty (50) parking spaces and/or loading areas of any size, except in locations that are superseded by the streetscape standards in §31.M. “Public view” shall mean viewable from a public or private street or a private driveway within a site that collects and distributes traffic between the public street and parking fields. Berms may be installed in other locations when designed as part of an overall landscape plan.
b. Berms shall be sufficiently high to hinder the view of the lower half of passenger vehicles parked in private parking lots provided for the convenience of customers or employees of a business establishment.
c. Berms shall not exceed a slope of one foot of rise for each three feet of run (1:3).
d. Any berm in excess of two (2) feet in height above the toe of the slope shall be adequately irrigated.
e. Continuous berms shall be avoided. Berms should be overlapped to provide buffering of any sight line perpendicular to the right-of-way. Berm overlapping should also be designed in locations to aid in site drainage.
f. Berms shall have a minimum top soil cover of six (6) inches in depth.
E. Street and Cul-de-Sac Medians. Where a homeowner's or condominium association is established or intended to be established for the maintenance of common open space or storm water management basins, vegetated islands in the center of cul-de-sacs should be proposed that exhibit the following criteria:
1. All plant material shall be designed for a mature height under 30 inches (2.5 feet) or above 7 feet in order to allow for proper visibility.
2. All plants shall be tolerant of drought, salt and reflected heat from pavement.
3. Ground cover plantings shall be consistent with the degree of maintenance expected for the cul-de-sacs and of sufficient density to entirely cover the ground surface.
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 200
F. Stormwater Facilities. Stormwater management areas including retention and detention basins, drainage ditches and swales, and wetland areas shall be landscaped in accordance with the standards in this subsection.
1. The screening of outfall structures and emergency spillways from public view is of particular importance in the landscape design. This may involve integration of these areas as aesthetic landscape features, naturalized wetland areas, or active and passive recreation areas, in addition to their stormwater management function.
2. Detention and retention facilities should be located in cleared areas where reasonably feasible.
3. Basins designed as naturalized wetland areas shall be planted with a fringe of wetlands plants such as sedges, rushes and forbs. The ground should be seeded with a wildflower or wet meadow grass mix but in certain circumstances may require sod or hydroseeding to stabilize the basin slopes. All plants shall be tolerant of typical flood plain and wetland conditions. See Table 31.6 for recommended wet conditions plants.
4. Planting other than wildflowers and grasses shall not be located within ten (10) feet of low flow channels to facilitate drainage.
5. Provisions for emergency access as well as general maintenance of the basins shall be reviewed by the Board of Jurisdiction. Plantings shall be designed to disguise yet not hinder vehicular access.
6. Trees shall not be permitted upon any berm or dam associated with a stormwater management basin unless approved by the Board Engineer.
7. All basin structures shall be designed to blend into the landscape in terms of construction materials, color, grading and planting.
G. Open Space Landscaping. Common or public open space provided as a part of any cluster development shall be landscaped in one of the following ways, depending upon the intent of the use for the open space.
1. Conservation use. Conservation areas are appropriate in areas adjacent to and inclusive of natural features to be preserved, including wooded areas, water bodies, streams wetlands, and steep slopes. The following conservation use design guidelines shall apply:
a. Natural features shall be encompassed in open space areas rather than moved or eliminated in the development process.
b. Cleared areas shall be re-vegetated to a naturalistic appearance where appropriate.
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 201
c. Re-vegetated areas may be seeded with a wildflower and/or meadow grass mix.
2. Recreational Open Space. The following landscape standards shall apply for recreational uses:
a. Grading and plantings of the recreation area shall remain consistent with the overall landscape design. The landscape design shall consist of massed deciduous and evergreen trees and berms to create spaces and views and ornamental trees and shrub masses for visual variety, interest and detail.
b. In general, plants shall be provided at the following rates:
1) Shade trees - 15 per acre
2) Evergreen Trees - 5 per acre
3) Flowering Shrubs - 10 per acre
4) Shrubs - 20 per acre
These quantities are exclusive of plants that may be required for landscape buffers pursuant to §31.D.
c. Adjacent dwelling units shall be buffered from active play areas with a minimum buffer width of twenty-five (25) feet.
d. In the area where a recreation facility fronts onto a public or private street, fencing may be required to provide controlled access. The adjacent street tree planting shall be continued along this area, and any reverse frontage buffer planting shall be integrated with open space plantings.
H. Parking and Loading Area Landscaping. The objectives of the landscape architectural treatment of all parking areas shall be to provide for safe and convenient movement of vehicles, to limit pedestrian/vehicular conflicts, to limit paved areas, to provide for screening from public right-of-way and buildings, to reduce the overall visual impact of parking lots, and to provide shade and reduce heat island effects. All non-residential parking lots and residential parking lots in excess of five (5) spaces shall conform to the following requirements:
1. The minimum width of landscape islands shall be eight (8) feet on the side of parking spaces and ten (10) feet between parking bays. If sidewalks are incorporated through the long axis of the landscape islands, their width shall be added to these requirements. Where the parking lot design will result in pedestrians cutting perpendicularly through landscape islands, sidewalks shall be installed at regular intervals through its short axis.
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 202
2. Landscape islands shall be planted with a combination of deciduous trees, evergreen and deciduous shrubs, and ground cover at the rate of six (6) large or medium trees, four (4) small or ornamental trees and sixty (60) shrubs per one hundred (100) lineal feet along the long axis of the island.
3. Parking and loading areas shall be screened by a combination of berms, hedges, fences or walls. The minimum screening height at planting shall be three (3) feet and shall have a height of at least four (4) feet within three (3) years of installation. Loading dock areas shall be screened with shrubs a minimum height of six (6) feet at planting and shall achieve a height of at least ten (10) feet five (5) years after installation. Landscape buffers as otherwise required by §31.D may be used to meet these requirements.
4. Parking lot lighting should be sited within landscape islands, however, without hindering necessary lighting coverage.
5. No more than twenty (20) parking spaces shall be placed in one row of parking without an intervening landscape island.
I. Site Protection and General Planting Requirements.
1. Topsoil preservation. Topsoil moved during the course of construction shall be redistributed on all re-graded surfaces so as to provide at least four (4) inches of even cover to all disturbed areas of the development and shall be stabilized by seeding or planting.
2. Removal of debris. All stumps and other tree parts, litter, brush, weeds, excess or scrap building materials, or other debris shall be removed from the site and disposed of in accordance with New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection regulations. No tree stumps, portions of tree trunks or limbs shall be buried anywhere in the development. All dead or dying trees, standing or fallen, shall be removed from the site. If trees and limbs are reduced to chips, they may, subject to approval of the Township Engineer, be used as mulch in landscaped areas, provided they have been properly composted.
3. Protection of existing plantings. Maximum effort should be made to save specimen plants. No material or temporary soil deposits shall be placed within four (4) feet of shrubs or ten (10) feet of trees designated to be retained on the preliminary and/or final plat.
4. Slope plantings. Landscaping of the area of all cuts and fills and/or terraces shall be sufficient to prevent erosion, and all roadway slopes steeper than 3:1 shall be planted with ground covers appropriate for the purpose and soil conditions, water availability, and environment.
J. Planting Specifications.
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 203
1. All shade and street trees shall have a minimum caliper as indicated in of two and one half (2.5) inches or as required by the accompanying tables herein, whichever is larger.
2. All ornamental and flowering trees shall have a minimum height of six (6) to eight (8) feet or as required by the accompanying tables herein, whichever is larger.
3. All evergreen trees shall have a minimum height of five (5) to six (6) feet unless otherwise determined by the Planning Board or Township Planner or as required by the accompanying tables herein, whichever is larger.
4. Shrubs shall have a minimum planting size as indicated in the relevant tables within this section of the ordinance, but in no instance shall the planting size be less than fifteen (15) inches in height. Ground cover shall have a minimum two (2) inch diameter pot.
5. Trees and shrubs shall be of nursery-grown stock and shall be insect and disease free. Plants should be well-formed and healthy nursery-grown stock. The root ball should be inspected to insure that it is undamaged and contains good quality soil and that it encompasses the entire root system.
6. The quality and size of plants, spread of roots, and size of balls shall be measured and determined in accordance with AANI Z60.1-1986 (or current addition) "American Standard for Nursery Stock" as published by the American Association of Nurserymen, Inc.
7. Trees and shrubs shall be planted according to the following recommended horticultural procedures:
a. Planting operations shall be performed during periods within the planting season when weather and soil conditions are suitable and in accordance with accepted local practices.
b. Deciduous and evergreen tree planting holes shall be a minimum of two (2) feet larger than the diameter of the root ball and dug to a depth that will place the trees in the same relation to finished grade as the tree bore to its pre-dug existing grade. The root ball shall sit on a convex mound of undisturbed sub-grade. Topsoil and subsoil shall be mixed thoroughly with sphagnum peat or humus before backfilling.
c. Shrub planting holes shall be a minimum of twelve (12) to eighteen (18) inches larger than the ball.
d. Plantings shall be set plumb and straight. The planting shall be set at such a level that, after settlement, a normal or natural relationship to the crown of the plant with the ground surface will be established. The plant shall be
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 204
located in the center of the pit. Roots shall be spread evenly throughout the hole and soil added carefully.
e. The backfill soil shall be tamped in place and the hole filled to the top of the root ball. The added soil should be tamped gently, but not compacted, and an eight (8) inch soil saucer rim for the evergreen and deciduous trees and a three (3) inch saucer rim for the shrubs shall be created. A saucer rim shall not be needed when a shrub is planted in a mulched planting bed.
f. Plants shall be thoroughly watered according to an approved watering schedule.
g. Contractor shall report to the Township Engineer any soil or drainage conditions considered detrimental to the growth of the plant material.
h. Insofar as it is practical, plant material shall be planted on the day of delivery. In the event this is not possible, the contractor shall protect stock not planted and water it appropriately. Plants shall not remain unplanted for longer than a three (3) day period after delivery.
i. Plants shall not be bound with wire or rope at any time so as to damage the bark or break branches. Plants shall be handled from the bottom of the ball only.
j. Tree trunks shall be wrapped with tree wrap which shall be removed after one (1) growing season.
k. In the case of balled and burlapped trees, the burlap and bindings shall be removed from the top of the root ball. If synthetic, non-biodegradable burlap and twine or wire mesh is used, complete removal of these materials shall be required after setting plant material in hole.
l. All trees and shrubs shall be delivered to the site unpruned. Each tree and shrub shall be pruned in accordance with standard horticultural practices to preserve the natural character of the plant. One-third (1/3) of the leaf area should be removed by thinning the branches and reducing their length. The central leader of the tree shall not be cut.
m. Trees shall be supported immediately after planting. All trees greater than six (6) inches shall be guyed to anchors. Smaller trees shall be staked with two (2) wood stakes. The stakes shall have a minimum two (2) inch nominal diameter. The support wires between the stakes and the tree shall be a double strand of galvanized wire, with a minimum of No. 15 gauge. To protect the tree from injury, the portion of the support wire in contact with the tree shall be encased in reinforced rubber hosing or equal. To increase the visibility for safety, surveyor's flags shall be tied to the support wires.
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 205
n. All planting beds and tree saucers shall be dressed to a minimum depth of three (3) inches with shredded hardwood mulch.
o. No plant, except ground covers, shall be planted less than two (2) feet from existing structures and sidewalks.
p. No deciduous or evergreen trees shall be planted closer than ten (10) feet to a sanitary or utility easement.
q. Underground irrigation systems shall be installed in all buffers greater than two (2) feet in height as measured from the toe of the slope to the top and other areas of mass planting.
r. All plant material shall be guaranteed by the contractor to be in a vigorous growing condition. Provisions shall be made for a growth guarantee of at least two (2) years for trees and a minimum of two (2) growing seasons for shrubs. Replacement of dead or diseased material shall be made at the beginning of each planting season. All replacements shall have a guarantee equal to that stated above.
K. Tree Management Plan and Tree Replacement. The purpose of this section is to establish protective regulations for trees within the Township of Deptford in order to control problems of flooding, soil erosion, air and noise pollution; to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizenry of the Township; and to promote quality development in the Township. The intent of this section is to encourage the protection of the greatest number of trees within the tree protection zone and of large specimen trees throughout the Township, regardless of location.
1. Disturbance zone defined. That portion of a lot covered by existing or proposed buildings, structures or improvements and within a certain distance around same as noted below:
a. House or building - Twelve (12) feet from foundation wall.
b. Garage - Eight (8) feet from foundation wall.
c. Pool/ Cabana - Twelve (12) feet from foundation wall.
d. Driveway/ sidewalk - Five (5) feet
e. Septic fields - Ten (10) feet
f. Underground utility - Five (5) feet
g. Paved parking/drive aisle - Five (5) feet
h. Shed - Five (5) feet
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 206
i. Improvement (other) - Five (5) feet
2. Applicability. With the exceptions as set forth in this Section, no person shall cut or remove, or cause to be cut or removed, any tree with a diameter of eight (8) inches or greater upon any lands in the Township unless the cutting or removal is accomplished in accordance with the provisions of this Section. At the time of a minor subdivision, preliminary major subdivision or site plan application submitted pursuant to this chapter, a Tree Protection Management Plan shall be submitted if there are ten (10) or more total non-specimen trees, or one (1) or more total specimen trees, cut or removed or proposed to be cut or removed during development. The provisions of this Section shall be applicable to all property owners in the Township, or their designees, with the following exceptions:
a. When the property in which the tree(s) are located is in excess of one (1) acre and the owner or his designee has submitted an application to the Deptford Township Planning Board or Zoning Board, as the case may be, for subdivision or site plan approval. For the purposes of calculating one (1) acre in a subdivision application, the total area of all lots shall be considered.
b. Any cultivated tree growing on property actually being used as a nursery, orchard or Christmas tree farm.
c. Any tree cut or removed for agricultural use of lands when operated in accordance with a farm conservation plan approved by the local Soil Conservation Service District or tree management plan prepared by a NJDEP approved forester (see sub-paragraph -3, herein), provided that a copy of such plan is filed with the Environmental Commission of Deptford.
d. Any tree, which in the opinion of the Township constitutes an immediate threat to the health or safety of the general public.
e. Any tree that is dead or diseased.
f. Pruning and removal of trees by utility companies to provide for line clearance of underground and overhead utilities.
g. The standards contained herein shall be considered the minimum standards to be met and maintained. Standards established by other Township ordinances, or by state and federal rules and regulations shall apply where those standards are more restrictive than the standards set forth herein.
3. Woodland management plan. Plans for the harvesting of timber shall be in accordance with the standards and recommendations of the New Jersey Forest
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 207
Service. A copy of such plan shall be filed with the Environmental Commission of Deptford at least fifteen (15) days prior to the harvesting of timber.
4. Requirements of a Tree Protection Management Plan. A Tree Protection Management Plan shall include the following information:
a. Applicant's name, street address, telephone number;
b. Lot owner's name, street address, telephone number;
c. Lot owner's consent to the application;
d. Block and Lot number;
e. Location of all existing or proposed buildings, driveways, septic fields, easements, underground utility lines, and other improvements;
f. Existing or proposed rights of way;
g. Location of all proposed trees having a diameter of eight (8") inches or greater to be cut, removed, or damaged in such a way as to cause a need for their removal, noting each tree by its species, size and general health condition. If the area involved is greater than one (1) acre, a representative section of the woodland one hundred (100) feet by one hundred (100) feet shall be surveyed and the results extrapolated to the woodland area. This shall not preclude surveying the entire property for specimen trees.
h. Reasons for tree removal, including a description of the type of tree removal: thinning, selective cutting, clear cutting, aesthetic improvement cut.
i. Specifications for the removal of existing trees and for the protection of existing trees to be preserved;
j. Specific proposals for planting replacement trees, if applicable.
k. Existing topography within twenty (20) feet of the proposed disturbed area and proposed grading, if any;
l. Location of existing water courses, wetlands, and floodplains.
5. Review of applications for a Tree Protection Management Plan.
a. All applications for a Tree Protection Management Plan shall be immediately referred by the Administrative Officer to the Environmental Commission and Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be.
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 208
b. The Environmental Commission may provide a recommendation of approval or denial of the Tree Protection Management Plan application to the Board of Jurisdiction. Failure on the part of the Environmental Commission to provide a recommendation within twenty (20) days, provided that the Environmental Commission receives the application at least ten (10) days in advance of its regularly scheduled meeting, shall be deemed a recommendation for approval. In the event that the Environmental Commission recommends denial of an application, they shall specify, in writing, the reason(s) for their action. The Board of Jurisdiction shall review and consider the recommendations of the Environmental Commission and the recommendations shall be made a part of the record before either Board. The Board of Jurisdiction shall have the authority to approve or to deny the Tree Protection Management Plan as part of the subdivision and/or site plan review process.
c. The Planning Board or Zoning Board shall review the application for a Tree Protection Management Plan and, if necessary, request professional review of the application and inspect the site.
d. In the review of the application, the following factors shall be considered in deciding whether to recommend approval, approval with conditions or denial, of the Tree Protection Management Plan:
1) Impact on the growth of remaining trees;
2) Impact on existing drainage patterns;
3) Impact on soil erosion or increased dust;
4) Impact on the vegetative screening between adjacent land uses; and
5) Impact on woodland corridors, stream corridors, greenways, and wildlife habitat.
e. There is hereby established a presumption that each and every tree of eight (8) inches of diameter or greater located within the tree protection zone or any specimen tree located anywhere on the lot shall be preserved at its location on the site. Each such tree located within the tree protection zone or each specimen tree may be removed only if the Board of Jurisdiction finds that the applicant has set forth:
1) That it is necessary to remove trees which pose a safety hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or threatens to cause disruption of public services.
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 209
2) That it necessary to remove trees which pose a safety hazard to a building.
3) That it is necessary to remove diseased trees, trees infested with destructive insects liable to infect healthy trees on the subject or adjacent property, or trees weakened by age, fire or other injury.
4) That it is necessary to observe good forestry practices, i.e., the number of healthy trees that a given parcel of land will support when documented by a report prepared on behalf of the applicant by a professional forester or a certified landscape architect.
5) That it is necessary for the reasonable development of the site pursuant to other provisions of this ordinance.
6) Other conditions which, in the judgment of the Planning Board/Zoning Board, warrant the removal of a tree.
f. No building permit shall be issued until the applicant has obtained approval and fulfilled any conditions attached thereto of its Tree Protection Management Plan application. Such approval or approval with conditions may be included in the actions of the Board of Jurisdiction in approving a site plan or subdivision application.
6. Planting of new trees and replacement of trees.
a. Where the Planning Board or Zoning Board, whichever has jurisdiction, determines that it is impossible to retain trees in the tree protection zone, or any specimen tree as defined by this Section, due to cutting, filling, or other construction activity, the applicant shall replant one (1") inch of new tree diameter for every four (4") inches of existing tree diameter removed. Replacement trees should be shown on the Tree Protection Management Plan for review. New replacement trees should have a minimum diameter of two and one-half (2.5) inches measured six (6) inches above the ground. Replanting should be done according to the standards specified by the American Nurserymen's Association.
b. Criteria for the selection of new trees. When an applicant is required to replace trees as described above, the applicant should replace the trees with the same species that were removed or, with the approval of the Planning Board/ Zoning Board, choose other tree species, preferably native to Deptford Township. Wherever possible trees that serve as important food sources for wildlife such as oak, walnut, cherry, and holly should be selected except in those areas where specific problems caused by falling nuts and fruits would occur. In selecting replacement trees, the following positive criteria should be used. These guidelines should also be followed in choosing trees proposed to be retained or cleared.
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 210
1) Species longevity;
2) Native to the area;
3) Hardiness (wind firmness, climate requirements, characteristics of soil to hold tree);
4) Resistance to insect and disease attack and to pollution;
5) Aesthetic values (autumn, coloration, type of flowers or fruit, form characteristics);
6) Low maintenance and care (pruning, etc.);
7) High wildlife values;
8) Climate protection of pedestrians, vehicles, and buildings;
9) Size at maturity;
10) Effect of soil retention and erosion control; and
11) Value as a noise buffer.
L. Protection of Existing Trees. Applicants shall exercise due care to protect trees to be retained from damage during construction. The following procedures shall be observed in order to protect retained trees.
1. Protection from mechanical injury.
2. Prior to any grubbing or clearing, all trees to be retained within twenty-five (25) feet of a building and all other improvements should be protected from equipment damage by enclosing the drip lines of the trees with sections of snow fence or boards, wired together. All exposed roots and low hanging branches should be equally protected. Groups of trees may be protected by fencing the drip lines of the entire tree mass to be retained.
3. Heavy equipment operators should not damage existing tree trunks and roots. Feeder roots should not be cut closer than the distance of the drip line from the tree trunks and should be cut with pruning shears or other tools which will make a clean cut.
4. Tree trunks and exposed roots accidentally damaged during construction should be protected from further damage. Damaged branches should be sawed off at the branch collar. No shellac or pruning paint should be used. When the portion of the tree to be removed is diseased, the pruning equipment should be dipped in alcohol or disinfectant prior to use on another tree to prevent the spread of the disease.
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 211
5. Deciduous trees should be given an application of liquid slow release, low nitrogen, all purpose fertilizer to aid in their recovery from possible damage caused by construction operations. Such application should be made at a distance of one foot from the trunk to the drip line and should be made as soon as construction is completed and again one (1) year after the first application has been made.
6. Trees should not be used for roping, cables, signs or fencing. Nails and spikes should not be driven into trees.
7. The area around the base of existing trees should be left open to provide access for water and nutrients. Therefore, no impervious cover, or storage of equipment, materials, debris, or fill should be allowed within the drip line of any existing tree to be retained.
8. Protection from grade change. If an increase of the grade is proposed, the applicant should install either:
a. A system of gravel and drain tiles at the old soil level opening into a dry well built around the trunk and designed for each tree, individually fitting the contour of the land so that it drains water away from the tree trunk.
b. A retaining wall between the existing grade and the higher grade. A detailed plan for each proposed retaining wall should be provided.
c. If a decrease of the grade is proposed, the applicant should initiate one (1) of the following methods to protect the trees:
d. Terracing the grade at the drip line and out from the tree.
e. A retaining wall between the existing grade and the lower grade. A detailed plan for each proposed retaining wall should be provided.
9. Protection from excavation. When digging trenches for utility lines and other similar uses, the applicant should adhere to the following, listed in order of preference:
a. If possible, trenches should bypass the root area.
b. If it is impossible for the trenches to bypass the root area, trenches should be tunneled under the trees.
c. If trenches must be dug along the side of a tree, the following precautions should be observed:
1) Trenches should be no closer to the trunk than half the distance from the drip line.
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 212
2) As few roots as possible should be cut.
3) If roots are cut, they should be cut as cleanly as possible.
4) The trench should be backfilled as soon as possible, avoiding soil compaction.
10. Protection during construction clean-up.
a. All construction debris should be hauled away. No such debris should be burned or buried.
b. Fences and barriers around trees should be the last thing to be removed from the site, prior to the installation of final landscaping or building occupancy.
M. Streetscape Standards. Retail, office, multi-family and age-restricted residential and institutional uses located on arterial roads as depicted on the Circulation Element of the Master Plan shall be designed utilizing the Streetscape Design Standards of the Township of Deptford, herein incorporated by reference. In general, the design shall incorporate a dual purpose sidewalk suitable for pedestrians and bicyclists, masonry piers and solid masonry wall sections or picket fencing, street trees, low shrubs and berms, ornamental trees, ornamental street lighting, seating, bicycle racks, perpendicular sidewalks connecting the street sidewalk with the building entrance, and building signage.
§ 32. Common Open space Standards.
A. The following standards for the provision of common open space pertain to any multi-family development in the Township, including but not limited to the RM-1 and RM-2 Districts and PUD's.
1. Not less than twenty-five percent (25%) of land area of every multi-family development shall be preserved as common open space or shall be dedicated to active recreational or community facilities.
2. At least twenty-five percent (25%) of the required open space area shall be free of environmental constraints such as flood plains, wetlands, bodies of water, storm water drainage ways and basins, or steep slopes. This land shall be utilized for common recreational or community facilities.
3. Common, active recreation shall be provided at a ratio of not less than one (1) acre for every one hundred (100) anticipated residents.
4. The recorded plan and deeds shall indicate that no additional development of principal structures can occur in the common open space area. The open space shall be restricted against any future building, development or use, except as is consistent with that of providing for open space for recreational, conservation, agriculture or aesthetic satisfaction of the residents of the development or of the
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 213
general public. Buildings or uses for non-commercial recreation, cultural, or agricultural purposes compatible with the open space objectives may be permitted only with the express approval of the Planning Board, following the approval of the building and site plans by the Planning Board.
5. Any land set aside as open space must be made subject to a deed restriction or agreement in a form acceptable to the Planning Board and duly recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Gloucester County. All documents pertaining to the conveyance and maintenance of the open space shall meet the approval of the Planning Board as to legal form and effect.
6. Methods of conveyance - All open space must be conveyed in accordance with one of the following methods:
a. Dedication in fee-simple to the Township - The Township may, at the discretion of the Township Council, accept any portion or portions of the open space provided:
1) It is determined by the Planning Board that such land is suitable in size, shape, location, and access and the Township Council may determine that such lands will benefit the general public of the municipality;
2) The Township agrees to and has access to maintain such lands;
3) The titles are conveyed to the Township without cost; and
4) The Township Council shall adopt a resolution accepting the deed of dedication from the landowner together with an account of monies as determined by the Township Council which shall be deposited in a special municipal trust account that shall be used only for the purpose of maintaining the land. The maintenance funds shall be determined by the Township Engineer based on an estimate of annual costs for the maintenance of the site including constructed facilities. Sufficient funds shall be posted to cover all costs is perpetuity and shall be based on a present worth value using a three percent (3%) rate of return.
b. Conveyance of title to a conservancy, corporation, homeowners association, funded community trust, condominium corporation, individual or other legal entity, provided that:
1) The terms of such instrument of conveyance must include provisions suitable to the municipality assuming such organization can guarantee:
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 214
(a) The continued use of such land for the intended purpose in perpetuity;
(b) Continuity of proper maintenance;
(c) Availability funds required for such maintenance;
(d) Adequate insurance protection;
(e) Provision for payment of applicable taxes;
(f) The right of the Township to enter upon and maintain such property at the expense of the organization in the event the organization fails to maintain the property; and
(g) Such other covenants and/or easements necessary to fulfill the purposes and intent of this chapter.
2) The following are prerequisites for a condominium corporation, homeowners association, or similar entity:
(a) Disposition of the open space must be approved by the Planning Board, prior to final plan approval, and the final plats recorded before any dwelling units are sold, leased, or otherwise conveyed;
(b) Membership must be mandatory for each buyer and/or lessee. The organizational papers shall set forth the voting rights and the manner and time of transference of the organization and its assets from developer to homeowner;
(c) It must be responsible for liability insurance, taxes, recovery for loss sustained by casualty, condemnation or otherwise, and the maintenance of recreational and other facilities;
(d) Members or beneficiaries must pay their pro rata share of the costs, and the assessment levied can become a lien on the property, including any maintenance and associated administrative costs incurred by the municipality;
(e) Such corporation or association shall not be dissolved nor shall it dispose of the open space by sale or otherwise, except to an organization conceived and established to own and maintain the open space. The corporation or association must first offer to dedicate the open space to the Township before any such sale or disposition of open space.
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 215
(f) The dedication of open space, streets, or other lands in common ownership of the corporation, association, individual, or other legal entity or the Township shall be absolute and not subject to reversion for possible future use for further development.
§ 33. Water Supply. Where applicable the Residential Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21-5) and the following shall apply.
A. Where public water is accessible, water mains shall be constructed in such a manner as to make adequate water service available to each lot or building within the development. The entire system shall be designed in accordance with the requirements and standards of the Deptford Township Municipal Utilities Authority and/or the state agency having approval authority and shall be subject to their approval. The system shall also be designed with adequate capacity and sustained pressure to service the lots and permit necessary fire-fighting abilities, and in a looped system with no dead-end lines, whenever possible.
B. Where no public water is accessible, water shall be furnished on an individual lot basis. Well installation, sealing and testing shall be in accordance with the New Jersey Standards for Construction of Water Supply Systems in Realty Improvements (Chapter 199 of the Public Laws of 1954), as amended, and in accordance with the guidelines, resolutions and requirements adopted by the County Board of Health and the Deptford Township Municipal Utilities Authority. Prior to being placed in consumer use and prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any building served by the well, the developer shall certify to the County Board of Health and the Deptford Township Municipal Utilities Authority that he complied with all applicable state, county and local regulations.
C. If a public water supply system will be provided to the area within a six-year period as indicated in the municipal water master plan, official map, or other official document, the Deptford Township Municipal Utilities Authority may require installation of a capped system or "dry lines" (mains, only) within the road right-of-way; or alternatively, the Municipal Utilities Authority may require a payment in lieu of the improvement.
D. Fire hydrants.
1. Fire hydrants shall be provided as required by the Fire Marshall's Office of the Township of Deptford.
2. Hydrants shall be spaced to provide necessary fire flow, and the average area per hydrant typically should not exceed 120,000 square feet. In addition, hydrants shall be spaced so that each residence shall be within five hundred (500) feet of a hydrant and that all commercial buildings shall be within five hundred (500) feet of a hydrant.
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 216
3. A hydrant shall be located at all low points and at all high points with adequate means of drainage provided.
§ 34. Sanitary Sewers and Septic Systems.
Where applicable the Residential Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21-6) and the following shall apply.
A. Sanitary sewers.
Where a public wastewater treatment plant and collection system is accessible, or where such facilities are to be constructed as a condition of approval of any application for development, the developer shall construct such wastewater treatment facilities and/or sanitary sewer lines and building connections in accordance with the design criteria and permit requirements of the Deptford Township Municipal Utilities Authority and those of the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and Energy. The planning, design, construction, installation, modification, and operation of any treatment works shall be in accordance with the applicable NJDEPE regulations implementing the New Jersey Water Pollution Control Act (N.J.S.A. 58:10A-1 et seq.) and the New Jersey Water Quality Planning Act (N.J.S.A. 58:11-A-1 et seq.).and in such a manner as to make adequate sewage treatment available to each lot and building within the development.
B. If a public sanitary sewer system will be provided to the area within a six-year period as indicated in the municipal sewer master plan, official map, and other official document, the Deptford Township Municipal Utilities Authority may require installation of a capped system (mains, only) within the road right-of-way; or alternatively the Municipal Utilities Authority may require a payment in lieu of the improvement. Capped sanitary sewers shall be allowed only in areas indicated for sewer service in the State of New Jersey Statewide Water Quality Management (WQM) Plans and where permitted by the NJDEPE through sewer connection approval.
C. Septic systems.
1. On-site sewage systems, including septic tanks shall be permitted only when it is infeasible to connect to or extend an existing sanitary sewer, as provided for above.
2. On-site sewage systems shall conform to the regulations of the Gloucester County Department of Health, the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, and all other applicable local, county, state, and federal regulations. All systems should be referred to the Deptford Township Municipal Utilities Authority for review.
§ 35. Stormwater Control. See Storm Water Control Ordinance Number 0.9.06.
§ 36. Performance Standards for Industrial Developments.
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 217
A. Fire and explosive hazards. All activities and all storage of flammable and explosive materials at any point shall be provided with adequate safety devices against the hazards of fire and explosion and adequate fire-suppression equipment shall be installed and maintained in an operable condition in accordance with the regulations of the fire marshal’s office, construction official and the regulations of applicable local, county, state, and federal agencies.
B. Electrical disturbance. No activity shall be permitted which results in an electrical disturbance adversely affecting the operation of any equipment beyond the building in which the disturbance is created.
C. Smoke, ash, dust, fume, vapor, gases and other forms of air pollution. There shall be no emission at any point from any chimney or otherwise which can cause damage to human health, to animals or vegetation, or to other forms of property; or which will cause any excessive soiling at any point.
D. Liquid and solid wastes. There shall be no discharge at any point, into any private or public sewerage system, or into any stream, or into the ground of any materials in such a way, or of such temperature, as to contaminate or otherwise cause the emission of hazardous materials except as regulated by applicable local, state, or federal agencies.
E. Noise. No activity or use shall produce a sound pressure level on adjacent property in excess of the level permitted in the following table:
Octave Band Frequency Residential District Non-Residential District
(cycles per second) (decibels) (decibels)
> <
20 75 72 79
75 150 67 74
150 300 59 66
300 600 52 59
600 1200 46 53
1200 2400 40 47
2400 4800 34 41
4800 - 32 39
The maximum permitted sound levels for residential districts shall apply between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. and shall be reduced by six (6) decibels in each octave band for any other time of day. For the purposes of this section, decibels shall mean "A" weighted decibels.
F. Vibration. No activity or operation shall produce at any point along the lot line continuous earthborne vibrations greater than the maximum displacement as permitted in the following table:
Residential District Non-Residential District
Frequency Displacement Displacement
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 218
(cycles per second) (in inches) (in inches)
> <
0 10 .0004 .0020
10 20 .0002 .0010
20 30 .0001 .0006
30 40 .0001 .0004
40 50 .0001 .0003
50 - .0001 .0002
Discrete pulses that do not exceed 100 impulses per minute may not produce more than twice the displacement specified in the table.
G. Glare. No activity or use shall produce a strong, dazzling light or reflection of same beyond its lot lines. Exterior lighting shall be shielded, buffered and directed so that glare, direct light, or reflection will not be a nuisance to adjoining properties, dwellings, streets, districts, or from adjacent buildings within an industrial park. In no event shall a lighting intensity greater than one twenty-five hundredths (.125) footcandle, measured at grade, be permitted beyond the subject lot lines.
H. Odor. No operation shall release materials capable of becoming odorous, either by bacterial decomposition or chemical reaction, that cause or will cause odorous matter or vapor to be generated so as to be readily discernible without instruments from any point along the boundaries of each lot.
I. Operation. All fabricating, manufacturing, or assembling activities shall be conducted entirely within enclosed buildings.
§ 37. General design requirements.
A. General design requirements for all non-residential districts are as follows:
1. No merchandise, products, waste equipment, or similar material or objects shall be displayed or stored outside. However, for automotive sales facilities, vehicles capable of moving under their own power may be displayed and stored outside, except as otherwise regulated in this Ordinance.
a. Outdoor Display. Display of merchandise for sale or rent may occur outdoors under the following requirements:
1) Placement and hours of display shall be shown on a site plan, which will be reviewed by the Township Fire Marshall in addition to other reviewers.
2) A maximum of 50% of the length of the facade and 50% of the width designated for pedestrians or four feet, whichever is less, may be utilized for outdoor display. No display shall impede the free flow of pedestrian traffic in any sidewalk.
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 219
3) No entries or exits may be blocked or any display placed within five feet of any such entry or exit.
4) Any carriers or containers of merchandise must be compatible in design and color scheme to the adjacent building elements
5) Any signage must be printed and similar in design and copy to interior signage
6) All outdoor displays must be portable or movable
7) No outdoor displays or placement of merchandise may be located in any area designated or constructed as a pedestrian or vehicular area except as specified above in f.2.
8) The storage and display of products under canopies which are not sprinklered shall be prohibited.
2. All buildings in a development shall be compatibly designed, whether constructed all at one time or in stages over a period of time. All building walls facing any street or residential district line shall be suitably finished for aesthetic purposes.
3. All portions of the property not utilized by buildings or paved surfaces shall be landscaped.
4. The established grades on the site shall be planned for both aesthetic and drainage purposes. The grading plan, drainage facilities and landscaping shall be coordinated to prevent erosion and silting as well as assuring that the capacity of any natural or man-made drainage system is sufficient to handle the water generated and anticipated both from the site and contributing upstream areas.
5. Trash enclosures must be enclosed behind an opaque fence or wall at least five (5) feet in height, with an opaque self-closing gate. The exterior finish material of the trash enclosure and gate must be compatible with that of the exterior of the principal structure. Trash enclosures shall not be within ten (10) feet of any other structures.
6. Not more than one (1) point of ingress and/or egress shall be permitted within seventy-five (75) feet of another point of ingress and/or egress serving the same tract, and in no case shall a development have more than two (2) such points of ingress and/or egress on any one (1) street frontage.
B. Design requirements for office buildings. [Ord. O.18.13, 12/9/13]
1. Office buildings shall be designed with a base, middle or field, and a top comprising the three main elements of the exterior elevation. In general, the base should comprise that portion of the first or single floor below the window sills. The middle or field should comprise the main body of the building in area which
Deptford Township UDO Design and Improvement Standards
May 5, 2014 Page 220
may be accented by accent lines or trim. The top should generally comprise no more than fifteen percent (15%) of the vertical dimension of the façade and should always be located above the top level of any window.
2. Visual interest shall be created through the use of horizontal displacement along any façade facing a public street. This may be achieved through the creation of prominent entranceways or building offsets that are at least 2 feet measured horizontally.
3. Mirrored glass shall not be used.
4. Office buildings five thousand (5,000) sf. or less in gross floor area shall employ gable, hip or gambrel roofs in their designs.
5. Office parks shall utilize the same roof type throughout the entire development.
6. Exterior Insulation and Finishing System (EIFS), Direct-Applied Finish System (DAFS) and synthetic stucco shall be limited to the middle and top elements of the façade and shall not be used on piers or columns.
Deptford Township UDO General Regulations
May 5, 2014 Page 221
Article V. General Regulations
§ 38. Affordable Housing Controls and Affirmative Marketing Requirements.
[Ord. 0.3.10, 2/22/10]
A. Purpose. This section is designed to implement the New Jersey Fair Housing Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.) and the Township of Deptford’s Housing Element of the Master Plan by ensuring that affordable housing created under the Act is occupied by low and moderate-income households for the appropriate period of time. The words, phrases, and terms herein shall be interpreted to have the same meanings and usages as in the Act and its related regulations, including but not limited to, Uniform Housing Affordability Controls (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.) and the regulations of the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing (N.J.A.C. 5:94-1 et seq.), as they may be amended or superseded. This section also implements the Township’s growth share requirements and provides for the imposition of development fees. This section sets for the affirmative marketing requirements that are intended to create a regional marketing strategy designed to attract buyers and/or renters of all majority and minority groups, regardless of race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry, marital, or familial status, gender, affectional or sexual orientation, disability, age or number of children to housing units which are being marketed by a developer or sponsor of affordable housing
B. Affordability Average; Bedroom Distribution.
1. In each affordable development, at least fifty percent (50%) of the restricted units within each bedroom distribution shall be low-income units and the remainder may be moderate-income units.
2. Affordable developments that are not age-restricted shall be structured in conjunction with realistic market demands such that:
a. The combined number of efficiency and one bedroom units is no greater than twenty percent (20%) of the total low and moderate-income units;
b. At least thirty percent (30%) of all low and moderate-income units are two bedroom units;
c. At least twenty percent (20%) of all low and moderate-income units are three bedroom units; and
d. The remainder, if any, may be allocated at the discretion of the developer.
3. Age-restricted low and moderate-income units may utilize a modified bedroom distribution. At a minimum, the number of bedrooms shall equal the number of age-restricted low and moderate-income units within the affordable development. The standard may be met by creating all one-bedroom units or by creating a two-bedroom unit for each efficiency unit.
Deptford Township UDO General Regulations
May 5, 2014 Page 222
4. The maximum rent for affordable units within each affordable development shall be affordable to households earning no more than sixty percent (60%) of median income and the average rent for low and moderate-income units shall be affordable to households earning no more than fifty-two percent (52%) of median income. The developers and/or municipal sponsors of restricted rental units shall establish at least one rent for each bedroom type for both low income and moderate-income units, provided that at least ten percent (10%) of all low and moderate-income units shall be affordable to households earning no more than thirty percent (30%) of median income.
5. The maximum sales price of restricted ownership units within each affordable development shall be affordable to households earning no more than seventy percent (70%) of median income. Each affordable development shall achieve an affordability average of fifty-five percent (55%) for restricted ownership units. In achieving this affordability average, moderate income ownership units shall be available for at least three different prices for each bedroom type, and low income ownership units shall be available for at least two different prices for each bedroom type.
6. Affordable units shall utilize the same type of heating source as market units within the affordable development.
7. The facade of an affordable housing unit shall be indistinguishable from those of market units in terms of the use of exterior materials, windows, doors, reveal, roof pitch, color, or other material. Affordable housing units shall be interspersed with market rate housing to the greatest extent possible.
8. For inclusionary developments with a single housing tenure, the affordable housing units shall have the same tenure as the market housing units.
C. Occupancy Standards.
1. In determining the initial rents and initial sales prices for compliance with the affordable average requirements for restricted units other than assisted living facilities, the following standards shall be used:
a. A studio shall be affordable to a one person household;
b. A one bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one and one-half person household;
c. A two bedroom unit shall be affordable to a three person household;
d. A three bedroom unit shall be affordable to a four and one-half person household;
e. A four bedroom unit shall be affordable to a six person household.
Deptford Township UDO General Regulations
May 5, 2014 Page 223
2. For assisted living facilities, the following standards shall be used:
a. A studio shall be affordable to a one person household;
b. A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to one and one-half person household;
c. A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a two person household or to two one-person households.
3. In referring certified households to specific restricted units, to the extent feasible and without causing an undue delay in occupying the unit, the administrative agent shall strive to:
a. Provide an occupant for each unit bedroom;
b. Provide children of different sex with separate bedrooms; and
c. Prevent more than two persons from occupying a single bedroom.
D. Ownership Units.
1. Each restricted ownership unit shall remain subject to the requirements of the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.) until the Township of Deptford elects to release the unit from such requirements pursuant to action taken in compliance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5(g). Prior to such municipal election, a restricted ownership unit shall remain subject to the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5-80-26.5, for a period of at least 30 years.
2. Each restricted ownership unit shall remain in compliance with and subject to the requirements of the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5 for control periods, N.J.A.C.5:80-26.6 for price restrictions, N.J.A.C.5:80-26.7 for buyer income eligibility, N.J.A.C.5:80-26.8 for limitations on indebtedness and subordination, N.J.A.C.5:80-26.9 for capital improvements, and N.J.A.C.5:80-26.10 for maintenance.
E. Rental Units.
1. Each restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the requirements of the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls until the Township of Deptford elects to release the unit from such requirement pursuant to action taken in compliance with N.J.A.C.5:80-26.11(e). Prior to such a municipal election, a restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the requirements of N.J.A.C.5:80-26.11, for a period of 30 years.
2. Each restricted rental unit shall remain in compliance with and subject to the requirements of the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.11
Deptford Township UDO General Regulations
May 5, 2014 Page 224
for control periods, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.12 for restrictions on rents, and N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.13 for tenant income eligibility.
F. Administrative Agent.
1. Each income restricted unit identified in Deptford Township’s Housing Element and Fair Share Plan shall have a designated administrative agent. The affordability controls set forth in this ordinance shall be administered and enforced by such administrative agent. The primary responsibility of the administrative agent shall be to ensure that the restricted units under administration are sold or rented, as applicable, only to low and moderate-income households. Among the responsibilities of the administrative agent are those outlined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.14. The Township of Deptford hereby designates the Housing Affordability Service in the NJ Department of Community Affairs as the designated administrative agent, or some other such administrative agent as may be approved by the NJ Department of Community Affairs, the NJ Housing Mortgage Finance Agency or COAH for the administration of affordability controls and other requirements pursuant to the Fair Housing Act.
2. The administrative agent shall have the responsibility to income qualify low and moderate-income households, to place income eligible households in low and moderate-income units upon initial occupancy, to provide for the initial occupancy of low and moderate-income units with income qualified households, to continue to qualify households for re-occupancy of units as they become vacant during the period of affordability controls, to assist with advertising and outreach to low and moderate income households, and to enforce the terms of the deed restriction and mortgage loan. The administrative agent shall provide counseling services to low and moderate-income applicants on subjects such as budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental lease requirements and landlord/tenant law.
3. Procedures for changing administrative agents. In order to ensure an orderly transfer of control responsibility from a municipality to an administrative agent, from one administrative agent to another administrative agent, or other transfer, the requirements as set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.17 shall apply as are necessary before or during the transition. The administrative agent’s enforcement responsibility for implementing such practices and procedures shall not be delegated or otherwise transferred to any other party, except to a successor administrative agent.
4. Enforcement. By accepting state funds for affordable housing purposes, or by submitting to the jurisdiction of COAH, Deptford Township shall be deemed to have delegated to its administrative agent the day-to-day responsibility for implementing practices and procedures designated to ensure effective compliance with the controls set forth in this Article. Deptford Township, however, shall retain the ultimate responsibility for ensuring effective compliance with the
Deptford Township UDO General Regulations
May 5, 2014 Page 225
requirements as set forth in the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.).
G. Municipal Housing Liaison. There is hereby created the position of Municipal Housing Liaison who shall be a municipal employee. The Township Council shall appoint the Municipal Housing Liaison by resolution. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall act as the municipality’s representative between COAH, municipal officials, the Township’s designated administrative agent and the developer or sponsor of affordable housing. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for tracking the progress of affordable housing, addressing or designating a delegate to address inquiries regarding affordable housing from the public and COAH, and complying with COAH monitoring and reporting requirements.
H. Affirmative Marketing.
1. The Township of Deptford’s affirmative marketing plan is intended to address the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15. Deptford Township is located in COAH Housing Region 5 that consists of Burlington, Camden, and Gloucester Counties. The affirmative marketing program is a continuing program that shall meet the requirements set forth in this subsection.
2. The affirmative marketing plan is intended to be used by all developers of affordable housing restricted to low and moderate-income households located within the Township of Deptford. Information provided in the marketing of low and moderate-income units shall contain the name, address, directions (to the project), the number of units (including the number of sales and/or rental units), a range of prices or the price of sales and/or rental units, the name of the sales agent and/or rental manager, along with the location(s) and hours when applications may be obtained and directions to sales and/or rental office, a description of the size (in bedrooms) of the units and of the random selection method that shall be used to select occupants, a disclosure of required application fee(s), and the maximum income permitted to qualify for the housing units. Advertising and outreach shall take place during the first week of the marketing program and each month thereafter until all of the affordable units have been leased or sold.
3. Location of Applications. Applications, brochure(s), sign’s, and/or poster(s) shall be located at the Deptford Municipal Building, Gloucester County Department of Human Services and respective sales and rental offices. Applications shall also be mailed to prospective applicants upon request.
4. The affirmative marketing plan shall include the media and outreach sources to be used in advertising and publicizing the availability of affordable housing in Deptford Township.
5. In implementing the affirmative marketing plan, each administrative agent shall designate an experienced staff agent approved by COAH to provide counseling services to low and moderate income applicants on subjects such as budgeting,
Deptford Township UDO General Regulations
May 5, 2014 Page 226
credit history, mortgage qualifications, rental lease agreements, and landlord/tenant law, as applicable. Alternatively, an administrative agent may refer applicants to an experienced agency approved by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development to provide such counseling services.
6. The Township shall also ensure that all original applicant and sales records of affordable units be returned to the municipality for reporting purposes and to aid with future resale. The Township shall retain the ultimate responsibility for the proper administration of the affirmative marketing program including initial sales and rentals and resale and re-rental.
I. Household certification and random selection.
1. The administrative agent shall prepare a standardized form of certification and shall secure all information from applicant households necessary and appropriate to determine that restricted units are occupied by properly sized households with appropriate low or moderate income levels. No household may be referred to a restricted unit, or may receive a commitment with respect to a restricted unit, unless that household has received a signed, dated, and executed certification, as set forth in the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.16, Applications J and K, as applicable). An initial certification shall be valid for no more than 180 days unless a valid contract for sale or lease has been executed within that time period. In this event certification shall be valid until such time as the contract for sale or lease is ruled invalid and no occupancy has occurred. Certifications may be renewed in writing, at the request of the head of the certified household, for an additional 180 days at the administrative agent’s discretion.
2. When reviewing an applicant’s household income to determine eligibility, the administrative agent shall make its determination in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.16. The administrative agent may also require a household to produce documentation of household composition for determining the correct unit size and applicable income level.
3. The administrative agent may withhold a certificate of eligibility as a result of the applicant’s inability to demonstrate sufficient present assets for down payment or security deposit purposes. A certificate of eligibility may also be withheld by the administrative agent as a result of the applicant’s inability to verify funds claimed as assets, household composition, or other facts represented. The administrative agent shall deny the certificate of eligibility should it be determined that any willful and material misstatement of fact has been made by an applicant seeking eligibility.
4. The administrative agent shall employ a random means of selecting households when matching certified applicants to available affordable units.
Deptford Township UDO General Regulations
May 5, 2014 Page 227
J. Appeals from Decision of Administrative Agent. Appeals from all decisions of the administrative agent shall be filed in writing with the Executive Director of the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency. When acting in this capacity, the Executive Director may appoint one or more employees of the Agency, COAH and/or the Department of Community Affairs to assist him or her in rendering the final decision; whenever he or she, in his or her sole discretion, determines that committee participation would materially provide a fair and just disposition of the appeal. A written decision of the Executive Director upholding, modifying or reversing an administrative agent’s decision shall be a final administrative action.
§ 38.1 Development Impact Fee. [Ord. 0.3.10, 2/22/10]
A. Purpose. This section establishes standards for the collection, maintenance, and expenditure of development fees pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:97-6. Fees collected pursuant to this section shall be used for the sole purpose of providing low- and moderate-income housing. This ordinance shall be interpreted within the framework N.J.A.C. 5:97-1 et seq. and any words and phrases shall have the same meanings they have pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:97-1.4, as such definitions may from time to time be amended.
B. Residential Development Fees.
1. Developers shall pay a fee of one and one-half percent (1.5%) of the equalized assessed value of residential development, provided no increased density is permitted.
2. When an increase in residential density pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d(5) has been granted by the Zoning Board of Adjustment, developers may be required to pay a development fee of six (6) percent of the equalized assessed value for each additional unit that may be realized. However, if the zoning on a site has changed during the two-year period preceding the filing of such a variance application, the base density for the purposes of calculating the bonus development fee shall be the highest density permitted by right during the two-year period preceding the filing of the variance application.
Example: If an approval allows four units to be constructed on a site that was zoned for two units, the fees could equal one percent of the equalized assessed value on the first two units; and the specified higher percentage up to six percent of the equalized assessed value for the two additional units, provided zoning on the site has not changed during the two-year period preceding the filing of such a variance application.
C. Non-residential Development Fees.
1. Regardless of zoning district, developers of non-residential uses shall pay a fee equal to two and one-half percent (2½ %) of the equalized assessed value of the land and improvements for all new non-residential construction on an unimproved lot or lots, except for certain non-residential
Deptford Township UDO General Regulations
May 5, 2014 Page 228
2. Non-residential developers, except for developers of the types of development specifically exempted, shall also pay a fee equal to two and one-half (2.5) percent of the increase in equalized assessed value resulting from any additions to existing structures to be used for non-residential purposes.
3. Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing structure is demolished and replaced. The development fee of two and a half percent (2.5%) shall be calculated on the difference between the equalized assessed value of the pre-existing land and improvement and the equalized assessed value of the newly improved structure, i.e. land and improvement, at the time final certificate of occupancy is issued. If the calculation required under this section results in a negative number, the non-residential development fee shall be zero.
D. Eligible Exactions, Ineligible Exactions and Exemptions.
1. Affordable housing developments and developments where the developer has made a payment in lieu of on-site construction of affordable units shall be exempt from development fees.
2. Developments that have received preliminary or final approval prior to the imposition of a municipal development fee shall be exempt from development fees unless the developer seeks a substantial change in the approval. Where a site plan approval does not apply, a zoning and/or building permit shall be synonymous with preliminary or final site plan approval for this purpose. The fee percentage shall be vested on the date that the building permit is issued. This requirement shall not affect the obligation of developers to pay a fee imposed by any applicable predecessor ordinance.
3. Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing structure is expanded or undergoes a change to a more intense use that requires an application for development or for the construction of an entirely new building. The development fee shall be calculated on the increase in the equalized assessed value of the improved or constructed structure.
4. Any use that is required to make a payment in lieu of construction shall be exempted from the payment of a development fee for affordable housing.
5. The non-residential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or market rate development shall be subject to development fee of two and a half percent (2.5%), unless otherwise exempted below.
6. The development fee of two and a half percent (2.5%) shall not apply to an increase in equalized assessed value resulting from alterations, change in use within existing footprint, reconstruction, renovations and repairs.
7. Non-residential developments shall be exempt from the payment of non-residential development fees in accordance with the exemptions required pursuant
Deptford Township UDO General Regulations
May 5, 2014 Page 229
to P.L.2008, c.46, as specified in the Form N-RDF “State of New Jersey Non-Residential Development Certification/Exemption” Form. Any exemption claimed by a developer shall be substantiated by that developer.
8. A developer of a non-residential development exempted from the non-residential development fee pursuant to P.L.2008, c.46 shall be subject to it at such time the basis for the exemption no longer applies, and shall make the payment of the non-residential development fee, in that event, within three years after that event or after the issuance of the final certificate of occupancy of the non-residential development, whichever is later.
9. If a property which was exempted from the collection of a non-residential development fee thereafter ceases to be exempt from property taxation, the owner of the property shall remit the fees required pursuant to this section within forty-five (45) days of the termination of the property tax exemption. Unpaid non-residential development fees under these circumstances may be enforceable by the municipality as a lien against the real property of the owner.
E. Collection of Fees.
1. Upon the passage of the resolution of memorialization granting a preliminary, final or other applicable approval for a development, the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment Secretary shall notify the Construction Code Official of the approving authority’s action.
2. Once all prior approvals have been obtained, the person requesting a building permit application for a non-residential development, only, shall also be provided with a copy of Form N-RDF “State of New Jersey Non-Residential Development Certification/ Exemption” as part of the building permit application. Form N-RDF shall be completed as per the instructions provided. The Construction Code Official shall verify the information submitted by the non-residential developer or his designee. The Deptford Township Tax Assessor shall verify any requested exemptions and shall prepare estimated and final assessments as per the instructions provided in Form N-RDF.
3. The Construction Code Official shall notify the Township Tax Assessor of the issuance of the first building permit for a development which is subject to a development fee.
4. Within ninety (90) days of receipt of that notice, the Township Tax Assessor shall provide an estimate of the equalized assessed value of the development based on the architectural and Board approved plans filed.
5. The Construction Code Official shall notify the Township Tax Assessor of any and all requests for the scheduling of a final inspection on property which is subject to a development fee.
Deptford Township UDO General Regulations
May 5, 2014 Page 230
6. Within ten (10) business days of a request for the scheduling of a final inspection, the Township Tax Assessor shall confirm or modify the previously estimated equalized assessed value of the improvements of the development; calculate the development fee; and thereafter notify the developer of the amount of the fee.
7. Should the Township Tax Assessor fail to determine or notify the developer of the amount of the development fee within 10 business days of the request for final inspection, the developer may estimate the amount due and pay that estimated amount consistent with the dispute process set forth in N.J.S. 40:55D-8.6, as it may be amended or superseded.
8. Fifty percent (50%) of the development fee shall be collected at the time of issuance of the building permit. The remaining portion shall be collected at the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The developer shall be responsible for paying the difference between the fee calculated at building permit and that determined at issuance of certificate of occupancy.
9. Appeal of development fees.
a. A developer may challenge residential development fees imposed by filing a challenge with the Gloucester County Board of Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the Board, collected fees shall be placed in an interest bearing escrow account by the Chief Financial Officer of Deptford Township. Appeals from a determination of the Board may be made to the tax court in accordance with the provisions of the State Tax Uniform Procedure Law, R.S.54:48-1 et seq., within ninety (90) days after the date of such determination. Interest earned on amounts escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
b. A developer may challenge non-residential development fees imposed by filing a challenge with the Director of the NJ Division of Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the Director, which shall be made within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the challenge, collected fees shall be placed in an interest bearing escrow account by Chief Financial Officer of Deptford Township. Appeals from a determination of the Board may be made to the tax court in accordance with the provisions of the State Tax Uniform Procedure Law, R.S.54:48-1 et seq., within ninety (90) days after the date of such determination. Interest earned on amounts escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
F. Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
1. There is hereby created a separate, interest-bearing housing trust fund in TD Bank, N.A., or as such depository may be changed by action of the governing body in accordance with –F.3 herein below, for the purpose of depositing development fees collected from residential and non-residential developers and proceeds from the sale of units with extinguished controls. All development fees
Deptford Township UDO General Regulations
May 5, 2014 Page 231
paid by developers pursuant to this ordinance shall be deposited into this fund. Nothing herein shall affect the continuation of existing affordable housing trust accounts.
2. The following additional funds shall be deposited in the Affordable Housing Trust Fund and shall at all times be identifiable by source and amount:
a. Payments in lieu of on-site construction of affordable units.
b. Developer contributed funds to ensure that ten percent (10%) of the adaptable entrances in a townhouse or other multi-story attached development are accessible to the handicapped.
c. Rental income from municipally operated units.
d. Repayments from affordable housing program loans.
e. Recapture funds.
f. Proceeds from the sale of affordable units.
g. Any other funds collected in connection with Deptford’s affordable housing program.
3. Within seven (7) days from the opening of the trust fund account, or change in such account by action of the governing body, the Township of Deptford shall provide COAH with written authorization, in the form of a three-party escrow agreement between the municipality, the municipality’s financial institution, and COAH to permit the state agency to direct the disbursement of the funds as provided for in N.J.A.C. 5:94-6.16(b).
G. Use of Funds.
1. General. No funds shall be expended from the affordable housing trust fund unless the expenditure conforms to a spending plan approved by COAH. All interest accrued in the housing trust fund shall only be used on eligible affordable housing activities approved by COAH. This provision shall not prevent the municipality from disbursing funds pursuant to any spending plan still in effect prior to the approval of a subsequent spending plan.
2. The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a spending plan approved by COAH. Funds deposited in the Affordable Housing Trust Fund may be used for any activity approved by COAH to address the municipality’s fair share obligation and may be set up as a grant or revolving loan program. Such activities include, but are not limited to: preservation or purchase of housing for the purpose of maintaining or implementing affordability controls, rehabilitation, new construction of affordable housing units and related costs, accessory apartment, market to affordable, or regional housing partnership programs, conversion of
Deptford Township UDO General Regulations
May 5, 2014 Page 232
existing non-residential buildings to create new affordable units, green building strategies designed to be cost saving and in accordance with accepted national or state standards, purchase of land for affordable housing, improvement of land to be used for affordable housing, extensions or improvements of roads and infrastructure to affordable housing sites, financial assistance designed to increase affordability, administration necessary for implementation of the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, or any other activity as permitted pursuant to N.J. A.C. 5:97-8.7 through -8.9 and specified in the approved spending plan.
3. Funds shall not be expended to reimburse Deptford Township for past housing activities.
4. At least thirty percent (30%) of all development fees collected and interest earned shall be used to provide affordability assistance to low- and moderate-income households in affordable units included in the municipal housing plan. One-third of the affordability assistance portion of development fees collected shall be used to provide affordability assistance to those households earning thirty percent (30%) or less of median income by region, or as determined through the affordability assistance calculations of an approved spending plan.
H. Affordability Assistance.
1. Affordability assistance programs may include down payment assistance, security deposit assistance, low interest loans, rental assistance, assistance with homeowners association or condominium fees and special assessments, and assistance with emergency repairs.
2. Affordability assistance to households earning thirty percent (30%) or less of median income may include buying down the cost of low or moderate income units in the municipal housing plan to make them affordable to such households.
3. Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site and funds from the sale of units with extinguished controls shall be exempt from the affordability assistance requirement.
I. Limit on Administrative Expenses. No more than twenty (20%) percent of all revenues collected from development fees may be expended on administration, including, but not limited to, salaries and benefits for municipal employees or consultant fees necessary to develop or implement a new construction program, a Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and/or an affirmative marketing program. In the case of a rehabilitation program, no more than twenty (20%) percent of the revenues collected from development fees shall be expended for such administrative expenses. Administrative funds may be used for income qualification of households, monitoring the turnover of sale and rental units, and compliance with COAH’s monitoring requirements. Legal or other fees related to litigation opposing affordable housing sites or objecting to the Council’s regulations and/or action shall not be eligible uses of the affordable housing trust fund.
Deptford Township UDO General Regulations
May 5, 2014 Page 233
J. Monitoring of Affordable Housing. The municipal housing liaison or secondary designee shall complete and return to COAH all monitoring forms included in monitoring requirements related to the collection of development fees from residential and non-residential developers, payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site, funds from the sale of units with extinguished controls, barrier free escrow funds, rental income, repayments from affordable housing program loans, and any other funds collected in connection with the municipality’s housing program, as well as to the expenditure of revenues and implementation of the housing plan.
[§38.2, Growth Share Affordable Housing Obligation repealed by Ord. 0.3.10, 2/22/10]
§ 39. Provision of Park and Recreation Land.
A. Reservation of land.
1. Any residential major subdivision, other than planned unit developments, or inclusionary developments in the R-6A District, shall reserve land for use as park and recreation facilities as determined herein, provided however, that the applicant may petition the Planning Board to accept a payment of monies in lieu of reservation, as described below.
2. The amount of land to be reserved for park and recreation facilities shall not be less than an amount equal to one (1) acre for each one hundred (100) expected residents. For the purposes of determining the anticipated number of persons expected to reside in the development, the applicant may either present demographic data acceptable to the Township Planning Board or calculate the number of anticipated residents based on the following table, taken from the New Practitioners Guide to Fiscal Impact Analysis (Burchell, et al; Center for Urban Policy Research; Rutgers University Press; 1985):
Unit Type 1BR 2BR 3BR 4BR 5BR Blended
Single family 2.223 3.258 4.031 4.853 3.384
Garden apartment 1.443 2.175 3.439 1.904
Townhouse 1.695 2.019 2.808 2.441
Two family 1.556 2.320 3.429 2.619
3. Such land shall have a minimum easement of thirty (30) feet to a public street and shall not have an average slope exceeding seven percent (7%) and shall be generally located so as to be accessible to the residents of the development.
4. The recorded plan and deeds shall indicate that no additional development of principal structures can occur in the recreation area. The open space shall be restricted against any future building, development or use, except as is consistent with that of providing for recreational, conservation, agriculture or aesthetic satisfaction of the residents of the development or of the general public. Buildings or uses for non-commercial recreation, cultural, or agricultural purposes
Deptford Township UDO General Regulations
May 5, 2014 Page 234
compatible with the open space objectives may be permitted only with the express approval of the Planning Board, following the approval of the building and site plans by the Planning Board.
5. Any land set aside as a recreation area must be made subject to a deed restriction or agreement in a form acceptable to the Planning Board and duly recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Gloucester County. All documents pertaining to the conveyance and maintenance of the recreation area shall meet the approval of the Planning Board as to legal form and effect.
6. Methods of conveyance - All recreation areas must be conveyed in accordance with one of the following methods:
a. Dedication in fee-simple to the Township - The Township may, at the discretion of the Township Council, accept any portion or portions of the recreation area provided:
1) It is determined by the Planning Board that such land is suitable in size, shape, location, and access and the Township Council may determine that such lands will benefit the general public of the Township;
2) The Township agrees to and has access to maintain such lands; and
3) The titles are conveyed to the Township without cost.
b. Conveyance of title to a conservancy, corporation, homeowners association, funded community trust, condominium corporation, individual or other legal entity, provided that:
1) The terms of such instrument of conveyance must include provisions suitable to the Township assuming such organization can guarantee:
(a) The continued use of such land for the intended purpose in perpetuity;
(b) Continuity of proper maintenance;
(c) Availability funds required for such maintenance;
(d) Adequate insurance protection;
(e) Provision for payment of applicable taxes;
(f) The right of the Township to enter upon and maintain such property at the expense of the organization in the event the organization fails to maintain the property; and
Deptford Township UDO General Regulations
May 5, 2014 Page 235
(g) Such other covenants and/or easements necessary to fulfill the purposes and intent of this chapter.
2) The following are prerequisites for a condominium corporation, homeowners association, or similar entity:
(a) Disposition of the open space must be approved by the Planning Board, prior to final plan approval, and the final plats recorded before any dwelling units are sold, leased, or otherwise conveyed;
(b) Membership must be mandatory for each buyer and/or lessee. The organizational papers shall set forth the voting rights and the manner and time of transference of the organization and its assets from developer to homeowner;
(c) It must be responsible for liability insurance, taxes, recovery for loss sustained by casualty, condemnation or otherwise, and the maintenance of recreational and other facilities;
(d) Members or beneficiaries must pay their pro rata share of the costs, and the assessment levied can become a lien on the property, including any maintenance and associated administrative costs incurred by the Township;
(e) Such corporation or association shall not be dissolved nor shall it dispose of the open space by sale or otherwise, except to an organization conceived and established to own and maintain the open space. The corporation or association must first offer to dedicate the recreation area to the Township before any such sale or disposition of the land.
(f) The dedication of recreation areas, open space, streets, or other lands in common ownership of the corporation, association, individual, or other legal entity or the Township shall be absolute and not subject to reversion for possible future use for further development.
B. Fees in lieu of land.
Any applicant may, at the time of preliminary or final major subdivision approval, petition the Planning Board to accept a voluntary contribution of monies in lieu of land dedication or reservation.
Deptford Township UDO General Regulations
May 5, 2014 Page 236
1. Such contribution shall be deposited in a Neighborhood Park and Recreation Improvement Fund to be established by the Township Council. Such contribution shall be used by the Township for acquisition of recreation land or for the improvement of the existing recreational facilities that will actually be available to and benefit the persons in said subdivision or land development and located in the general neighborhood of said subdivision or land development. In the event that there are no recreational facilities in the immediate vicinity of the subdivision or land development, such contribution may be used for the acquisition and/or improvement of other Township-wide recreational facilities.
2. The contribution shall be a cash sum in an amount equal to the fair market value of the area of land that would otherwise been required to have been set aside for park and recreational facilities provided that said sum shall not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per dwelling unit.
3. Payment of fees in lieu of land dedication or reservation are payable prior to the issuance of a building permit for the dwelling unit that it relates to.
4. The Planning Board shall, at its sole discretion, have the authority to accept the offer of payment of fees in lieu of land dedication or reservation of park and recreational facilities or it may decline the offer and require the land dedication or reservation.
§ 40. Reverse Frontage Lots. [Ord. 0.1.10, 2/22/10]
Residential lots with reverse frontage on a collector or arterial road shall be required to contain a landscaped buffer between the rear or side yard and the road that shall be in addition to the minimum required yard depth. The landscaped buffer shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet in depth from the right-of-way or as indicated in Table 31.7, whichever is larger. Driveway access shall only be permitted from the lowest order street that provides access to the property. Along the street frontage without direct driveway access, no fencing shall be placed within fifteen (15) feet of the right-of-way. Any fencing that is installed must have a man gate opening to the high order street without direct driveway access to insure that pedestrian access is provided for maintenance of the required buffer. Corner lots with just two (2) street frontages are not required to place a gate in the fencing facing the street without direct driveway access. Landscaping within the required street buffer should consist of existing vegetation when it can be properly preserved during construction. In the case where existing vegetation can not be preserved or if there is to be an insufficient existing vegetative screen preserved within this buffer, the Board of Jurisdiction may require additional landscaping to be provided, including evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs.
§ 41. Visibility at Street and Driveway Intersections.
Sight triangle easements shall be required at all street intersections, in addition to the specified right-of-way widths, in which no grading, planting or structure shall be erected
Deptford Township UDO General Regulations
May 5, 2014 Page 237
or maintained in such a manner as to obscure the vision above the height of three (3.0) feet and below ten (10) feet, except for street signs, fire hydrants and light standards.
The sight triangle easement for all street intersections is defined as that area outside of the street right-of-way which is bounded by the intersecting street lines and the straight line connecting sight points, one (1) each located on the two (2) intersecting street center lines: arterial streets at one hundred fifty (150) feet; collector streets at one hundred (100) feet; and local streets at thirty (30) feet. Such easement dedication shall be expressed on the plat or plan as follows: "Sight triangle easement deeded for purposes provided for and expressed in the Unified Development Ordinance of Deptford Township."
The sight triangle easement for any driveway entry onto a public road is defined as that area outside of the street right-of-way which is bounded by the intersecting street line and a straight line connecting two sight points, one (1) each located fifty (50) feet along each side of the street and a point ten (10) feet back from the street line along the driveway centerline.
§ 42. Residential Driveways.
A. For residential uses, not including multi-family developments:
1. Continuous open driveways in excess of twenty (20) feet at the street line shall be prohibited.
2. The edge of a paved driveway shall not be closer than three (3) feet to a side or rear property line.
3. No driveway shall have a slope of more than ten-percent.
§ 43. Recreation Uses in Residential Districts.
A. General.
1. The regulations of this Section shall apply to all open private recreational uses, including swimming pools, which require the installation of permanent surfaces, either at ground level or elevated.
2. Such uses are considered "structures" for the purpose of permits and certain other regulations; however, they are not counted as floor area in computing building coverage.
3. No such use shall be located in a front yard, except that a basketball hoop on a pole must be located at least ten (10) feet from the front property line. Additionally, no such use shall be located less than ten (10) feet from any property line as measured from the edges of any permanent surface, except that such a use may be located five (5) feet from a side or rear property line if a six (6) foot fence is erected for at least twenty (20) feet along that side or rear property line.
Deptford Township UDO General Regulations
May 5, 2014 Page 238
4. A basketball hoop or any other recreational use shall not be located within a designated right-of-way. All such uses shall be located completely upon private property.
5. No such use shall be constructed in the Township except in accordance with a permit therefore previously secured from the Zoning Officer. The application for said permit shall be accompanied by a plan showing the size and location of any recreational facility and its enclosure and such other information as may be necessary for the Zoning Officer to determine whether said facility complies with the requirements of this Section.
6. Every tennis or paddle tennis court area shall be completely enclosed by a metal chain-link or mesh fence at least nine (9) feet in height but not in excess of twelve (12) feet in height. Appropriate fences for any other type of recreational use may be required at the discretion of the Zoning Officer. The type, quality and method of construction of any required fence shall be approved by the Construction Officer with the intent that said fence shall act as a protection to adjacent properties against interference from stray balls.
B. Special regulations applicable to swimming pools and man-made ponds.
1. No private residential swimming pool shall be constructed or installed on any lot unless the lot contains a residential building. Pools shall be located in rear yard areas only and shall occupy no more than seventy-five percent (75%) of the yard area in which it is located. All swimming pools used for bathing or swimming purposes in which water may collect in excess of a depth of two (2) feet shall be completely enclosed by a fence. Swimming pools shall be located no less than ten (10) feet from any property line as measured from the water line.
2. The type, quality and method of construction of any required fence shall be approved by the Construction Officer with the intent that it shall act as a safeguard and protection to children. Such fence shall be at least four (4) feet in height, but not in excess of six (6) feet, and non-removable. Fences shall have self-locking and self-closing gates and shall be such as to prevent unauthorized children and stray animals from entering the pool area in accordance with the requirements of the construction code. These requirements shall also apply to soft-sided pools.
3. No swimming pool shall be constructed in the Township except in accordance with a permit therefore previously secured from the Zoning Officer, upon written application accompanied by a plan showing the size, shape, and location of the swimming pool and its enclosure and such other information as may be necessary for the Zoning Officer to determine whether the pool complies with the requirements of this chapter.
a. No commercial swimming pool shall be constructed or installed unless approved as part of a site plan approval. Commercial swimming pools
Deptford Township UDO General Regulations
May 5, 2014 Page 239
shall be classified into types in accordance with their particular use and shall meet the appropriate design standards as set forth by the National Swimming Pool Institute or the Swimming Pool Code of New Jersey, whichever is more stringent.
b. A man-made pond with a water level of two-feet or greater shall be located in a side or rear yard area only. Any man-made pond with a depth of two (2) feet or greater shall comply with the fencing requirements as provided for in subsection 2, above.
§ 44. Grading Requirements. [Ord. O.16.10, 11/8/10]
A. Performance. No construction shall be permitted which creates or aggravates water stagnation, ponding or a drainage problem on adjacent properties.
B. Lot filling. All lots being filled shall comply with Article VII, Soil Erosion and Sediment Control and shall be filled with clean fill and/or topsoil to allow complete surface draining of the lot into local storm sewer systems or natural drainage rights-of-way.
C. Lot grading. The requirements set forth below shall apply to the development of all lots within the Township of Deptford.
1. Grading plan requirements. The developer of a tract of land in the Township shall provide grading plans for each lot proposed to be developed prior to the issuance of a building permit. Each lot grading plan shall contain all the information required in the grading plan checklist found in §94, Document Submission Requirements. The developer shall submit a completed grading plan checklist together with the fee and any required application forms.
2. Grading standards. The grading plan shall conform to the following standards:
a. No grading shall be undertaken that creates adverse impacts to adjacent properties. Grading shall not increase the volume of water that drains onto adjoining lots. For a lot or lots contributing to adverse impacts on adjacent properties prior to grading taking place, the grading plan shall reduce the impact on adjoining lands to the greatest extent possible by directing stormwater runoff or other surface water (e.g., a spring) to appropriate receiving waters, conveyances and other devices accepted by the Township Engineer. All lots shall be graded to direct surface water runoff away from structures and towards the frontage road or other defined drainage paths.
b. Minimum and maximum slope. The following minimum and maximum slopes shall be maintained unless a greater or lesser standard is accepted by the Township Engineer for special circumstances.
Deptford Township UDO General Regulations
May 5, 2014 Page 240
1) A minimum slope of two percent (2%) shall be maintained in all lawn areas.
2) A minimum slope of one percent (1%) shall be maintained for all swales.
3) A minimum slope of one-half percent (0.5%) shall be maintained for all paved surfaces.
4) All graded slopes shall be no greater than 3:1.
5) Residential driveway slope shall not exceed ten percent (10%). Non-residential driveway slope shall not exceed eight percent (8%).
c. No grading shall occur within five (5) feet of a property line unless necessary to direct drainage off the site and into acceptable drainage facilities in accordance with these standards. When a developer proposes to grade over an adjoining property line, written permission or an executed agreement from the adjoining property owner shall be obtained acceptable to the Township Engineer.
d. The top of excavation or toe of slope shall be no closer than five (5) feet to an adjoining property line.
e. If a retaining wall is proposed, construction details shall be provided. If the retaining wall exceeds five (5) feet in height, the construction details shall be signed and sealed by a licensed structural engineer certifying the stability of the structure.
f. For swimming pool construction, the finished deck or apron elevation shall be set above the natural grade occurring on the lot to prevent surface runoff from flowing into the pool.
g. Tree protection. The grading plans shall show compliance with §31.K, Tree Management Plan and Tree Replacement.
D. Application procedures. The following procedures will apply to the review and approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the grading plan application
1. The Township Engineer shall review the grading plan, indicating in a written report any plan deficiencies and any required revisions.
2. The Township Engineer shall oversee the grading operation during normal site inspections. Notification of the start of grading operations shall be given to the Township Engineer at least forty-eight (48) hours beforehand.
Deptford Township UDO General Regulations
May 5, 2014 Page 241
3. Following the completion of all grading and drainage work, the developer shall submit an as-built survey, prepared by a New Jersey licensed land surveyor, in accordance with §96.G. With submission of the as-built survey, the developer may request a final inspection. If any discrepancy exists between the grading plan and actual construction, the developer shall be required to perform any necessary site work to correct the deficiency. All as-built site work shall be in conformity with the approved grading plans. Any minor deviation from the grading plan may be approved by the Township Engineer. Any deviation deemed substantial by the Township Engineer shall require submission of an amended final site plan or subdivision, as the case may be, to the Board of Jurisdiction.
4. Following the completion of all work, the Township Engineer shall conduct the final inspection and notify the Construction Official, in writing, whether the final construction is in compliance with the approved grading plan and that a certificate of occupancy may be issued. The Construction Official shall issue the certificate of occupancy only if all conditions for the approved grading plan have been satisfied.
5. All grading work shall be completed within 180 days from the issuance of the grading permit. Extension of the time limit may be granted by the Township Engineer for good cause shown, but in no circumstance shall the extension be greater than an additional 180 days.
E. Permit and review fees for grading plan applications shall be as set forth in §95, Fees, in this Ordinance.
§ 45. Stripping of Topsoil; Excavation of Clay, Sand, Gravel or Rock.
A. Topsoil, sod, clay, sand, gravel or rock may be removed only under the following conditions:
1. As a part of the construction or alteration of a building, or the grading incidental to such building;
2. In connection with normal land preparation and maintenance;
3. In connection with the construction or alteration of a street or utility improvement; and
4. As part of a legal, non-conforming commercial resource extraction operation.
B. A soil erosion and sedimentation control permit shall be required in all instances.
§ 46. Special Height Limitations.
A. The height limitations of the respective districts shall not apply to the following, provided that they do not extend more than fifteen (15) feet above the roof line and do not occupy more than twenty percent (20%) of the area of the roof.
Deptford Township UDO General Regulations
May 5, 2014 Page 242
1. Church spires or domes.
2. Non-commercial radio and television towers.
3. Chimneys, smokestacks, flag poles and aerials.
4. Elevators, tanks, HVAC and other mechanical equipment, and other projections neither intended nor used for human occupancy, provided they are screened from view of surrounding properties and streets.
B. Height limitations.
The height limitations of the respective districts shall not apply to the following, provided that they do not extend more than four (4) feet above the roof line:
1. Cornices.
2. Parapets.
§ 47. Prohibited Uses.
A. All uses not expressly permitted in this chapter are prohibited. The following uses are specifically prohibited in every district:
1. Junk yards, including automobile or motor vehicle junk yards or wrecking establishments.
2. No single recreational vehicle or boat may be used for living or housekeeping purposes within the Township, except as provided for by the Deptford Township Trailer Ordinance, Chapter 72 of the Code of Deptford Township.
3. Outdoor storage of any type shall not be permitted unless such storage is a part of the normal operation of a use conducted on the premises subject to design and performance standards for the prevailing district and provided further that the following requirements are conformed with:
a. All outdoor storage facilities shall be enclosed by an opaque fence adequate to conceal the facilities from any adjacent properties.
b. No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or manner that may be transferred off the lot by natural causes or forces.
c. All material or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible or otherwise be attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors only in closed containers.
d. Flammable or explosive liquids, solids, or gases shall be permitted to be stored in above ground storage tanks only if the proposed use and structure
Deptford Township UDO General Regulations
May 5, 2014 Page 243
meet the requirements of the Uniform Construction Code (5:23 et seq.) and the Fire Code (5:18 et seq.), as used by Deptford Township officials. In addition, above ground storage tanks are not permitted in any front yard and shall be sufficiently buffered from any adjoining use.
4. Private sanitary landfills.
5. Commercial resource extraction operations.
6. Any use of a heavy industrial nature which is not similar in character to those permitted in the LI-1 or LI-2 Light Industrial Districts. Examples of such uses are power generation plants and the manufacturing of automobiles, steel, and similar products.
7. The overnight parking of any vehicle with a gross vehicle weight in excess of eight thousand (8,000) lbs. or with more than two (2) axles shall be prohibited in all residential districts.
8. Temporary structures shall be prohibited in all residential districts.
§ 48. Manufactured Housing and Prefabricated Buildings.
A. Manufactured housing and prefabricated buildings, including those created by the joining of several sections constructed at another location, shall be permitted in every residential zoning district, subject to the following regulations:
1. The unit must comply with all regulations, including area and bulk standards, of the underlying zoning district.
2. The unit must comply with all state and federal standards for manufactured housing or prefabricated buildings.
3. The unit must be permanently mounted on a masonry foundation, either partially or entirely below grade. In addition, the following conditions shall be complied with:
a. Any wheels shall be removed prior to installation.
b. The undercarriage shall not be visible from any side following installation.
c. The foundation shall be capable of transferring all design loads imposed by or upon the structure into soil or bedrock without failure.
d. The foundation shall be placed at an adequate depth below grade to prevent frost damage.
Deptford Township UDO General Regulations
May 5, 2014 Page 244
B. All temporary prefabricated buildings shall be considered trailers and shall be subject to regulation by the applicable provisions of either §58. of this chapter or Chapter 72 of the Deptford Township Code.
§ 49. Accessory Buildings and Structures in Residential Districts.
A. The following supplemental and general regulations regarding accessory buildings and structures shall be observed in all residential districts where applicable:
1. No accessory building shall exceed one (1) story or seventeen (17) feet in height, whichever is less, except in the case of a building accessory to a permitted church, school or other non-residential use authorized as a conditional use by the Planning Board.
2. No private garage, carport, or other permanent accessory building or structure may be erected within a front yard and no such building may be erected in a side or rear yard unless:
a. It is entirely separated from the principal building.
b. It is located at least five (5) feet farther back from the front street line than the rearmost portion of the principal building.
c. It is located at least ten (10) feet from the side or rear line of said lot, provided however, that accessory structures which are one hundred twenty (120) square feet or less in gross floor area may be located within five (5) feet of a side or rear property line.
d. A carport shall not be located closer than three (3) feet to a side or rear property line.
3. Notwithstanding the provisions of this Subsection, no accessory building may be located in any yard which abuts a street and nothing in this Subsection shall be construed to prohibit the erection of a common or joint garage which is not an integral part of a main building on adjacent lots.
§ 50. Projections into Required Yards.
A. No part of a building shall be erected within, or shall project into any required yard area except as follows:
1. Cornices, projecting eaves, gutters or chimneys may project a distance of up to thirty (30) inches into a required yard area.
2. Steps and awnings may project up to six (6) feet into a required yard area.
3. Handicapped ramps may project thirteen (13) feet into a required yard, however, they may not be any closer than three (3) feet to a property line.
Deptford Township UDO General Regulations
May 5, 2014 Page 245
4. Decks may project into required rear yards up to half the minimum required distance, i.e. if a required rear yard is 30 feet a deck may be as close as 15 feet to the rear property line.
§ 51. Reduction or Modification of Existing Lots.
A. No existing lot area shall be so reduced that the area of the lot, or the dimensions of the open spaces, shall be smaller than herein prescribed in a district, except as provided for in cluster or planned unit developments.
B. No lot shall be formed from part of an existing lot already occupied by a building unless the existing building and any proposed building shall each be able to meet the area and yard requirements prescribed for the district in which they are located.
C. No yard or open space required in connection with any building shall be considered as providing required open space for any other building.
D. Any existing lot area or yard depth may be reduced for the purpose of providing a right-of-way for a public street as required by an agency of the government entity having jurisdiction over said street.
E. Permitted Modifications for Infill Development. The yard areas of principal dwellings on infill development lots may encroach within the yard areas as otherwise required in this Ordinance under the following conditions: [Ord. O.3.13, 2/25/13]
1. Front Yard. The front yard depth may be reduced to the average of the setbacks from the streetline of existing dwellings on both sides of the proposed residence. In the event an adjacent lot is vacant, the average shall be calculated using the required setback for the vacant lot.
2. Side Yard. The side yard may be reduced to the depth of the side yard of the adjacent lot but in no instance shall the distance between dwellings be reduced to less than 10 feet.
3. Rear Yard. A portion of the principal dwelling may encroach into the rear yard up to 20% of the required depth provided that the average of the building's distance from the rear property line meets or exceeds the required setback.
F. Expansion of Residential Building on Undersized Lot. Any existing lot on which a residential building is located and which lot does not meet the minimum lot size may have additions to the principal building and/or construction of an accessory building without any appeal for variance relief provided: [Ord. O.3.13, 2/25/13]
1. The existing use(s) on the lot is conforming to the permitted use(s) allowed in the zoning district in which the lot is located; and
2. The total permitted building and impervious lot coverages are not exceeded; and
Deptford Township UDO General Regulations
May 5, 2014 Page 246
3. The addition or the construction of an accessory building does not violate any other requirements of this Ordinance including, but not limited to, height, setback, and parking; except that an addition to the principal building may encroach into a required yard area so long as the addition intrudes no more into the required yard area than the principal building.
§ 52. Lot Configuration.
A. Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be either at right angles or radial to street lines.
B. Each lot must front upon an approved public street with a right-of-way at least fifty (50) feet in width.
C. Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of existing streets, lots shall begin at such new street line and all setbacks shall be measured from such line.
§ 53. Conformity of Building Setback lines.
Notwithstanding other requirements of this chapter, there shall be conformity of building setback lines with the median setback lines of existing structures on the same side of the street and within three hundred (300) feet of the proposed new construction.
§ 54. Fences and Walls. [Ord. O.14.10, 8/2/10]
A. General Requirements.
1. No fence or wall shall be installed without first obtaining a zoning permit, excepting the municipality.
2. No fence shall be erected in any zoning district within the right-of-way of a street.
3. Fences and walls may be placed with the outer face located on the property line.
4. All fences shall be constructed so that the finished side is exposed to the outside of the property.
5. All fences shall be maintained in an adequate manner so that broken elements are promptly replaced and elements requiring an exterior coating are painted as necessary.
6. No fence shall be constructed of, or topped with, barbed wire, concertina wire, broken glass, electrified wires, or any other materials which are considered hazardous to humans with the following limited exceptions:
a. Electrified wires may be used on farmland assessed property for the purpose of containing livestock and shall be so marked once for every fifty lineal feet with an appropriate warning sign not to exceed one square foot in area.
Deptford Township UDO General Regulations
May 5, 2014 Page 247
b. Three-strand barbed wire may be used on top of a minimum six-foot high fence around all public utility facilities excepting administrative offices, roadway maintenance facilities and telecommunications ground facilities.
7. Fences and walls shall be so erected to avoid damming or diverting the natural flow of water or shall be integrated into a grading plan that provides for the adequate movement of storm water. For fences located in drainage swales, the lower edge of the fence shall be a minimum of six inches (6”) above the ground level to facilitate lot drainage.
8. Notwithstanding any other regulation to the contrary, no fence or wall shall be erected in violation of the requirements of §41, Visibility at Street and Driveway Intersections, or that otherwise impedes clear sight distance as established through the promulgated standards of the American Association of State and Highway Transportation Officials.
9. Fencing and walls for all uses requiring site plan approval shall be considered within the overall context of a landscape plan that considers the function and aesthetic quality of the fencing or wall.
10. Corrugated metal shall not be used for fencing purposes.
11. These regulations shall not be construed as to affect the ability of a governmental entity with jurisdiction within the municipality to erect any fence or wall.
12. Prior to the installation of a fence or wall, the landowner, contractor, or other responsible party shall call the One-Call System [(800) 272-1000] or login to http://www.nj1-call.org for site mark out of underground utilities.
B. Fences and walls in easements. No fence or wall may be constructed in any sanitary sewer, storm water management (drainage) and public water easements under Deptford Township and Deptford Township Municipal Utilities Authority jurisdiction, except in the following limited circumstance:
1. For easements that run perpendicular to the streetline, a fence and gate parallel to the streetline shall be permitted provided the following conditions are met:
a. No fence with a footer or concrete casing may be installed within eight (8) feet of the underground utility in the easement.
b. An access opening a minimum of sixteen (16) feet in width shall be provided via a double gate made of equal halves. Appropriate center support of the non-hinged side of the gate to prevent sagging shall be required.
c. Such gate shall remain unlocked.
Deptford Township UDO General Regulations
May 5, 2014 Page 248
d. The posts for any fence shall not be installed directly above any underground pipe, cable or conduit.
2. The municipality and its agencies or delegated party (such as a contractor) may remove the fence and gate to address any repair, construction or reconstruction they deem necessary. Any cost in the removal and reinstallation of a fence in an easement shall be borne by the landowner. The zoning permit issued for the installation of fencing in an easement shall clearly state and the landowner shall sign acknowledgement of the rights of the easement holder and the responsibility of the landowner to repair and reinstall such fencing and gate after the construction, reconstruction or repair is completed.
3. Fences may be constructed in easements under other agency jurisdiction if written authorization from the easement owner is provided at the time of zoning permit application. The zoning permit application shall make reference to any required conditions of the written authorization.
4. No fence shall be permitted in a landscaping easement except as herein provided or by the Board of Jurisdiction for an approved development.
C. Regulations for single family detached, single family semi-detached and fee simple townhouse dwellings. On any lot in any district, no wall or fence shall be erected or altered to be greater than three (3) feet in height in front yards and six (6) feet in height in side and rear yards, except as modified herein. Illustrative examples are contained in Exhibit 54.1, Residential Fence Locations.
1. A private residential tennis court, basketball court or batting cage when located in a rear yard only may be surrounded by a fence a maximum of twelve (12) feet in height provided that the fence is a minimum of seventy-five percent (75%) open and is set back from any property line a minimum of fifteen (15) feet.
Deptford Township UDO General Regulations
May 5, 2014 Page 249
2. A dog run when located in a rear yard only may be surrounded by a fence a maximum of seven (7) feet in height provided that the fence is set back from any property line a minimum of fifteen (15) feet.
Exhibit 54.1. Residential Fence Locations
3. Six-foot (6’) high fences and walls may be permitted in the rear yard of a reverse frontage lot provided that the fence is set back a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from the right-of-way line of the higher order street and is planted in accordance with the landscaping requirements in §31 for 15-foot wide buffers.
4. No fence or wall shall be permitted in the front yard of a townhouse dwelling.
5. A private residential swimming pool area shall be surrounded by a fence in accordance with §43.B.
Deptford Township UDO General Regulations
May 5, 2014 Page 250
6. A deer protection fence consisting of wooden poles with horizontal stretched wire or wire mesh fencing with openings no less than four inches (4”) by four inches (4”) surrounding agricultural fields on farmland assessed property shall be permitted up to a maximum height of eight (8) feet.
7. Entrance gateways may extend to six (6) feet in height in a front yard provided the fence or wall is within fifteen (15) feet of a driveway or sidewalk connecting the front door of the dwelling to the street. The highest to lowest elements of the fence or wall shall transition in height over a minimum distance of eight (8) feet.
8. Wall piers may extend up to eight inches (8”) above the height limitations for any wall.
D. Regulations for all uses except §54.C uses. On any lot in any district, no wall or fence shall be erected or altered to be greater than three (3) feet in height in front yards and six (6) feet in height in side and rear yards, except as modified herein.
1. Fences in front yard areas may be increased to four (4) feet in height provided that the fence is a minimum of seventy-five percent (75%) open.
2. Fences used as trash enclosures shall be fully opaque and a minimum of six (6) but no taller than eight (8) feet high.
3. In the event that these regulations conflict with a site plan approval granted by the Board of Jurisdiction, the site plan approval shall control. Once a certificate of occupancy has been issued and any performance or maintenance guarantee released, the landowner may replace such fencing or wall without site plan approval provided that the material used is an exact replacement. Zoning permit issuance, however, shall be required.
4. In the event that these regulations conflict with any streetscape improvements in accordance with §31, the streetscape improvement standards shall control.
5. Fencing for recreational purposes may extend to fifteen (15) feet in height provided that the closest portion of any fencing above six (6) feet shall be set back from any front property line by fifty (50) feet and fifteen (15) feet from any other property line, except that the height of fencing for golf driving ranges, batting cages, and similar outdoor recreation shall be determined at the time of site plan approval.
6. Outdoor storage uses, where permitted, shall be enclosed with a minimum eight-foot tall opaque fence. Where such a use abuts an industrial use, the fence may be located in a side and rear yard, otherwise the fence shall be setback from any property line a minimum of fifteen (15) feet and the area between the fence and property line landscaped in accordance with §31. The setback may be larger depending on the landscape buffer requirements.
Deptford Township UDO General Regulations
May 5, 2014 Page 251
7. Trash compactors shall be enclosed with a masonry wall on three sides with a fully gated access on the fourth side. The wall shall be a minimum height of eight (8) feet, but in no circumstance shall it be higher than three-quarters of the height of the associated building. No portion of the wall shall be within twenty-five (25) feet of a property line.
8. In multi-family developments, up to six-foot high fences around outdoor patios shall be permitted when designed to be a similar color and texture with the exterior materials of the building.
§ 55. Environmental Regulations.
A. Use of lands in flood plains, wetlands and wetland buffers. Lands which are located within the one hundred (100) year flood plain of a stream or lands which are classified by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) as wetlands or wetland transition buffers may be used only as permitted by the NJDEP.
B. Site Environmental Assessment.
1. A Site Environmental Assessment shall be prepared by qualified firms or individuals and shall be submitted to the Township with an application for development. The minimum required scope of work for the Site Environmental Assessment shall include:
a. Records review;
b. Site inspection;
c. Interviews; and
d. Preparation of report.
2. Records review - Regulatory agency file data and existing environmental reports should be reviewed to determine if any existing documents show that the site was used for waste disposal or burial, and to determine if the site has previously been identified as a suspected source of contamination. The minimum documents that should be reviewed include, but are not limited to:
a. Federal Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and New Jersey databases should be reviewed to determine if National Priority List (Superfund NPL) or State Superfund sites, or other alleged contamination sites are located within one thousand (1,000) feet of the proposed development site.
b. Historical aerial photographs from the 1950's (or earlier, if available) to current periods should be reviewed. The photographs should be inspected for signs of dumps, excavations, vegetation stress, or other feature indicative of contamination, both on and adjacent to the site. The
Deptford Township UDO General Regulations
May 5, 2014 Page 252
preferred scale of the photographs is one inch (1") equals four hundred (400) feet.
c. Recorded land title records and/or chain of title and/or property tax file indicating property ownership from 1940 to the present.
3. Site inspection - The applicant's environmental consultant should physically inspect the site and collect information on these subjects, as appropriate, to identify past or current practices which could cause soil or groundwater contamination, or which could cause contamination in any structures at the site, but not limited to:
a. Past and current materials use;
b. Storage, handling, and disposal of wastes at the subject property, as applicable;
c. The number and location of chemical storage containers, such as drums and storage tanks, and the materials stored in these;
d. Transformers and capacitors at or directly adjacent to the property for signs of leaks, spills, and fires; and
e. The properties and structures around the site to document evidence of obvious and severe impacts from the adjacent properties on the subject site. Examine exteriors of adjacent buildings and grounds of adjacent properties for evidence of staining and spills.
4. Interviews - The applicant's environmental consultant should conduct interviews with local government officials, occupants and adjoining property owners relative to obtaining information indicating recognized environmental conditions in connection with the property. The interviews shall generally confirm:
a. The prior uses of the site;
b. Conditions or events related to environmental conditions;
c. Questions about helpful documents;
d. Prior assessment; and
e. Proceedings involving the site.
5. Report preparation - The applicant's environmental consultant should prepare a report that includes, but is not limited to:
a. Description of the physical site, description of the site history and surrounding land use.
Deptford Township UDO General Regulations
May 5, 2014 Page 253
b. A USGS topographic map indicating the location of the site.
c. List of the environmental reports, permits and background documents reviewed. List of interviewees.
d. Discussion of causes of environmental concern as applicable, such as underground storage tanks, PCBs, asbestos and other applicable environmental hazards.
e. Statements regarding the presence of wells on the site, and a statement regarding the presence or past presence of septic systems or other subsurface disposal systems.
f. The results of contacts with regulatory agencies concerning potential contaminated sites in the site vicinity.
g. Prints of all aerial photographs.
h. A table that indicates the dates of property ownership from 1940 to the present, and the corresponding property use(s) for those years, if known.
i. Discussion of potential contamination in the soil and groundwater of the site.
j. The resume or curriculum vitae of the individual(s) who performed the environmental assessment. The resume or curriculum vitae should indicate that the assessor has knowledge of current environmental investigative techniques and standards.
6. Certification - The Site Environmental Assessment report shall include a statement as follows: "[Name of the Environmental Company] has performed this Site Environmental Assessment with diligence; it is complete and accurate within its scope. To the best of our knowledge, no contamination-related condition associated with the property has been misrepresented or omitted from this report."
7. Indemnification - The Site Environmental Assessment report shall also include the following statement: "The Applicant hereby indemnifies the Township, its affiliates and Engineer against any liability, loss, expense, lien, claim demand, and cause of action of every kind for damage to property of the Applicant and third parties, including fines or penalties, attorney's fees, and other costs that result from activities associated with or the findings of this Site Environmental Assessment.
8. Waiver - All requests for waiver of requirements of the Site Environmental Assessment may be forwarded to the Environmental Commission for their recommendations. The request for waiver shall include justifications for relieving the requirements. If the request was forwarded to the Environmental
Deptford Township UDO General Regulations
May 5, 2014 Page 254
Commission, the Commission shall respond with recommendations within thirty (30) days.
9. Further requirements - Upon review of the Site Environmental Assessment report by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment Engineer, as the case may be, and upon the recommendation of said Engineer, the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment may require other studies, tests, or environmental treatments and remedies as may be determined to be reasonably necessary for the environmental safety and security of the site.
§ 56. Use of Reflective Building Materials.
No building shall be constructed so that fifty percent (50%) or more of any facade consists of reflective building materials, capable of producing a glare.
§ 57. Non-Conforming Uses, Lots and Structures.
A. Continuation.
1. Any use, located either within a building or other structure, or on the land, which was lawful immediately prior to the effective date of this chapter but which became non- conforming by virtue of this chapter may be continued so long as the use is continued without abandonment, including subsequent sales of the property.
2. Any building which was lawful immediately prior to the effective date of this chapter but which became non-conforming by virtue of this chapter may be continued so long as not more than seventy-five percent (75%) of the building is destroyed by fire, explosion, or other cause.
3. Any lot which was lawful at the time of its creation but which is non-conforming by virtue of this chapter, may be continued to be used for the use existing at the time the lot became non-conforming. Any subsequent use of the lot which requires variances from the provisions of this chapter shall be governed by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as applicable.
B. Expansion of non-conforming uses, buildings or structures.
1. The expansion of non-conforming uses, buildings, or structures shall be governed by the following rules:
a. A non-conforming, non-residential use shall not be expanded, enlarged, or increased in any way without the grant of a variance by the Zoning Board of Adjustment. A non-conforming, non-residential building or structure shall not be expanded, enlarged, or increased in any way unless the addition is in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
b. A non-conforming, residential use, building, or structure may be expanded without a hearing before the Zoning Board of Adjustment if the expansion
Deptford Township UDO General Regulations
May 5, 2014 Page 255
conforms with the yard setback and height requirements of the zoning district in which it is located, or if it conforms with the standards prevailing in the R-10 Residential District, whichever is less. The expansion of non-conforming, residential uses, buildings, or structures which do not meet these criteria shall require the grant of a variance by the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
2. No structural alterations may be made to any non-residential building or structure which is itself non-conforming or which contains a non-conforming use unless:
a. The alteration is ordered by a public official to eliminate a hazardous condition, or
b. The alteration reduces the extent of non-conformity of the building or structure.
C. Abandonment.
1. A non-conforming use of land or of a building shall be presumed to have been abandoned if the active use of the land or building for that purpose changes or is discontinued for a period of one (1) continuous year or more.
2. If abandonment occurs involuntarily, the owner may request that the Planning Board stay the effect of abandonment for an additional period of up to one (1) year.
3. Any non-conforming building or structure which is destroyed by fire, explosion, or other cause shall be deemed to be completely destroyed and to have lost its non-conforming status if seventy-five percent (75%) or more of its bulk is destroyed. In the event that seventy-five percent (75%) of the bulk of all buildings, structures, and other improvements on the lot are destroyed, all buildings, structures, and improvements shall be deemed to have been completely destroyed and to have lost their non-conforming status. In either event, all buildings, structures and improvements which have lost their non-conforming status shall be removed within six (6) months of the date of destruction.
D. Change in use.
1. A non-conforming use shall not be changed to any use other than a conforming use.
2. Any non-conforming use which has been changed to a conforming use shall not be changed back again into a non-conforming use.
E. Certificate of non-conformity.
1. The owner of any non-conforming building, use, structure, or lot may at any time apply to the Zoning Officer for a certificate of non-conformity.
Deptford Township UDO General Regulations
May 5, 2014 Page 256
2. The Zoning Officer shall issue a certificate of non-conformity only upon the presentation of satisfactory evidence that the non-conforming building, use, structure, or lot was lawful prior to enactment of this chapter. The burden of proof shall be entirely upon the developer.
3. A reasonable fee may be charged for the certificate of non-conformity.
§ 58. Temporary Construction and/or Sales Trailers.
Temporary construction and/or sales trailers are permitted in all districts. A construction trailer may be at the site for the period of construction beginning with the issuance of a construction permit and concluding before a certificate of occupancy is granted, or one (1) year, whichever is less. A sales trailer may be at the site for the period beginning with the posting of bonds for the project and concluding before a certificate of occupancy is granted (or the last certificate of occupancy in the case of a residential project), or one (1) year, whichever is less. Construction and sales trailers shall be set back from all street and lot lines at least thirty (30) feet. Any temporary construction or sales signage must comply with the standards as noted in §30
§ 59. Collection of Storage of Recyclable Materials in Multifamily Housing.
A. There shall be included in any new multifamily housing development that requires subdivision or site plan approval an indoor or outdoor recycling area for the collection and storage of residentially-generated recyclable materials. The dimensions of the recycling area shall be sufficient to accommodate recycling bins or containers which are of adequate size and number, and which are consistent with anticipated usage and with current methods of collection in the area in which the project is located. The dimensions of the recycling area and the bins or containers shall be determined in consultation with the municipal recycling coordinator, and shall be consistent with the district recycling plan adopted pursuant to section 3 of P.L. 1987, c.102 (N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13) and any applicable requirements of the municipal master plan, adopted pursuant to section 26 of P.L. 1987, c.102.
B. The recycling area shall be conveniently located for the residential disposition of source separated recyclable materials, preferably near, but clearly separated from, a refuse dumpster.
C. The recycling area shall be well lit, and shall be safely and easily accessible by recycling personnel and vehicles. Collection vehicles shall be able to access the recycling area without interference from parked cars or other obstacles. Reasonable measures shall be taken to protect the recycling area, and the bins or containers placed therein, against theft of recyclable materials, bins or containers.
D. The recycling area or the bins or containers placed therein shall be designed so as to provide protection against adverse environmental conditions which might render the collected materials unmarketable. Any bins or containers which are used for the collection of recyclable paper or cardboard, and which are located in an outdoor recycling
Deptford Township UDO General Regulations
May 5, 2014 Page 257
area, shall be equipped with a lid, or otherwise covered, so as to keep the paper or cardboard dry.
E. Signs clearly identifying the recycling area and the materials accepted therein shall be posted adjacent to all points of access to the recycling area. Individual bins or containers shall be equipped with signs indicating the materials to be placed therein.
F. Landscaping and/or fencing shall be provided around any outdoor recycling area and shall be developed in an aesthetically pleasing manner.
§ 59.1 Seasonal Sales.
A. Any use of property for the sale of merchandise on a seasonal non-permanent basis must adhere to the following requirements:
1. Off-street parking shall be provided as specified in Section 27 of this Ordinance, except that the quantity of parking spaces shall be provided at one (1) for every two-hundred (200) square feet of sales or display area, or portion thereof.
2. Lighting shall be provided as specified in Section 29 of this Ordinance.
3. Portable sanitary facilities shall be provided at the rate of one (1) per fifty (50) parking spaces, or portion thereof.
§ 59A. Temporary Outdoor Display/Sale.
A. Intent
The intent of this Section is to provide standards for the regulation of seasonal/intermittent outdoor sales on developed sites in areas not regulated or approved in Section 37.A.1.a.
B. Regulations
1. Occupants of existing developed commercial sites may have outdoor displays and sale areas for no more than 60 days within a calendar year.
2. Plans must be submitted showing location of said areas, number of parking spaces/aisles used and provisions for redirecting vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
3. The Department of Community Development may approve the temporary use when public safety is not compromised based upon the plan details.
Deptford Township UDO Conditional Uses
May 5, 2014 Page 258
Article VI. Conditional Uses
§ 60. Conditional Uses.
A. Standards for approval. Before a construction permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any conditional use as permitted by this chapter, application shall be made to the Planning Board. The review by the Planning Board of a conditional use shall include any required site plan review pursuant to this chapter. Public notice and a hearing shall be required as stipulated by this chapter.
B. In deciding applications for conditional use, the Planning Board shall consider the following standards in addition to those which may be enumerated in the applicable section of the chapter.
1. The surrounding neighborhood should not be adversely affected by unreasonable impacts generated by the proposed conditional use. In particular, the Board should consider the following impacts:
a. Traffic generated by the proposed use should:
1) Not cause a local residential street to reach a level of service of C or worse, if it is not already at level of service C or worse, as defined by the generally accepted method of the Transportation Research Board.
2) Not cause any other street to reach a level of service of D or worse, if it is not already at level of service D or worse, as defined by the generally accepted method of the Transportation Research Board.
3) Not create a hazardous traffic condition as determined by a professional transportation engineer or planner.
b. Environmental impact.
1) All activities and all storage of flammable and explosive materials at any point shall be provided with adequate safety devices against the hazards of fire and explosion and adequate fire-suppression equipment shall be installed and maintained in an operable condition in accordance with the regulations of the fire marshal’s office, construction official and the regulations of applicable local, county, state, and federal agencies.
2) No activity shall be permitted which results in an electrical disturbance adversely affecting the operation of any equipment beyond the building in which the disturbance is created.
3) There shall be no emission at any point from any chimney or otherwise which can cause damage to human health, to animals or
Deptford Township UDO Conditional Uses
May 5, 2014 Page 259
vegetation, or to other forms of property; or which will cause any excessive soiling at any point.
4) There shall be no discharge at any point, into any private or public sewerage system, or into any stream, or into the ground of any materials in such a way, or of such temperature, as to contaminate or otherwise cause the emission of hazardous materials except as regulated by applicable local, state, or federal agencies.
5) No activity or use shall produce a sound pressure level on adjacent property in excess of the level permitted in the following table:
Octave Band Frequency Residential District Non-Residential District
(cycles per second) (decibels) (decibels)
> <
20 75 72 79
75 150 67 74
150 300 59 66
300 600 52 59
600 1200 46 53
1200 2400 40 47
2400 4800 34 41
4800 - 32 39
The maximum permitted sound levels for residential districts shall apply between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. and shall be reduced by six (6) decibels in each octave band for any other time of day. For the purposes of this section, decibels shall mean "A" weighted decibels.
6) No activity or operation shall produce at any point along the lot line continuous earthborne vibrations greater than the maximum displacement as permitted in the following table:
Residential District Non-Residential District
Frequency Displacement Displacement
(cycles per second) (in inches) (in inches)
> <
0 10 .0004 .0020
10 20 .0002 .0010
20 30 .0001 .0006
30 40 .0001 .0004
40 50 .0001 .0003
Deptford Township UDO Conditional Uses
May 5, 2014 Page 260
50 - .0001 .0002
Discrete pulses that do not exceed 100 impulses per minute may not produce more than twice the displacement specified in the table.
7) No activity or use shall produce a strong, dazzling light or reflection of same beyond its lot lines. Exterior lighting shall be shielded, buffered and directed so that glare, direct light, or reflection will not be a nuisance to adjoining properties, dwellings, streets, districts, or from adjacent buildings within an industrial park. In no event shall a lighting intensity greater than one twenty-five hundredths (.125) footcandle, measured at grade, be permitted beyond the subject lot lines.
8) No operation shall release materials capable of becoming odorous, either by bacterial decomposition or chemical reaction, that cause or will cause odorous matter or vapor to be generated so as to be readily discernible without instruments from any point along the boundaries of each lot.
9) All fabricating, manufacturing, or assembling activities shall be conducted entirely within enclosed buildings.
2. The Board may consider the effect that the grant of the conditional use would have on the logical extension of public utilities and streets.
§ 61. Conditional Use Regulations for Specific Principal and Accessory Uses.
A. The following regulations are for specific principal and accessory conditional uses as noted below.
1. A church, synagogue, or similar place of religious worship, provided that:
a. The use occurs on a lot of two (2) acres or more in area.
b. Each lot used for this purpose shall have a minimum street frontage and lot width of two hundred (200) feet.
c. No structure shall be provided within seventy-five (75) feet of a public street or property line.
d. The maximum permitted building coverage shall not exceed twenty percent (20%).
e. The maximum permitted impervious coverage shall not exceed fifty percent (50%).
Deptford Township UDO Conditional Uses
May 5, 2014 Page 261
f. The twenty-five (25) feet closest to the property line or the public street shall be bermed and landscaped so as to screen the use from view.
g. The maximum height of any structure shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet except that a steeple may extend to a height of sixty (60) feet.
h. Off-street parking shall be provided in a side or rear yard, as required by §27.
2. A club, lodge, or similar fraternal organization, provided that:
a. The use occurs on a lot of two (2) acres or more in area.
b. Each lot used for this purpose shall have a minimum street frontage and lot width of two hundred (200) feet.
c. No structure shall be provided within seventy-five (75) feet of a public street or property line.
d. The twenty-five (25) feet closest to the property line or the public street shall be bermed and landscaped so as to screen the use from view.
e. The maximum permitted building coverage shall not exceed twenty percent (20%).
f. The maximum permitted impervious coverage shall not exceed fifty percent (50%).
g. The maximum height of any structure shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet.
h. Off-street parking shall be provided in a side or rear yard, as required by §27.
3. A cemetery or memorial park, provided that:
a. The use occurs on a lot of ten (10) acres or more in area, except as modified below.
b. Each lot used for this purpose shall have a minimum street frontage and lot width of two hundred (200) feet.
c. No structure shall be provided within seventy-five (75) feet of a public street or property line, provided however that graves and headstones not exceeding five (5) feet in height may be placed not less than fifty (50) feet from a public street or property line.
Deptford Township UDO Conditional Uses
May 5, 2014 Page 262
d. The twenty-five (25) feet closest to the property line or the public street shall be bermed and landscaped so as to screen the use from view.
e. The maximum permitted building coverage shall not exceed twenty percent (20%).
f. The maximum permitted impervious coverage shall not exceed fifty percent (50%).
g. The maximum height of any structure shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet.
h. Off-street parking shall be provided as required by §27.
i. Crematories shall only be permitted on tracts of twenty-five (25) acres or more and shall be designed so that chimneys are not located within five hundred (500) feet of any street or property line.
4. A continuing care facility, provided that:
a. The continuing care facility must be provided on a tract of land at least fifty (50) acres in area.
b. Each lot used for this purpose shall have a minimum street frontage and lot width of three hundred (300) feet.
c. The continuing care facility must contain at least fifty percent (50%) single family detached or zero-lot line dwellings. The remaining dwellings may be of any other type otherwise permitted in this chapter.
d. The overall density of the continuing care facility may not exceed four (4) dwelling units per acre.
e. The bulk standards of the underlying zoning district shall not apply to this use. Instead, the following standards shall be adhered to:
1) No structure shall be provided within seventy-five (75) feet of a property line or a public street.
2) The twenty-five (25) feet closest to the property line or the public street shall be bermed and landscaped so as to screen the use from view.
3) No principal structure shall be located within thirty-five (35) feet of another principal structure except that zero-lot line homes may be located within twenty-five (25) feet of each other.
Deptford Township UDO Conditional Uses
May 5, 2014 Page 263
4) The maximum permitted building coverage shall not exceed twenty percent (20%).
5) The maximum permitted impervious coverage shall not exceed thirty-five percent (35%).
6) The maximum height of any structure shall be forty-five (45) feet.
g. Nursing beds shall be provided onsite and must be licensed by the State of New Jersey. They must be available within three (3) months of the initial occupancy of the continuing care facility and must be reserved for the exclusive use of the residents of the facility no later than five (5) years after the initial occupancy of the development. No more than one (1) nursing bed shall be provided for every five (5) residents, calculated at the rate of one and one-quarter (1.25) residents per dwelling unit.
h. Every conditional use granted for a continuing care facility shall contain a restriction that the land be deed restricted for that use. In the event that the continuing care use shall cease to exist at some point in the future, the land must be used for another use permitted in the underlying zoning district. The reuse of a continuing care facility for non age-restricted multi-family housing is specifically prohibited.
5. Community residences for the developmentally disabled and community shelters for victims of domestic violence serving more than six (6) persons and not more than fifteen (15) persons, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.2., provided that:
a. There are no other similar community residences or shelters within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of the proposed community residence or shelter.
b. It can be shown that the total number of persons other than staff who are or will be living in community residences or shelters within Deptford Township (including the community residence or shelter under consideration), will not exceed one-half of one percent (0.5%) of the Township's total population.
c. There is sufficient off-street parking as required by §27.
d. It can be shown that the site location, existing development pattern of the area, traffic circulation and pedestrian mobility and safety are suitable for the establishment of a community residence or shelter.
e. Details are submitted concerning all life safety and emergency facilities and equipment to be provided within the building.
f. A community residence or shelter shall have twenty-four (24) hour onsite supervision and security.
Deptford Township UDO Conditional Uses
May 5, 2014 Page 264
6. Day care center, provided that:
a. The use shall occur on a tract with a minimum area of one (1) acre.
b. Each lot used for this purpose shall have a minimum street frontage and lot width of one hundred fifty (150) feet.
c. No structure shall be provided within fifty (50) feet of a public street or property line.
d. The maximum permitted building coverage shall not exceed twenty percent (20%).
e. The maximum permitted impervious coverage shall not exceed fifty percent (50%).
f. The twenty-five (25) feet closest to the property line or the public street shall be bermed and landscaped so as to screen the use from view.
g. The maximum height of any structure shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet.
h. A minimum interior area of forty (40) square feet per person must be provided for the day care use on the first floor, exclusive of hallways, closets, bathrooms, kitchens, and related areas.
i. A minimum outdoor play or recreation area of one hundred (100) square feet per person must be provided within a fenced area located within the rear or side yard area.
j. The use must be licensed by appropriate state and local officials.
k. Care may not be provided for more than eighteen (18) hours within any one (1) day.
l. Off-street parking shall be provided as required by §27.
7. Commercial Recreational Uses in the Residential Districts, provided that:
a. The use occurs on a minimum lot area of five (5) acres or less.
b. No noise generating outdoor uses, other than that associated accessory uses such as off-street parking, shall be located within three hundred (300) feet of any adjacent street or property line. A noise-generating use shall be defined as one which produces measurable noise in residential districts which exceeds the standards contained in Section 60.A.1.b. and which may be produced either by the principal activity or by spectators.
Deptford Township UDO Conditional Uses
May 5, 2014 Page 265
c. The use shall be one which provides a recreational service to the general public or to its membership. The retail sales if goods shall not be permitted as a principal activity, but may be permitted when purely incidental and accessory to the permitted principal use.
d. The following commercial recreational uses are specifically excluded from this definition and are prohibited in residential zoning districts:
1) Amusement parks, zoos and wildlife parks.
2) Race tracks, go-cart tracks, and similar uses.
3) Theaters and night clubs not accessory to a permitted principle use.
4) Any use which is statutorily prohibited for individuals under the age of eighteen (18), provided, however that the sale or consumption of alcohol and tobacco products may be permitted when purely incidental and accessory to any permitted principal use.
e. There shall be no outdoor storage or display of materials, products or equipment.
f. One (1) off-street parking space must be provided in addition to those required for the dwelling if a non-resident person is employed in conjunction with the home occupation use.
8. Family day care home, provided that:
a. The use must be licensed by appropriate state and local officials and registered with the Township.
b. Not more than five (5) children may be cared for at one time.
c. The use shall comply with all other requirements for home occupations.
9. Satellite dish or microwave antennas, provided that:
a. The dish or antenna must be placed in a rear yard area. Rooftop installation is specifically prohibited.
b. The dish or antenna must be screened by landscaping to a height of no less than four (4) feet along all sides except that a clear passage may be maintained for the minimum width necessary to achieve line-of-sight contact with the satellites to be served.
c. No more than one (1) such dish or antenna shall be permitted per lot.
Deptford Township UDO Conditional Uses
May 5, 2014 Page 266
10. Heliports, provided that:
a. The heliport is not a principal use.
b. The heliport is designed and operated in full compliance with all rules and regulations of applicable state and federal agencies.
c. The heliport shall not be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of the boundary line of any residential zoning district or residential dwelling.
11. Self-service storage facilities, provided that the following conditions are met:
a. Off-street parking shall be provided at the office at the rate of two (2) spaces per one hundred (100) storage units plus two (2) spaces for the manager's apartment.
b. One (1) ten (10) foot wide parking/loading lane shall be provided adjacent to each bay of storage buildings, exclusive of required aisle widths.
c. The minimum aisle width, exclusive of parking/travel lanes, shall be fifteen (15) feet for one-way traffic flow and twenty-four (24) feet for two-way traffic flow.
d. Self-service storage facilities shall not exceed one (1) story in height.
e. Self-service storage facilities shall be designed so that the exterior of the development is composed of solid masonry walls, unbroken by garage doors, or by a decorative fence. Chain link fences are specifically prohibited. No portion of the facility shall be unprotected by either a solid wall or fence.
f. Each facility will be heavily landscaped to lessen the impact of the severe exterior wall or fence.
g. One (1) resident manager's apartment shall be required for onsite supervision.
h. The facility shall agree to include in each storage unit lease a prohibition on the storage of toxic, explosive, hazardous, or illegal materials.
12. Whenever the reviewing board is petitioned to approve siting of any antennas, antenna support structures, or alternative antenna support structures, or to consider any variance from the requirements of this Ordinance, the following shall be considered:
a. Siting of any antenna, antenna array, equipment enclosure, or the use of any alternative antenna support structure shall be prohibited in all residential districts.
Deptford Township UDO Conditional Uses
May 5, 2014 Page 267
b. Siting of any antenna, antenna array, equipment enclosure, or the use of any alternative antenna support structure shall be a conditional use in any nonresidential district. The following criteria shall be considered during review:
1) The existence of other antenna support structures and alternative antenna support structures that can accommodate the needs of a wireless communications service provider.
2) The height of any proposed antenna support structure.
3) The proximity of any proposed antenna support structure to residential structures and residential use district boundaries.
4) The nature of uses on adjacent property.
5) The surrounding topography.
6) The existing or proposed tree coverage and foliage.
7) The design of the proposed antenna support structure, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness.
8) Proposed ingress and egress.
9) The availability of suitable existing antenna support structures for use as co-locations.
c. In granting any approval, the Board may require the applicant to comply with any reasonable conditions that it deems necessary or desirable, in its sole judgment, to minimize the impact or effect of any antenna, antenna array, equipment enclosure, or the use of any alternative antenna support structure, on the area in which it is sought to be installed, constructed or erected, or used, by requiring fencing, painting, coloring, blending, disguising, camouflaging, relocating facilities on a site, or other measures that the Board deems appropriate, including special construction and design.
d. An administrative approval may be granted for the addition of new antennas and associated equipment upon an existing telecommunication tower or site.
§ 62. [Reserved – Ord. No. O.4.06, 4/3/06]
Deptford Township UDO Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
May 5, 2014 Page 268
Article VII. Soil Erosion And Sediment Control
§ 63. Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan Required; Exceptions.
A. No site plan shall be approved, no street shall be constructed, no changes shall be made in the contour of the land and no grading, excavating or removal or destruction of topsoil, trees or other vegetative cover of the land shall be commenced by any developer until such time that a plan for soil erosion and sediment control has been processed and approved by the Township Planning Board or there has been a determination by the Planning Board that such plans are not necessary. Soil erosion and sediment control plans are not required in the following instances:
1. Disturbances of five thousand (5,000) square feet or less of the surface area of the land,
2. Construction of structures for which a building permit would not be required under the Standard Building Code of the State of New Jersey,
3. Single-family dwellings which are not part of a subdivision, and
4. Agricultural use of land when operated in accordance with a conservation plan approved by the local Soil Conservation District, or when it is determined by the local Soil Conservation District that such agricultural pursuits will not cause excessive erosion and sedimentation.
B. No subdivision, site plan or land development plan shall be approved unless:
1. There has been a plan approved by the Planning Board that provides for soil erosion and sediment control consistent with this section and an improvement bond (or other acceptable security) has been deposited with the Township in the form of an escrow guarantee which will ensure installation and completion of the required improvements in accordance with Township specifications, or
2. There has been a determination by the Township Planning Board that a soil erosion and sediment control plan is not necessary.
§ 64. Minimum Standards and Specifications.
Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures used to control erosion and reduce sedimentation shall, as a minimum, meet the standards and specifications for soil erosion and sediment control as adopted for use by the Gloucester County Soil Conservation District. The Township Engineer shall ensure compliance with the appropriate specifications, copies of which are on file at the Municipal Building of Deptford Township and are available from the Soil Conservation District.
§ 65. Procedures.
Deptford Township UDO Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
May 5, 2014 Page 269
A. Procedures for applications for soil erosion and sedimentation control permits.
1. As part of the site plan and/or subdivision review process, or for any land development plan, or for any other activity requiring a soil erosion and sedimentation control permit, a plan shall be submitted which clearly shows on a suitable map the location of the proposed action, the total area of the development, the total amount of earthwork in cubic yards, existing topography, the location of flood plains, wetlands, and any other information required by the Planning Board. The plan shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer, land surveyor, architect, professional planner, or landscape architect and shall conform to the submission requirements noted below.
B. Plan review and action.
1. Where a soil erosion and sediment control plan is required, the applicant shall submit such plan to the Administrative Officer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. If the plan is submitted concurrent with and as part of a site plan or subdivision approval, the Planning Board shall either approve or disapprove of said plan within the same time period as permitted the concurrent development application by the Municipal Land Use Law. Any extension of this time period agreed to in writing by the applicant for the development application shall include the same time period extension of the soil erosion and sediment control plan. If the plan is not submitted concurrent with and as part of a site plan or subdivision approval, the Planning Board shall either approve or disapprove of said plan within sixty (60) days of receipt by the Administrative Officer of said plan unless, by written mutual agreement between the Planning Board and the applicant, the said sixty-day period is extended for an additional period up to thirty (30) days. Approval by the Planning Board shall constitute authorization for issuance of a soil erosion and sediment control permit. The failure of the Planning Board to either approve or disapprove said plan within the time as provided for above shall constitute approval of said plan by the Planning Board. For purposes of this section, a major revision of the plan by the applicant shall constitute a new submission.
2. The Administrative Officer shall provide the applicant with written notice of such approval or disapproval, a copy of which decision, stating the name of the applicant, the location of the site [designated both by street address and by lot and block number(s)] and the proposed use of the land, shall be sent to the Gloucester County Soil Conservation District along with other information as requested by the said District.
C. Performance guarantee required. Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the developer shall have filed with the Township a performance guarantee computed by the Township Engineer at one hundred twenty percent (120%) of the construction cost to insure the installation of such uncompleted soil erosion and sediment control measures on or before an agreed date. Construction costs should be based on prices obtained for government contracts. Such performance guarantee may be in the form of a performance bond which
Deptford Township UDO Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
May 5, 2014 Page 270
shall be issued by a bonding or surety company approved by the Township Solicitor; a certified check, returnable to the developer after full compliance; or any other type of surety approved by the Township Solicitor. The performance guarantee shall be approved by the Township Solicitor as to form, sufficiency and execution. Such performance guaranty shall run for a period to be fixed by the Planning Board.
D. Inspection and approval of soil erosion and sediment control measures.
1. Prior to and during construction, all soil erosion and sediment control measures shall be subject to inspection and approval by the Township Engineer, who shall be notified by the developer at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the start of construction.
2. When all of the necessary and appropriate soil erosion and sediment control measures have been completed, the developer shall notify the Planning Board in writing, by certified or registered mail, of the completion of the aforesaid soil erosion and sediment control measures and shall send a copy thereof to the Township Engineer. The Planning Board shall then direct and authorize the Township Engineer to inspect all of the aforesaid soil erosion and sediment control measures. The Engineer shall, thereupon, file a written report to the Planning Board. Said report shall be detailed and shall indicate either approval, partial approval or rejection. If said soil erosion and sediment control measures, or any portion thereof, shall not be approved or shall be rejected by the Township Engineer, said report shall contain a statement of reasons for such non-approval or rejection. Where said report indicates partial approval of said soil erosion and sediment control measures, it shall indicate the cost of the soil erosion and sediment control measures for which approval is rejected or withheld. Where partial approval is granted, the developer may be released from all liability pursuant to its performance guarantee bond, except for that portion adequately sufficient to secure the soil erosion and sediment control measures not yet approved.
3. No approval for occupancy of any building shall be granted unless all needed soil erosion control measures have been completed or substantially provided for in accordance with this chapter. The developer shall bear the final responsibility for the installation and construction of all required soil erosion and sediment control measures according to the provisions of this chapter.
4. The developer shall immediately prior to the release of the performance guarantee, unless relief is granted by the Planning Board, post with the Township a maintenance guarantee for a period not to exceed two (2) years in an amount not to exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the cost of the improvement or of the permanent installation.
5. Whenever sedimentation is caused by stripping vegetation, regarding or other development, it shall be the responsibility of the developer causing such sedimentation to remove it from all adjoining surfaces, drainage systems and
Deptford Township UDO Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
May 5, 2014 Page 271
watercourses and to repair any damage at his expense. All such work shall be done immediately.
6. Maintenance of all drainage facilities and watercourses within the development is the responsibility of the developer until the final facilities are accepted by the Township or such other entity as approved by the Township Council.
7. It is the responsibility of the developer doing any action on or across a communal stream, watercourse or swale, or upon the floodplain or right-of-way during the pendency of the activity, to return it to its original or equivalent condition after such activity is completed.
8. Maintenance of drainage facilities or watercourses, including public drainageways originating and completely on private property, is the responsibility of the landowner to their point of open discharge at the property line or at a communal watercourse within the property.
§ 66. Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan Contents and Requirements.
A. General plan contents.
At a minimum, the soil erosion and sediment control plan shall contain:
1. Plans and specifications of soil erosion and sediment control measures in accordance with the New Jersey Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act.
2. A time schedule indicating the anticipated starting and completion dates of the development sequence and the time of exposure of each area prior to the completion of effective soil erosion and sediment control measures. A sequence of construction is to be included on the plan showing major items of construction and the installation of various sediment control devices.
3. The County Soil Conservation District requires the Township to obtain from the applicant the following for transmittal to the County District:
a. A database summary sheet for any basins to be installed.
b. For sites over 5 acres and for mining operations, a Request for General Permit Authorization for Stormwater Discharge shall be completed and submitted by the applicant with a $200.00 check made out to the "Treasurer, State of New Jersey" prior to the release of final plans by the Township.
c. Copies of any HEC II studies (diskettes) should be submitted, if applicable.
B. General design principles.
Deptford Township UDO Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
May 5, 2014 Page 272
1. The following principles are effective in minimizing soil erosion and sedimentation and shall be included, where applicable, in the soil erosion and sediment control plan:
2. Stripping of vegetation, regarding or other development shall be done in such a way that it will minimize soil erosion.
3. Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented.
4. The disturbed area and the duration of exposure shall be kept to a practical minimum.
5. Temporary seeding and/or mulching shall be used to protect exposed critical areas during development.
6. Provisions shall be made to accommodate the increased runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and after development.
7. Sediment in the runoff water shall be trapped until the disturbed area is stabilized by the use of sediment basins or other methods acceptable to the Township Engineer.
8. Diversions and sediment basins shall be constructed prior to any on-site grading or disturbance of existing surface material.
9. Banks and beds of temporary and permanent watercourses shall be stabilized.
C. Grading and drainage practices.
In order to provide more suitable sites for building and other physical features, improve surface drainage and control erosion, the following requirements shall be met:
1. The yards of every structure shall be graded to secure proper drainage away from buildings and disposed of it without ponding, and all land within a development shall be graded to drain and dispose of surface water without ponding, except where approved by the Planning Board. Minimum five percent (5%) slopes for ten (10) feet away from structures shall be required.
2. All drainage provisions shall be of such design as to collect on-site runoff and carry surface waters to the nearest practical street, storm drain or natural watercourse. Where drainage swales are used to deliver surface waters away from buildings, the swales shall be sodded and shall be of such slope, shape and size as conform with specifications of the Township.
3. Concentration of diffused natural water flow shall only be permitted in swales or watercourses.
Deptford Township UDO Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
May 5, 2014 Page 273
4. Excavations and fills.
a. No excavation shall be made with a cut face steeper in slope than one and one-half (1.5) horizontal to one (1.0) vertical [sixty-six percent (66%)], except as approved by the Township Engineer when handled under special conditions.
b. No fill shall be placed which creates any exposed surface steeper in slope than two (2.0) horizontal to one (1.0) vertical [fifty percent (50%)], except as approved by the Township Engineer when handled under special conditions.
c. Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent surface water from damaging the cut face of excavations or the sloping surfaces of fills.
d. Retaining walls or cribbing shall be required where needed to prevent the surface of excavations or fills from exceeding at any point the maximum allowable slope.
e. Excavations shall not be made so close to property lines as to endanger adjoining property without supporting and protecting the face of the excavation.
f. No fill shall be made so as to cause settlement, sliding or erosion of the soil.
g. No fill shall be made or placed adjacent to the bank of a channel so as to create bank failure or sliding.
h. Slopes steeper than three (3.0) feet horizontal to one (1.0) foot vertical will need to be stabilized by means other than topsoil and seeding. Other requirements will govern basins and stormwater channels.
D. Design standards.
Standards and specifications for measures used in the soil erosion and sediment control plan shall be in accordance with the Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey, adopted by the Gloucester County Soil Conservation District or by future standards and specifications adopted by the Soil Conservation District. Copies shall be on file at the office of the Gloucester County Soil Conservation District and the Municipal Building of Deptford Township.
Deptford Township UDO Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
May 5, 2014 Page 274
Article VIII. Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
§ 67. Establishment and Composition of the Planning Board
A. Establishment.
A Planning Board is hereby created for the purposes set forth in this chapter and for such other duties as may from time to time be assigned to it by the Township Council. The Planning Board shall consist of nine (9) members and two (2) alternates, who shall be designated "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." All members of the Planning Board, except for the Class II members set forth below, shall be municipal residents.
B. Membership.
1. Members shall be appointed according to the following classes:
a. Class I - The Mayor or the Mayor’s designee in the absence of the Mayor.
b. Class II - One (1) of the officials of the Township other than a member of the Township Council, to be appointed by the Mayor. However, if there is an Environmental Commission, the member of the Environmental Commission who is also a member of the Planning Board as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 shall be deemed to be the Class II Planning Board member for purposes of this chapter in the event that there be among the Class IV or alternate members of the Planning Board both a member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment and a member of the Board of Education.
c. Class III - A member of the Township Council to be appointed by it.
d. Class IV - Other citizens of the Township, to be appointed by the Mayor. Members of Class IV shall hold no other municipal office, position or employment except that one (1) member may be a member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment or Historic Preservation Commission, if established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 and one (1) member may be a member of the Board of Education. If there is an Environmental Commission, the member of the Environmental Commission who is also a member of the Planning Board as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 shall be a Class IV member unless there be among the Class IV or alternate members of the Planning Board both a member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment and a member of the Board of Education, in which case the member common to the Planning Board and Environmental Commission shall be deemed a Class II member of the Planning Board. For the purposes of this section, membership on a Township board or commission whose function is advisory in nature, and the establishment of which is discretionary and not required by statute, shall not be considered the holding of a Township office.
2. Terms of members.
Deptford Township UDO Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
May 5, 2014 Page 275
Members and alternates of the Planning Board existent under the prior zoning ordinance shall retain their membership and their terms shall continue until their term would have expired under the prior ordinance. New appointments to the Planning Board shall be for a term as specified by N.J.S.A. 40:55D- 23 and 23.1, except in the case of a vacancy created by the resignation or removal of a member or alternate, in which case the appointment shall be for the duration of the unexpired term.
3. Members and alternates shall not participate in any hearing in which they have, either directly or indirectly, any personal or financial interest.
4. Any member or alternate other than the Mayor, after a public hearing if he or she requests it, may be removed by the Township Council for cause.
5. Alternate members.
a. The governing body may, by ordinance, provide for the appointment to the Planning Board of not more than two alternate members, who shall be municipal residents. Alternate members shall be appointed by the appointing authority for Class IV members, and shall meet the qualifications of Class IV members of nine member planning boards. Alternate members shall be designated at the time of appointment by the Mayor as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." The terms of the alternate members shall be for two years, except that the terms of the alternate members shall be such that the term of not more than one alternate member shall expire in any one year; provided, however, that in no instance shall the terms of the alternate members first appointed exceed two years. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled by the appointing authority for the unexpired term only.
b. No alternate member shall be permitted to act on any matter in which he has either directly or indirectly any personal or financial interest. An alternate member may, after public hearing if he requests one, be removed by the governing body for cause.
c. Alternate members may participate in all matters but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member of any class. Participation of alternate members shall not be deemed to increase the size of the Planning Board established by ordinance of the governing body pursuant to Section 14 of P.L.1975, c.291 (C.40:55D-23). A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
6. Substitute members.
Deptford Township UDO Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
May 5, 2014 Page 276
If the Planning Board lacks a quorum because any of its regular or alternate members is prohibited from acting on a matter due to the member's personal or financial interests therein, regular members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be called upon to serve, for that matter only, as temporary members of the Planning Board. Members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be chosen in order of seniority of continuous service to the Board of Adjustment until there are the minimum number of members necessary to constitute a quorum to act upon the matter. If a choice has to be made between regular members of equal seniority, the Chairperson of the Board of Adjustment shall make the choice.
§ 68. Powers of the Planning Board.
A. The Planning Board shall have to power to:
1. Prepare, maintain, adopt and administer the master plan.
2. Prepare, maintain, and administer the subdivision, site plan, and zoning ordinances within this chapter and hear and decide applications made pursuant thereto.
3. Prepare, maintain, and administer the official map.
4. Prepare a capital improvements program.
5. Review proposed amendments to the subdivision, site plan, and zoning ordinances within this chapter and the official map, and make recommendations regarding the same to the Township Council.
6. Hear and decide applications for conditional uses.
7. Hear and decide applications for variances and certain building permits when in conjunction with applications for subdivision, site plan and conditional use approval pursuant to Article 8 of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
B. The Planning Board may:
1. Participate in the exercise and review of programs or plans required by State or Federal law or regulation.
2. Assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous planning process.
3. Perform such other advisory duties as may be requested of it by the Township Council.
§ 69. Organization and Advisory Bodies of the Planning Board.
A. The Planning Board shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from the members of Class IV, select a Secretary who may or may not be a member or alternate member of the
Deptford Township UDO Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
May 5, 2014 Page 277
Planning Board or a municipal employee, and create and fill such other offices as established by ordinance. An alternate member shall not serve as Chairman or Vice Chairman of the Planning Board. It may employ, or contract for, and fix the compensation of legal counsel, other than the municipal attorney, and experts, and other staff and services as it may deem necessary, not exceeding, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the governing body for its use. The governing body shall make provision in its budget and appropriate funds for the expenses of the Planning Board.
B. Advisory bodies.
1. A citizens' advisory committee may be appointed by the Mayor, and shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor, to assist or collaborate with the Planning Board in its duties, but such person or persons shall have no power to vote or take other action required of the Board.
2. The Planning Board shall make available to the Environmental Commission an informational copy of every application submitted for development, although failure on the part of the Planning Board to make such informational copy available to the Environmental Commission shall not invalidate any hearing or procedure.
§ 70. Establishment and Composition of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
A. Establishment.
A Zoning Board of Adjustment is hereby established for the purpose of interpreting the zoning provisions of this chapter, hearing applications for appeals and variances from them, and such other duties as may from time to time be assigned to it by the Township Council.
B. Membership.
1. The Township Council shall appoint seven (7) members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment and may appoint two (2) alternates, who shall be designated "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." All regular members and any alternative members shall be municipal residents.
a. Members and alternates of the Zoning Board of Adjustment existent under the prior zoning ordinance shall retain their membership and their terms shall continue until their term would have expired under the prior ordinance.
b. New appointments to the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be for a term of four (4) years for members and two (2) years for alternates; except in the case of a vacancy created by the resignation or removal of a member
Deptford Township UDO Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
May 5, 2014 Page 278
or alternate, the appointment shall be for the duration of the unexpired term.
c. No member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment may hold any elective office or position within the Township.
2. Members and alternates shall not participate in any hearing in which they have, either directly or indirectly, any personal or financial interest.
3. Any member or alternate may, after public hearing if he or she requests it, be removed by the Township Council for cause.
4. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman from its regular members.
5. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall select a secretary who may or may not be a member or a municipal employee.
6. Alternate members.
a. Alternate members may participate in discussions of the proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member.
b. A vote shall not be delayed to permit the voting of an absent regular member.
c. In the event that a choice must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
7. Substitute members.
If the Zoning Board of Adjustment lacks a quorum because any of its regular or alternate members is prohibited from acting on a matter due to the member's personal or financial interests therein, Class IV members of the Planning Board shall be called upon to serve, for that matter only, as temporary members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment. The Class IV members of the Planning Board shall be chosen in order of seniority of continuous service to the Planning Board until there are the minimum number of members necessary to constitute a quorum to act upon the matter. If a choice has to be made between Class IV members of equal seniority, the Chairperson of the Planning Board shall make the choice.
§ 71. Powers of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
A. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the power to:
Deptford Township UDO Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
May 5, 2014 Page 279
1. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal made by an administrative officer based on or made in the enforcement of the zoning provisions of this chapter.
2. Hear and decide requests for interpretation of the zoning map, zoning provisions of this chapter, official map, or for decisions upon other special questions upon which the Board is authorized to pass.
3. Hear and decide variance requests pertaining to:
a. "c" variances.
1) Where (a). by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific piece of property, or (b). by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or physical features uniquely affecting a specific piece of property, or (c). by reason of an extraordinary and exceptional situation uniquely affecting a specific piece of property or structures lawfully existing thereon, the strict application of any regulation of the zoning provisions of this chapter would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to, or exceptional and undue hardship upon the developer of such property, grant, upon an application or an appeal relating to such property, a variance from such strict application of such regulation so as to relieve such difficulties or hardship.
2) Where in an application or appeal relating to a specific piece of property the purposes of the Municipal Land Use Law would be advanced by a deviation from the zoning provisions of this chapter and the benefits of the deviation would substantially outweigh any detriment, grant a variance to allow departure from the zoning provisions of this chapter; provided; however, that no variance from those departures enumerated in subsection 3.b. of this section shall be granted under this subsection; and provided further that the proposed development does not require approval by the Planning Board of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use in conjunction with which the Planning Board has power to review a request for a variance.
b. "d" variances.
In particular cases and for special reasons, grant a variance to allow departure from the zoning provisions of this chapter to permit:
1) A use or principal structure in a district restricted against such use or principal structure.
2) An expansion of a non-conforming use.
Deptford Township UDO Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
May 5, 2014 Page 280
3) Deviation from a specification or standard pertaining solely to a conditional use.
4) An increase in the permitted floor area ratio.
5) An increase in the permitted density, except as applied to the required lot area for a lot or lots for detached one or two dwelling unit buildings which lot or lots are either an isolated undersized lot or lots resulting from a minor subdivision.
6) A height of a principal structure which exceeds by ten (10) feet or ten percent (10%) the maximum height permitted in the district for a principal structure.
Variances granted under this subsection shall be granted only by affirmative vote of at least five (5) members. No variance or other relief may be granted under the terms of this section unless such variance or other relief can be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and will not substantially impair the intent and purpose of the zone plan and zoning provisions of this chapter.
If an application for development requests one or more variances but not a variance for a purpose enumerated in subsection d. of this Section, the decision on the requested variance or variances shall be rendered under subsection 71.A.3.a.
No variance or other relief may be granted under the terms of this Section, including a variance or other relief involving an inherently beneficial use, without a showing that such variance or other relief can be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and will not substantially impair the intent and the purpose of the zone plan and zoning ordinance. In respect to any airport safety zones delineated under the "Air Safety and Zoning Act of 1983," P.L.1983, c.260 (C.6:1-80 et seq.), no variance or other relief may be granted under the terms of this Section, permitting the creation or establishment of a nonconforming use which would be prohibited under standards promulgated pursuant to that act, except upon issuance of a permit by the Commissioner of Transportation. An application under this Section may be referred to any appropriate person or agency for its report; provided that such reference shall not extend the period of time within which the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act.
4. Exercise such other powers which are authorized by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-76.
Deptford Township UDO Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
May 5, 2014 Page 281
B. If an application for development requests one or more variances but not a variance for a purpose enumerated in subsection 3.b. of this Section, the decision on the requested variance or variances shall be rendered under subsection 3.a. of this Section.
C. No variance or other relief may be granted under the terms of this Section unless such variance or other relief can be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and will not substantially impair the intent and the purpose of the zone plan and zoning ordinance. In respect to any airport safety zones delineated under the "Air Safety and Zoning Act of 1983," P.L.1983, c.60 (C.6:1 80 et seq.), no variance or other relief may be granted under the terms of this Section, permitting the creation or establishment of a nonconforming use which would be prohibited under standards promulgated pursuant to that act, except upon issuance of a permit by the standards promulgated pursuant to that act, except upon issuance of a permit by the Commissioner of Transportation. An application under this Section may be referred to any appropriate person or agency for its report; provided that such reference shall not extend the period of time within which the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act.
§ 72. Annual Report, Expenses and Costs of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
A. Annual report.
1. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall, at least once a year, review its decisions on applications and appeals for variances and prepare and adopt by resolution a report of its findings on the zoning provisions of this chapter which were the subject of variance requests.
2. The report shall contain recommendations of the Zoning Board of Adjustment relative to amendments or revisions to the zoning provisions of this chapter, if any.
3. The report shall be sent to both the Township Council and the Planning Board.
B. Expenses and costs.
1. The Township Council shall make provision in its budget and appropriate funds for the expenses of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
2. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may employ, or contract for, and fix the compensation of legal counsel, other than the Township Solicitor, and experts and other staff and services as it shall deem necessary, not exceeding, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the Township Council for its use.
3. The Township Council may establish in the Salary Ordinance a manner of compensation and reimbursement of expenses for members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
§ 73. Appeals and Applications to the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
Deptford Township UDO Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
May 5, 2014 Page 282
A. Appeals and applications.
1. Appeals to the Zoning Board of Adjustment may be taken by any interested party affected by any decision of the Administrative Officer of the Township based on or made in the enforcement of the zoning provisions of this chapter or the official map.
2. Such appeal shall be taken within twenty (20) days by filing a notice of appeal with the Administrative Officer, specifying the grounds of such appeal.
3. The Administrative Officer shall immediately transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
4. A developer may file an application for development with the Zoning Board of Adjustment for action under any of its powers without prior application to the Administrative Officer.
B. Time for decision.
1. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall render a decision not later than one hundred twenty (120) days after the date:
a. An appeal is taken from the decision of the Administrative Officer, or
b. The submission of a complete application for development to the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
2. Failure of the Zoning Board of Adjustment to render a decision within the prescribed time period or within such further time as may be consented to by the developer, shall constitute a decision favorable to the developer. If an applicant elects to submit separate consecutive applications for "d" variance approval and site plan, subdivision or conditional use approval, the one hundred twenty (120) day time period for action shall apply to the application for approval of the "d" variance, and the time period for granting or denying any subsequent approval shall be as otherwise provided in this chapter.
3. If, in the case of an appeal made pursuant to Subsection a. of Section 57 of P.L.1975, c.291 (C.40:55D 70), the Board of Adjustment determines there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal made by the Administrative Officer pursuant to a report submitted by the Historic Preservation Commission or Planning Board in accordance with Section 25 of P.L. 1985, c.216 (C.40:55D 111), the Board of Adjustment shall include the reasons for its determination in the findings of its decision thereon.
C. Modification of appeal.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the action, order, requirement, decision, interpretation or determination appealed from
Deptford Township UDO Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
May 5, 2014 Page 283
and to that end have all the powers of the Administrative Officer from whom the appeal is taken.
D. Stay of proceedings by appeal; exception.
1. An appeal to the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action in respect to which the decision appealed from was made unless the Administrative Officer certifies to the Board, after the notice of appeal has been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property.
2. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by order of the Superior Court upon notice to the Administrative Officer and on due cause shown.
§ 74. Meetings of Both Boards.
A. Regular meetings of both the Planning Board and the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be fixed for the entire calendar year and set for a certain time and place. Regular meetings shall be scheduled no less than once a month and shall be held as scheduled unless cancelled for lack of applications for development to process.
B. Special meetings may be held at the call of the Chairman or on the request of any two (2) Board members, and which shall be held on notice to its members and the public in accordance with all legal requirements.
C. No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being present, said quorum to be the majority of the full authorized membership of the Board.
D. All actions shall be taken by a majority vote of the members of the Board at the meeting except as otherwise required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. A member of the Board who was absent for one (1) or more of the meetings at which a hearing was held shall be eligible to vote on a matter upon which the hearing was conducted provided, however, that such Board member certifies in writing to the Board that he or she has read a transcript or listened to a recording of all of the hearing from which he or she was absent.
E. All regular and special meetings shall be open to the public and notice of all such meetings shall be given in accordance with State requirements.
F. Minutes of every regular and special meeting shall be kept and shall include the names of the persons appearing and addressing the Board and of the persons appearing by attorney, the action taken by the Board, the findings, if any, made by it and reasons therefor. The minutes shall thereafter be made available for public inspection during normal business hours at the office of the Administrative Officer. Any interested party shall have the right to compel production of the minutes for use as evidence in any legal proceedings concerning the subject matter of such minutes. Such interested party shall be charged a reasonable fee for the reproduction of the minutes, as indicated in §95. of this chapter.
§ 75. Public Hearings of Both Boards.
Deptford Township UDO Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
May 5, 2014 Page 284
A. The Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, shall hold a hearing on each application for development. Each Board shall make rules governing such hearings.
B. Any maps and documents for which approval is sought at a hearing shall be on file and available for public inspection at least ten (10) days before the date of the hearing during normal business hours in the office of the Administrative Officer. The developer may produce other documents, records, or testimony at the hearing to substantiate, clarify, or supplement the previously filed maps and documents.
C. The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as he may designate shall have the power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant evidence, including witnesses and documents presented by the parties, and the provisions of the County and Municipality Investigations Law (C. 2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
D. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding officer, and the right of cross-examination shall be permitted to all interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if not represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and reasonable limitations as to time and number of witnesses.
E. A verbatim recording shall be made of every hearing. The recording of the proceedings shall be made either by stenographic, mechanical or electrical means. The Township shall furnish a transcript or duplicate recording in lieu thereof on request to any interested party at his or her expense, provided that the charge for a transcript shall not exceed the maximum amount permitted in N.J.S.A. 2A:11-15 and as indicated in §95. of this chapter. Each transcript shall be certified in writing by the transcriber to be accurate.
F. If an applicant desires a certified court reporter, the costs of taking testimony and transcribing it and providing a copy of the transcript to the Township or court shall be at the expense of the applicant, who shall also arrange for the attendance by the reporter. All costs for transcription of the record before the applicable Board shall be the entire and sole obligation of the applicant or appellant, whichever requests the transcript. The obligation to obtain and pay for such transcript shall be solely that of the applicant or appellant who requests the transcript.
§ 76. Public Notice of a Hearing of Either Board.
A. Public notice of a hearing shall be given by the developer for the following applications for development:
1. Any request for a variance.
2. Any request for conditional use approval.
Deptford Township UDO Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
May 5, 2014 Page 285
3. Any request for issuance of a permit to build within the bed of a mapped street or public drainageway or on a lot not abutting a street.
4. Any request for minor or major site plan and/or subdivision approval involving one (1) or more of the aforesaid elements.
5. Any request for preliminary approval of a major subdivision.
6. Any request for approval of a general development plan
7. Any extension of approvals for five or more years under Subsection d. of Section 37 of P.L.1975, c.291 (C.40:55D-49) and Subsection b. of Section 40 of P.L.1975, c. 291 (C.40:55D-52); for modification or elimination of a significant condition or conditions in a memorializing resolution in any situation wherein the application for development for which the memorializing resolution is proposed for adoption required public notice, and for any other applications for development, with the following exceptions: (1) conventional site plan review pursuant to Section 34 of P.L.1975, c.291 (C.40:55D-46), (2) minor subdivisions pursuant to Section 35 of P.L.1975, c.291 (C.40:55D-47) or (3) final approval pursuant to Section 38 of P.L.1975, c.291 (C.40:55D-50); notwithstanding the foregoing, the governing body may by ordinance require public notice for such categories of site plan review as may be specified by ordinance, for appeals of determinations of administrative officers pursuant to Subsection a. of Section 57 of P.L.1975, c.291 (C.40:55D-70), and for requests for interpretation pursuant to Subsection b. of Section 57 of P.L.1975, c.291(C. 40:55D-70). Public notice shall also be given in the event that relief is requested pursuant to Section 47 or 63 of P.L.1975, c.291 (C.40:55D-60 or C.40:55D-76) as part of an application for development otherwise excepted herein from public notice. Public notice shall be given by publication in the official newspaper of the municipality, if there be one, or in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality.
B. The Administrative Officer shall notify the developer at least two (2) weeks prior to the public hearing at which the application will be discussed. Notice of a hearing requiring public notice shall be given by the developer at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing in the following manner:
1. By publication in the official newspaper of the Township, if there is one, or in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township.
2. By notice to all owners of real property located in the State and within two hundred (200) feet in all directions of the property which is the subject of the hearing, as such owners are shown in the current tax duplicate, provided that this requirement shall be deemed satisfied by notice to the (a.) condominium association, in the case of any unit owner whose unit has a unit above or below it, or (b.) horizontal property regime, in the case of any co-owner whose apartment has an apartment above or below it. Notice shall be given by serving a copy on the property owner, as shown on the current tax duplicate, or his agent in charge
Deptford Township UDO Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
May 5, 2014 Page 286
of the property or by mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to the property owner at his address as shown on the current tax duplicate. It is not required that a return receipt is obtained as notice is deemed complete upon mailing.
3. Notice to a partnership owner may be made by service to any partner. Notice to a corporate owner may be made by service upon its president, vice president, secretary or other person authorized by appointment or by law to accept service on behalf of the corporation. Notice to a condominium association, horizontal property regime, community trust or homeowner's association, because of its ownership of common elements or areas located within two hundred (200) feet of the property which is the subject of the public hearing, may be made in the same manner as to a corporation without further notice to unit owners, co-owners, or homeowners on account of such common elements or areas.
4. To the clerk of any adjoining municipality or municipalities when the application for development involves property located within two hundred (200) feet of said municipality or municipalities. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail.
5. To the Gloucester County Planning Board when the application for development involves property adjacent to an existing County road or proposed road shown on the County Official Map or on the County Master Plan, adjoining other County land or situated within two hundred (200) feet of a municipal boundary. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail.
6. To the Commissioner of Transportation of the State of New Jersey when the property abuts a State highway. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail.
7. To the State Planning Commission when the application for development involves property which exceeds one hundred fifty (150) acres or five hundred (500) dwelling units, in which case the notice shall include a copy of any maps or documents required to be filed with the Township.
8. Notice of hearings on applications for approval of a major subdivision or a site plan, not defined as a minor site plan by this chapter, requiring public notice pursuant to subsection A. of this Section shall be given to public utilities, cable television companies or local utilities which possess a right-of-way or easement within the Township and which has registered with the Township in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the person whose name and address appears on the registration form.
C. Upon the written request of a developer, the Administrative Officer shall, within seven (7) days, make and certify a list from the current tax duplicates of names and addresses of owners within the Township to whom the developer is required to give notice. In addition, the Administrative Officer shall include on the list the names, addresses and
Deptford Township UDO Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
May 5, 2014 Page 287
positions of those persons who, not less than seven (7) days prior to the date on which the developer requested the list, have registered to receive notice pursuant to subsection B.8. of this Section. The developer shall be entitled to rely upon the information contained in such list, and failure to give notice to any owner or to any public utility, cable television company, or local utility not on the list shall not invalidate any hearing or proceeding. A sum not to exceed $0.25 per name, or $10.00, whichever, is greater, may be charged for such list.
D. The developer shall file an affidavit of proof of service with the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be.
E. The notice shall state the date, time and place of the hearing, the nature of the matters to be considered, an identification of the property proposed for development by street address, if any, or by reference to lot and block numbers as shown on the current tax duplicate in the Township Tax Assessor's office, and the location and times at which any maps and documents for which approval is sought are available for inspection.
§ 77. Decisions of Either Board.
A. The Board shall include findings of fact and conclusions based thereon in each decision on any application for development and shall reduce the decision to writing.
B. The Board may provide such written decision and findings and conclusions either on the date of the meeting at which the Board grants or denies approval or, if the meeting at which such action is taken occurs within the final forty-five (45) days of the applicable time period for rendering a decision on the application for development, within forty-five (45) days of such meeting by the adoption of a resolution of memorialization setting forth the decision and findings and conclusions of the Board.
C. Failure of a motion to approve an application for development to receive the number of votes required for approval shall be deemed an action denying the application. An action resulting from the failure of a motion to approve the application shall be memorialized by resolution as provided above.
D. The adoption of a resolution of memorialization pursuant to this subsection shall not be construed to alter the applicable time period for rendering a decision on the application for development. Such resolution shall be adopted by a vote of the majority of the Board members who voted for the action previously taken, and no other member shall vote thereon. The vote of such a resolution shall be deemed to be a memorialization of an action taken by the Board and not to be an action of the Board, except that failure to adopt such a resolution within the forty-five (45) day period shall result in the approval of the application for development, notwithstanding any prior action taken thereof.
E. Whenever a memorialization is adopted, the date of such adoption shall constitute the date of the decision for purposes of the mailings, filings, and publications specified in §79 of this chapter.
Deptford Township UDO Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
May 5, 2014 Page 288
§ 78. Appeal of Decision by Either Board.
A. All appeals of decisions made by the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment, except as noted below, shall be taken directly to the Superior Court of New Jersey and not to the Deptford Township Council.
B. Any interested party may appeal to the Deptford Township Council any final decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment involving the granting or denial of a variance as specified in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d. Such appeals shall be decided upon the record established by the Board of Adjustment. The filing and hearing of such appeals shall be in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-17.
§ 79. Notice of Decision for Either Board.
A. Any decision of the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment when acting upon an application for development and any decisions of the Township Council when acting upon an appeal shall be given notice in the following manner:
1. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the municipal agency within ten (10) days of the date of the decision to the developer or appellant or, if represented, then to his attorney, without separate charge. A copy of the decision shall also be mailed within ten (10) days to any interested party who has requested it and who has paid the fee prescribed in §95 of this chapter.
2. A brief notice of the decision shall be published in the official newspaper of the Township. Such publications shall be arranged by the Secretary of the planning Board, the Secretary of the Zoning Board of Adjustment or the Township Clerk, as the case may be, without separate charge to the developer. The notice shall be sent to the official newspaper for publication within ten (10) days of the date of the decision.
3. A copy of the decision shall also be filed in the office of the Administrative Officer, who shall make a copy of such filed decision available to any interested party upon payment of a reasonable fee and available for public inspection at the office during business hours.
Deptford Township UDO Review and Approval Procedures
May 5, 2014 Page 289
Article IX. Review and Approval Procedures
§ 80. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide procedures for the review and approval of applications for subdivisions, site plans, conditional uses, and general development plans in Deptford Township.
§ 81. Applicability of requirements.
A. Subdivision review - All subdivisions, as defined under Article II. of this chapter, are subject to the review procedures specified herein.
B. Site plan review - All site plans, as defined under Article II. of this chapter, are subject to the review procedures specified herein. No construction permit shall be issued for any new structure or for an addition to an existing structure and no certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any change of use of an existing structure until a site plan has been reviewed and approved by the appropriate Township agency, except that:
1. A construction permit for a single-family detached dwelling unit or a two-family dwelling unit and/or their accessory building(s) on a lot shall not require site plan approval.
2. Any construction permit for the customary buildings incidental to farms shall not require site plan approval.
3. Any change of use from one permitted nonresidential use to another permitted nonresidential use shall not require site plan approval if both the Construction Official and the Zoning Officer stipulate to the Board that the existing site development meets the requirements of this chapter for the new use, including onsite parking requirements.
C. Conditional use review - Before a construction permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any conditional use as permitted by this chapter, application shall be made to the Planning Board. The review by the Planning Board of a conditional use shall include any required site plan review pursuant to this chapter. Public notice and a hearing shall be required as stipulated by this chapter.
§ 82. Information reviews.
A. Applicability.
Nothing in this section shall be considered mandatory but the procedures provided for herein are recommended for the purpose of expediting the review process and reducing development costs.
B. Pre-application conference.
Deptford Township UDO Review and Approval Procedures
May 5, 2014 Page 290
1. Any developer may meet with the Administrative Officer or his/her designee without the payment of any fees and without obligation.
2. A pre-application conference may be used to provide the developer with an overview of the substantive and procedural aspects of the development review process, to provide insight as to the acceptability of the proposed plan, and to offer suggestions for the improvement of said plan.
3. The developer may be required to secure an appointment with the Administrative Officer in advance of the pre-application conference and to submit a sketch plan of the proposed application. The conference shall be held within fourteen (14) days of requesting an appointment unless the Administrative Officer is unavailable because of illness, vacation, or similar reason.
4. For the purpose of the pre-application conference only, the sketch plan need not be drawn to scale nor be prepared by a licensed engineer, surveyor, architect, landscape architect, or planner but shall contain sufficient information from a tax map or other source to enable the Administrative Officer to determine the suitability of the proposal in relation to the standards of this chapter.
5. The pre-application conference is a good-faith meeting between the developer and the Administrative Officer. Nothing discussed at the conference shall be binding upon either party or upon the Planning Board.
C. Concept plan review.
1. An applicant for site plan, subdivision or general development plan approval or an applicant having a particular question which cannot be resolved at a pre-application conference may request an informal concept plan review before the Planning Board. In addition, the applicant may request to have the concept plan reviewed by one (1) or more members of the Development Review Committee, as listed in §84. below.
2. Standards for the concept plan.
a. The concept plan shall contain sufficient detail to enable the reviewing officials to determine compliance with this chapter, including the area of all proposed lots and buildings and any dimensions necessary to determine zoning compliance.
b. Roadway and street widths shall be noted but fully engineered plans for streets, drainage, and other utility or infrastructure systems shall not be required.
c. The required number of concept plans to be submitted by the applicant shall be determined by the Administrative Officer, but in no case shall be less than twelve (12) plans.
Deptford Township UDO Review and Approval Procedures
May 5, 2014 Page 291
3. The applicant shall be required to submit application fees for an informal concept review before the Planning Board, however, the applicant shall only be required to post escrow fees for the review services of the Township's professional consultants if such review is so requested by the applicant. At the conclusion of the concept review process, any unexpended escrow fees will be returned.
4. An applicant desiring to have a concept plan informally reviewed by the Planning Board shall so notify the Secretary of the Planning Board at least fourteen (14) days prior to the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning Board. The Secretary of the Planning Board shall thereafter notify the applicant of the time and place which has been scheduled by the Planning Board for the informal review. The informal presentation before the Planning Board will be scheduled at the conclusion of the meeting and will be allotted fifteen (15) minutes, if time permits.
5. An applicant desiring to have a concept plan informally reviewed by any member(s) of the Development Review Committee shall so notify the Administrative Officer. The Administrative Officer will either schedule the applicant for a regularly scheduled Development Review Committee meeting (if the concept plan is submitted at least three (3) weeks prior to the regularly scheduled Development Review Committee meeting) or a specially called meeting may be set by the Administrative Officer within three (3) weeks of the concept plan submission if a mutually agreeable time may be established by all parties.
6. Nothing in the concept review process shall be binding upon either the applicant, Committee members, or the Planning Board.
§ 83. Submission, classification, and completeness of formal applications.
A. All formal applications for approval, including minor subdivisions and site plans, preliminary or final major subdivisions and site plans, general development plans, and conceptual use plans, shall be submitted with forms provided by the Administrative Officer. The Administrative Officer shall also provide the applicant with a copy of the checklist for completeness which is contained in Article X. of this chapter. The completed application forms shall be accompanied by all required plans, supporting documentation, application fees and escrow fees for professional review.
B. Submission standards.
1. Plans and supporting documentation must contain all information herein required for the type of approval requested. Where there is a question as to classification of the plan, the applicant may seek advice from the Administrative Officer. Failure to provide all required information will result in the plan being declared incomplete.
Deptford Township UDO Review and Approval Procedures
May 5, 2014 Page 292
2. All applications for preliminary or final site plan approval which require public sanitary sewer or water service shall submit a receipted copy of their application for Form A approval to the Deptford Municipal Utility Authority.
3. Twelve (12) copies of all plans and supporting documentation and twenty-six (26) copies of the completed application forms shall be submitted by the applicant to the Administrative Officer, where the Administrative Officer or his or her representative shall date stamp the plans upon receipt. This date shall be considered the official submission date.
C. Upon receipt of an application, the Administrative Officer shall preliminarily screen the material and determine completeness relative to the details required by the appropriate development checklist in this chapter. The Administrative Officer shall either determine the application to be incomplete or determine that the application is substantially complete.
1. Should the Administrative Officer determine that the application is incomplete, the reasons for such determination shall be specified in writing to the applicant, and an appropriately revised plan may thereafter be submitted to the Administrative Officer as in the first instance.
2. If the Administrative Officer determines the application to be substantially complete, the Administrative Officer shall schedule the application for the next regularly scheduled Development Review Committee meeting.
D. The following certifications are required before an application is heard by the Development Review Committee or Planning Board.
1. All taxes due to the Township on the property for which application is made shall be paid.
2. Sufficient monies are in the escrow account to cover the cost of professional reviews.
3. Where applicable, the applicant shall submit a certification at the time of the Development Review Committee meeting that the plan has been submitted for review by appropriate outside agencies such as the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and Energy in the case of potential wetlands or stream encroachment, the Gloucester County Board of Health where septic systems are proposed, the Gloucester County Planning Board when the proposal has frontage on a county road, the New Jersey Department of Transportation when the proposal has frontage on a state highway, and any other agency as may be directed by the Administrative Officer. A final determination by these agencies shall not be required for action by the Development Review Committee or the Planning Board, but any action taken shall be conditioned upon the approval of these agencies.
Deptford Township UDO Review and Approval Procedures
May 5, 2014 Page 293
§ 84. Development Review Committee.
A. Prior to being heard by the Planning Board and, in some cases, the Zoning Board of Adjustment, all applications whether for preliminary, final, general development plan or conditional use approval shall be presented to the Development Review Committee for review. The Administrative Officer will determine which members of the Development Review Committee will review the application. Those members so delegated may submit oral and/or written comments regarding an application, wherein written comments shall be made available to the applicant prior to, or at, the meeting.
B. The Development Review Committee may consist of the Administrative Officer, the Township Engineer, the Planning Board Engineer, the Township Planner, the Planning Board Planner, the Township Solicitor, the Planning Board Solicitor, the Construction Official, a representative of the Environmental Commission, a representative of the Deptford Municipal Utility Authority, a representative of the Township Police Department, the Township Fire Marshall, and any three (3) members of the Planning Board so designated by the Planning Board Chairperson.
C. Conduct of the Development Review Committee meeting.
1. The Development Review Committee meeting is a working session between the Committee and the applicant. The meeting is used to provide the applicant with a comprehensive review of his or her application, to provide insight as to the deficiencies of the plan and to offer suggestions and recommendations for the improvement of said plan, to analyze the application to help in determining completeness, and to comment on the acceptability of the proposed plan. It is not a public hearing and need not be advertised. The meeting shall be chaired by the Administrative Officer.
2. Attendance by the applicant and/or his representatives is not mandatory but is strongly encouraged.
3. The members of the Development Review Committee will review an application and will offer comments to the applicant. The Administrative Officer and/or his/her representative will prepare a report of all the outstanding review issues that remain to be addressed by the applicant. The members of the Development Review Committee present for each application will informally vote on whether the application is deemed complete or incomplete and how the application will be further scheduled. Such informal vote of the Committee will be a recommendation for action by the Administrative Officer.
4. An electronic sound recording or a written copy of the minutes of the meeting may be kept but, in the case of written minutes, need not be a verbatim account of the proceedings.
D. Determination and certification of completeness.
Deptford Township UDO Review and Approval Procedures
May 5, 2014 Page 294
1. The Administrative Officer will refer to the recommendation of the Development Review Committee and will make a determination of completeness within forty-five (45) days of the application's official submission date.
a. If incomplete, the Administrative Officer shall list such missing items in writing and an appropriately revised plan may thereafter be submitted by the applicant to the Administrative Officer as in the first instance of plan submission.
b. If complete, the Administrative Officer will certify in writing as such to the applicant and will schedule the application as noted below in subsection E.
2. If, within forty-five (45) days of the application's official submission date, the Administrative Officer neither certifies to the applicant that the application is complete nor notifies the applicant in writing that the application has been determined to be incomplete, then the application shall be considered certified complete and the period for action by the Board shall commence.
E. Scheduling of a complete application.
1. The Administrative Officer will refer to the recommendations of the Development Review Committee and will schedule a complete application as follows:
a. If complete with major revisions needed, the Administrative Officer shall notify the applicant in writing of the date revised plans must be resubmitted for the application to be scheduled for the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Development Review Committee.
b. If complete with minor revisions needed, the Administrative Officer shall state the date revised plans (eighteen (18) copies) must be resubmitted by the applicant for the application to be scheduled for the next regularly scheduled Planning Board meeting for which space is available on the agenda. In no case shall action be delayed for longer than the period prescribed by the Municipal Land Use Law unless the applicant has waived the time limits in writing or orally when the waiver is recorded by means of an electronic recording device.
c. If complete with no revisions needed, the Administrative Officer shall schedule the application for the next regularly scheduled Planning Board meeting for which space is available on the agenda. In no case shall action be delayed for longer than the period prescribed by the Municipal Land Use Law unless the applicant has waived the time limits in writing or orally when the waiver is recorded by means of an electronic recording device.
§ 85. Approval Procedures for Minor Subdivisions and Minor Site Plans.
Deptford Township UDO Review and Approval Procedures
May 5, 2014 Page 295
A. The developer must comply with §76. of this chapter regarding requirements for notice of a public hearing.
B. The Board shall take action on minor subdivisions and minor site plan applications within forty-five (45) days after the application has been certified complete or within such further time as may be consented to by the developer. Failure of the Board to act within the prescribed time period shall constitute approval of the application.
C. Minor subdivisions and minor site plans do not require preliminary approval and may be voted upon for final action by the Board. The Board may condition approval upon compliance with any reasonable condition not in violation with the terms of this chapter or other applicable local, state, or federal law.
D. When a minor subdivision or minor site plan is approved by the Board, at least twelve (12) prints of the plat, plan or deed descriptions shall be submitted to the Board by the developer to be signed by the Chairman and Secretary of the Board. If the minor subdivision or minor site plan application is denied by the Board, the Secretary of the Board shall notify the developer of such denial and forward the developer a copy of the resolution adopted in accordance with this chapter, setting forth the reasons for the denial.
E. Effect of minor subdivision approval.
1. The approval of a minor subdivision shall expire one hundred ninety (190) days from the date of approval unless within such period a plat conforming to all conditions of approval is filed in conformity with the provisions of the Map Filing Law, NJ.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq., or a deed clearly describing the approved minor subdivision is filed by the developer with the County recording officer, the Township engineer, and the Township tax assessor as required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
2. The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions, whether conditional or otherwise, upon which minor subdivision approval was granted, shall not be changed for a period of two (2) years after the date of minor subdivision approval, provided the approved minor subdivision shall have been duly recorded as provided in this subsection.
3. If the developer proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board that he or she was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding with the development because of delays in obtaining legally required approvals from other government entities and that he or she applied promptly for and diligently pursued the approvals, the Board either:
a. Shall grant an extension of the approval period not to exceed one (1) year. The developer shall apply for this extension before: 1), what would otherwise be the expiration date, or 2), the 91st day after the developer
Deptford Township UDO Review and Approval Procedures
May 5, 2014 Page 296
receives the last legally required approval from the other governmental entities, whichever occurs later; or
b. May extend the one hundred ninety (190) day period for filing a minor subdivision plat or deed pursuant to subsection C. of this Section. The length of the extension shall be equal to the period of delay caused by the wait for the required approvals, as determined by the Board. The developer may apply for the extension either before or after what would otherwise be the expiration date.
F. Effect of minor site plan approval.
The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions, whether conditional or otherwise, upon which minor site plan approval was granted, shall not be changed for a period of two (2) years after the date of minor site plan approval. If the developer proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board that he or she was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding with the development because of delays in obtaining legally required approvals from other government entities and that he or she applied promptly for and diligently pursued the approvals, the Board shall grant an extension of the approval period not to exceed one (1) year. A developer shall apply for this extension before: 1), what would otherwise be the expiration date, or 2), the 91st day after the date on which the developer receives the last of the legally required approvals from the other governmental entities, whichever occurs later.
G. Exceptions in Applications of Requirements.
1. The rules, regulations and standards set forth in this Section shall be considered the minimum requirements for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Township. However, if the applicant can clearly demonstrate that, because peculiar conditions pertaining to his land, the literal enforcement of this Section is impracticable or will exact undue hardship, the Planning Board may permit such exemption(s) and waiver(s) as may be reasonable within the general purpose and intent of the rules, regulations and standards established by this Section.
2. Exceptions after Approvals:
a. A building permit or certificate of occupancy may be issued if all improvements have been installed or completed except the finish course of the road and the Township Engineer warrants that completion of the road is in the Township’s interest after the subdivider has completed construction of dwellings and structures. The maintenance guarantee required shall not begin until the finish course has been installed.
b. The Planning Board may also authorize the issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy if the following improvements have been bonded but not yet installed: landscaping, sidewalks, other similar improvements.
Deptford Township UDO Review and Approval Procedures
May 5, 2014 Page 297
c. The Planning Board when acting upon an application which includes provisions for low and moderate income housing, shall waive those portions of the design standards which create barriers to the construction of low or moderate income housing and which are not necessary to protect public health and safety.
3. Site Plan Exemptions:
a. The one time construction of a parking area for less than three vehicles.
b. A proposed development not involving a change in use and not affecting existing circulation, drainage, building arrangements, landscaping, buffering, lighting and other considerations of plan review as determined by the Township Department of Community Development.
c. Customary agricultural buildings such as barns, silos, storage sheds and related structures and roadside stands not larger than 200-square feet of sales area, for the sale of products grown on-site when adequate parking and access is provided as determined by the Township Department of Community Development.
d. Normal maintenance or replacement such as a new roof, painting, new siding or similar activity.
§ 86. Approval Procedures for Preliminary Major Subdivisions and Site Plans.
A. The developer must comply with §76. of this chapter regarding requirements for notice of a public hearing.
B. The Planning Board shall take action on a preliminary major site plan application involving ten (10) acres of land or less and ten (10) dwelling units or less and/or a preliminary major subdivision application involving ten (10) lots or less within forty-five (45) days after the application has been certified complete or within such further time as may be consented to by the developer. Provided, however, that the Planning Board shall take action on a preliminary major site plan or subdivision application which includes a request for relief pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60 within one hundred twenty (120) days after the application has been certified complete or within such further time as may be consented to by the developer. Failure of the Planning Board to act within the prescribed time period shall constitute approval of the application.
C. The Planning Board shall take action on a preliminary major site plan application involving more than ten (10) acres of land or more than ten (10) dwelling units and/or a preliminary major subdivision application involving more than ten (10) lots within ninety-five (95) days after the application has been certified complete or within such further time as may be consented to by the developer. Provided, however, that the Planning Board shall take action on a preliminary major site plan or subdivision application which includes a request for relief pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60 within one
Deptford Township UDO Review and Approval Procedures
May 5, 2014 Page 298
hundred twenty (120) days after the application has been certified complete or within such further time as may be consented to by the developer. Failure of the Planning Board to act within the prescribed time period shall constitute approval of the application.
D. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall take action on a preliminary major site plan or subdivision application which includes a request for relief pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d. within one hundred twenty (120) days after the application has been certified complete or within such further time as may be consented to by the developer. In the event that the developer elects to submit separate consecutive applications, the aforesaid provision shall apply to the application for approval of the variance. The period for granting or denying any subsequent approval shall be as otherwise provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. Failure of the Zoning Board of Adjustment to act within the prescribed time period shall constitute approval of the application.
E. The Board may condition preliminary major subdivision or site plan approval upon compliance with any reasonable condition not in violation with the terms of this chapter or other applicable local, state, or federal law, provided, however, that no preliminary plan approval shall be granted prior to the granting of Form A approval for sanitary sewer and water service (if appropriate) by the Deptford Township Municipal Utilities Authority.
F. When a preliminary major subdivision or site plan is approved by the Board, at least twelve (12) prints of the plat or plan shall be submitted to the Board by the developer to be signed by the Chairman and Secretary of the Board and the Township Engineer. If the preliminary major subdivision or site plan application is denied by the Board, the Secretary of the Board shall notify the developer of such denial and forward the developer a copy of the resolution adopted in accordance with this chapter, setting forth the reasons for the denial.
G. Effect of preliminary major subdivision or site plan approval.
1. The preliminary approval of a subdivision or site plan shall, except as provided in subsection d. of this section, confer the following rights for a three (3) year period from the date on which the resolution of preliminary approval is adopted:
a. That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary approval was granted shall not be changed, including but not limited to use requirements; layout and design standards for streets, curbs and sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions, and off-tract improvements; and, in the case of a site plan, any requirements peculiar to site plan approval pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-41, except that nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the Township from modifying by ordinance such general terms and conditions of preliminary approval as relate to public health and safety;
b. That the developer may submit an application for final approval on or before the expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or a section
Deptford Township UDO Review and Approval Procedures
May 5, 2014 Page 299
or sections of the preliminary subdivision plat or site plan, as the case may be; and
c. That the developer may apply for, and the Planning Board may grant, an extension of the preliminary approval for additional periods of at least one (1) year but not to exceed a total extension of two (2) years, provided that if the design standards have been revised by ordinance, such revised standards may govern.
d. In the case of a subdivision of, or site plan for, an area of fifty (50) acres or more, the Planning Board may grant the rights referred to in subsections a, b and c. of this section for a reasonable period of greater than three (3) years, but not more than seven (7) years. The developer may apply for thereafter, and the Planning Board may thereafter grant an extension of the preliminary approval for not more than three (3) additional one (1) year periods, provided that if the design standards have been revised by ordinance, such revised standards may govern. The granting of this extended approval period shall be based upon the Planning Board's consideration of such factors as:
1) The total number of dwelling units and/or square footage of non- residential floor area proposed;
2) Economic conditions; and
3) The comprehensiveness of the development.
e. Whenever the Planning Board grants an extension of preliminary approval pursuant to subsection c. or d. of this section and preliminary approval has expired before the date on which the extension is granted, the extension shall begin on what would otherwise be the expiration date. The developer may apply for the extension either before or after what would otherwise be the expiration date.
f. The Planning Board shall grant an extension of preliminary approval for a period determined by the Board but not exceeding one (1) year from what would otherwise be the expiration date, if the developer proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board that he or she was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding with the development because of delays in obtaining legally required approvals from other governmental entities and that the developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued the required approvals. An developer shall apply for the extension before 1), what would otherwise be the expiration date of preliminary approval or 2), the 91st day after the developer receives the last legally required approval from other governmental entities, whichever occurs later.
Deptford Township UDO Review and Approval Procedures
May 5, 2014 Page 300
H. Concurrent preliminary and final subdivision and site plan approval.
1. The Planning Board may, as its discretion, approve a request from an developer to concurrently consider preliminary and final subdivision and/or site plan approval provided that:
a. The application does not involve the construction of a new street.
b. The application involves the creation of ten (10) or fewer lots.
c. The total square footage of non-residential construction involves less than twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet of floor area and less than thirty thousand (30,000) square feet of impervious surface.
2. The approval procedures for final approval shall be followed by the Planning Board as noted in §87 below.
§ 87. Approval Procedures for Final Major Subdivisions and Site Plans.
A. The Planning Board shall take action on a final major site plan or subdivision application within forty-five (45) days after the application has been certified complete or within such further time as may be consented to by the developer. Failure of the Planning Board to act within the prescribed time period shall constitute approval of the application.
B. The Planning Board may condition approval upon compliance with any reasonable condition not in violation with the terms of this ordinance or other applicable local, state, or federal law provided, however, no such final approval shall be granted until the project has received Form B and water service approval from the Deptford Township Municipal Utilities Authority. (Final MUA approval is required prior to applying for building permits.)
C. All final plans shall be revised to incorporate any conditions of approval and, when all such conditions have been met, twelve (12) copies of the revised final plat shall be submitted to the Administrative Officer to be signed by the Chairman and Secretary of the Planning Board.
D. Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire ninety-five (95) days from the date of signing of the plats unless within such period the plat shall have been filed by the developer with the County recording officer, in conformity with the provisions of the Map Filing Law, N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq. The Planning Board may, for good cause, extend the time period for filing for an additional one hundred ninety (190) days from the date of signing of the plats. The Planning Board may extend the ninety-five (95) day or one hundred ninety (190) day period if the developer proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the Planning Board that the developer was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from filing because of delays in obtaining legally required approvals from other governmental entities and that the developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued the required approvals. The length of the extension shall be equal to the period of delay
Deptford Township UDO Review and Approval Procedures
May 5, 2014 Page 301
caused by the wait for the required approvals, as determined by the Planning Board. The developer may apply for the extension either before or after what would otherwise be the expiration date.
E. Effect of final approval.
1. The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval first granted and all other rights granted to the developer pursuant to the preliminary approval, whether conditionally or otherwise, shall not be changed for a period of two (2) years after the date on which the resolution of final approval is adopted; provided that the developer has duly recorded the major subdivision plat as provided for in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-54.
2. If the developer has duly recorded the major subdivision plat as provided for in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-54, the Planning Board may grant an extension of the final approval for not more than three (3) additional one (1) year periods.
3. Notwithstanding any other provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., the granting of final approval terminates the time period of preliminary approval for the section(s) granted final approval.
4. In the case of a subdivision or site plan for a planned development of fifty (50) acres or more, a conventional subdivision or site plan for one hundred fifty (150) acres or more, or site plan for development of nonresidential floor area of two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet or more, the Planning Board may grant the rights referred to in subsections 1. and 2. of this section for a reasonable period of greater than two (2) years, but not more than seven (7) years. The developer may apply for thereafter, and the Planning Board may thereafter grant, an extension of final approval for such additional period of time as shall be determined by the Planning Board to be reasonable taking into consideration:
5. Whenever the Planning Board grants an extension of final approval pursuant to subsection -1- 2 or -4. of this section and final approval has expired before the date on which the extension is granted, the extension shall begin on what would otherwise be the expiration date. The developer may apply for the extension either before or after what would otherwise be the expiration date.
6. The Planning Board shall grant an extension of final approval for a period determined by the Board but not exceeding one (1) year from what would otherwise be the expiration date, if the developer proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board that he or she was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding with the development because of delays in obtaining legally required approvals from other governmental entities and that he or she applied promptly for and diligently pursued the required approvals. A developer shall apply for the extension before a) what would otherwise be the expiration date of preliminary approval or b) the 91st day after the developer receives the
Deptford Township UDO Review and Approval Procedures
May 5, 2014 Page 302
last legally required approval from other governmental entities, whichever occurs later.
7. All final approvals are conditioned upon submission of required bonds or other surety of a form satisfactory to the Township, as prescribed in §96. If required street, utility, and similar improvements are not constructed, the Township may call said bond or surety and use its proceeds to construct said improvements at the applicants expense.
§ 88. Approval Procedures for Conditional Uses.
A. The Planning Board may condition conditional use approval upon compliance with any reasonable condition not in violation with the terms of this chapter or other applicable local, state, or federal laws.
B. The Planning Board shall take action on an application for a conditional use within ninety-five (95) days of submission of a complete application or within such further time as may be consented to by the developer.
1. This time period shall be concurrent with the review of a site plan application.
2. An approval shall be conditioned upon receipt of a favorable recommendation from the County Planning Board or other appropriate agency.
3. Failure to render a timely decision shall be deemed an approval, as required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67.
§ 89. Findings for Planned Developments.
A. No planned development (including planned unit developments, residential clusters, planned commercial developments, or planned industrial developments) shall be authorized unless the Planning Board first makes all of the following determinations:
1. That the plan fully complies with the requirements of this chapter and the departures by the proposed planned development from the zoning regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property conform to those standards in this chapter applicable to the permitted planned development;
2. That the proposals for maintenance and conservation of common open space are reliable, and that the amount, location, and purpose of the common open space are adequate;
3. That the provisions through the physical design of the proposed development for public services, control over vehicular and pedestrian traffic, and the amenities of light and air, recreation and visual enjoyment are adequate;
4. That the proposed planned development will not have an unreasonably adverse impact upon the area in which it is proposed to be established; and
Deptford Township UDO Review and Approval Procedures
May 5, 2014 Page 303
5. That in the case of a proposed planned development which contemplates construction over a period of years, that the terms and conditions intended to protect the interests of the public and of the residents, occupants and owners of the proposed development in the total completion of the development are adequate.
§ 90. Required documentation for general development plans.
A. The general development plan shall set forth the permitted number of dwelling units, the amount of nonresidential floor space, the residential density and the nonresidential floor area ratio for the planned development, in its entirety, according to a schedule which sets forth the timing of the various sections of the development.
B. Every developer for approval of a PUD general development plan shall submit the following documentation for review by the Township.
1. Each report shall be prepared by appropriate professional experts, licensed by the State of New Jersey when applicable. Reports shall be of sufficient detail to allow for reasonable review by the Township's own experts, at the applicant's expense.
a. A report analyzing the impact of traffic generated by the proposed PUD on nearby roadways.
b. A storm water management plan setting forth the proposed method of controlling and managing storm water on the site.
c. An environmental inventory including a general description of the vegetation, soils, topography, geology, surface hydrology, climate and cultural resources of the site, existing man-made structures or features, and the probable impact of the development on the environmental attributes of the site.
d. A community facility plan indicating the scope and type of supporting community facilities which may include, but not be limited to, educational or cultural facilities, historic sites, libraries, hospitals, firehouses and police stations.
e. A housing plan outlining the number of housing units to be provided and the extent to which any housing obligation assigned to the municipality pursuant to P. L. 1985, c. 222 (C. 52:27D-301 et al.) will be fulfilled by the development.
f. A local service plan indicating those public services which the developer proposes to provide and which may include, but not be limited to, water, sewer, cable and solid waste disposal.
Deptford Township UDO Review and Approval Procedures
May 5, 2014 Page 304
g. A fiscal report describing the anticipated demand on municipal services to be generated by the planned development and any other financial impacts to be faced by Township or school districts as a result of the completion of the planned development. The fiscal report shall also include a detailed projection of property tax revenues which will accrue to the county, Township and school district according to the projected development schedule as required below, and following the completion of the planned development in its entirety.
2. The PUD general development plan shall include the following information:
a. A schematic land use plan containing sufficient information to allow a determination that the plan is capable of satisfying the requirements of this chapter. The plan shall include:
1) A hierarchical circulation system, but may be exclusive of local streets. Guidelines for bicycle and pedestrian circulation should also be provided.
2) Generalized land use by section. This plan need not contain detailed development design but shall include the area of each section, its intended use, and the maximum number of residential dwelling units or non-residential square feet which are anticipated.
3) A system of open space, recreational amenities, and necessary community facilities shall be noted.
b. A description or schematic plan of utility service by which it can be determined that adequate capacity exists for distribution, collection, and/or treatment of water, sanitary waste, solid waste, electric, gas, and telephone service. No PUD general development plan shall be approved without all principal buildings being served by public sewer and water service.
c. An estimate of the cost of completing required public and common services including recreational amenities, circulation system improvements, utility lines, community facilities, and such other improvements as may be deemed necessary. This estimate shall include the cost of all on-site improvements and a fair share of all required off-site improvements.
d. A proposed timing schedule in the case of a planned development whose construction is contemplated over a period of years, including any terms or conditions which are intended to protect the interests of the public and of the residents who occupy any section of the planned development prior to the completion of the development in its entirety.
Deptford Township UDO Review and Approval Procedures
May 5, 2014 Page 305
e. A municipal development agreement, which shall mean a written agreement between the Township and a developer relating to the planned development.
f. A detailed plan explaining how common areas are to be owned, managed, maintained, and administered. The submission shall include the proposed bylaws of any homeowners, community, or condominium association to be established.
§ 91. Approval procedures for general development plans.
A. The Planning Board shall first make the appropriate findings as noted in §89.
B. General development plan approval of a PUD must be granted by the Planning Board prior to the Planning Board taking action on preliminary approval on any section. Each PUD shall be developed in accordance with a general development plan approved by the Planning Board, notwithstanding any provision of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., or an ordinance or regulation adopted pursuant thereto after the effective date of the approval.
C. The planning board shall take action on the general development plan application within ninety-five (95) days after the submission of a complete application or within such further time as may be consented to by the developer. Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period prescribed shall constitute general development plan approval of the planned development.
D. The term of the effect of the general development plan approval shall be determined by the Planning Board using the guidelines set forth below, except that the term of the effect of the approval shall not exceed twenty (20) years from the date upon which the developer receives final approval of the first section of the planned development:
1. In making its determination regarding the duration of the effect of approval of the development plan, the Planning Board shall consider: the number of dwelling units or amount of nonresidential floor area to be constructed, prevailing economic conditions, the timing schedule to be followed in completing the development and the likelihood of its fulfillment, the developer's capability of completing the proposed development, and the contents of the general development plan and any conditions which the Planning Board attaches to the approval thereof.
2. The approval may be extended by the Planning Board for good cause for additional two (2) year periods but the Planning Board shall have the right to include with each extension a requirement that the PUD comply with such additional conditions as the Planning Board may deem appropriate and in the public interest. In no case shall the term of the effect of the approval and any extensions exceed twenty (20) years from the date upon which the developer receives final approval of the first section of the planned development.
Deptford Township UDO Review and Approval Procedures
May 5, 2014 Page 306
E. The developer shall, to the satisfaction of the Township, construct required improvements or post sufficient bond, notes, or letters of credit, to insure that, in the event that the PUD is not fully developed prior to the expiration of the general development plan, that adequate recreational, circulation, utility, and community facilities shall be provided to the residents and occupants of those portions of the development which are completed.
F. Approval of the PUD general development plan does not relieve the developer of the necessity to apply for preliminary and final site plan or subdivision approval for each and every section of the development and to fully comply with the requirements of this chapter.
G. Any guarantees or rights granted pursuant to approval of a subdivision or site plan for a specific section shall run independently of the term of the general development plan approval.
1. In the event that a general development plan approval expires prior to the expiration of rights granted pursuant to a subdivision or site plan for a specific section, the rights granted to that section shall remain in effect for the period guaranteed by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
2. Upon the expiration of general development plan approval, the conditional approval of the PUD shall be deemed to have expired and the land shall be regulated by the zoning regulations of the underlying district.
H. The Planning Board may condition approval upon compliance with any reasonable condition not in violation of the terms of this chapter or other applicable local, state, or federal laws.
I. In the event that the developer seeks to modify the proposed timing schedule, such modification shall require the approval of the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall, in deciding whether or not to grant approval of the modification, take into consideration prevailing economic and market conditions, anticipated and actual needs for residential units and nonresidential space within the Township and the region, and the availability and capacity of public facilities to accommodate the proposed development.
J. Except as provided hereunder, the developer shall be required to gain the prior approval of the Planning Board if, after approval of the general development plan, the developer wishes to make any variation in the location of land uses within the planned development or to increase the density of residential development or the floor area ratio of nonresidential development in any section of the planned development.
K. Except as provided hereunder, once a general development plan has been approved by the Planning Board, it may be amended or revised only upon application by the developer approved by the Planning Board.
1. A developer, without violating the terms of the approval pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., may, in undertaking any section of the planned development,
Deptford Township UDO Review and Approval Procedures
May 5, 2014 Page 307
reduce the number of residential units or amount of nonresidential floor space by no more than fifteen percent (15%) or reduce the residential density or nonresidential floor area ratio by no more than fifteen percent (15%); provided, however, that a developer may not reduce the number of residential units to be provided pursuant to P. L. 1985, c. 222 (C. 52:27D-301 et al.) without prior Township approval.
L. Upon the completion of each section of the development as set forth in the approved general development plan, the developer shall notify the Administrative Officer, by certified mail, as evidence that the developer is fulfilling his obligations under the approved plan. For the purpose of this section, "completion" of any section of the development shall mean that the developer has acquired a certificate of occupancy for every residential unit or every nonresidential structure, as set forth in the approved general development plan and pursuant to section 15 of P. L. 1975, c. 217 (C. 52-27D-133). If the Township does not receive such notification at the completion of any section of the development, the Township, shall notify the developer, by certified mail, in order to determine whether or not the terms of the approved plan are in compliance with the approval.
1. If a developer does not complete any section of the development within eight (8) months of the date provided for in the approved plan, or if at any time the Township has cause to believe that the developer is not fulfilling his obligations pursuant to the approved plan, the Township shall notify the developer, by certified mail, and the developer shall have ten (10) days within which to give evidence that he is fulfilling his obligations pursuant to the approved plan. The Township thereafter shall conduct a hearing to determine whether or not the developer is in violation of the approved plan. If, after such hearing, the Township finds good cause to terminate the approval, it shall provide written notice of same to the developer and the approval shall be terminated thirty (30) days thereafter.
2. In the event that a developer who has general development plan approval does not apply for preliminary approval for the planned development which is the subject of that general development approval within five (5) years of the date upon which the general development plan has been approved by the Planning Board, the Township shall have cause to terminate the approval.
M. In the event that a development which is the subject of an approved general development plan is completed before the end of the term of the approval, the approval shall terminate with the completion of the development. For the purposes of this section, a development shall be considered complete on the date upon which a certificate of occupancy has been issued for the final residential or nonresidential structure in the last section of the development in accordance with the timing schedule set forth in the approved general development plan and the developer has fulfilled all of his obligations pursuant to the approval.
§ 92. Compliance and Time Limitations for Certain Approvals.
Deptford Township UDO Review and Approval Procedures
May 5, 2014 Page 308
A. Compliance - All applicable requirements shall be met at the first time of erection, enlargement, alterations, moving or change in use of a structure and shall apply to the entire structure or structures, whether or not the entire structure or structures were involved in the erection, enlargement, alteration, moving or change in use.
B. Time limit on variances.
1. Applicable time limit - Any variance granted by the Zoning Board of Adjustment or the Planning Board pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70., subsection c. or d., shall expire and become null and void one (1) year from the date such variance is granted unless within said period the applicant obtains a building permit or otherwise avails himself of the said approval; provided, however, that in the event that such variance is approved in conjunction with a major subdivision or site plan approval, then such variance shall not expire and become null and void until three (3) years after the preliminary approval for such site plan and/or subdivision is granted and any approved extensions thereof, or if final approval is granted for such development, two (2) years from the date of the final approval and any approved extensions thereof.
2. Varying time periods - Nothing contained herein shall be construed as preventing the applicable municipal agency from specifying a shorter or longer period of time than noted in subsection B.1. above pursuant to approvals granted to variance applications under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70, subsection c. or d, that are not in conjunction with a major subdivision or site plan approval.
C. Commencement of time periods - For the purpose of calculating the times provided for in this section, such time periods shall commence on the date the municipal agency memorializes its approval by written resolution.
Deptford Township UDO Specifications of Documents to be Submitted
May 5, 2014 Page 309
Article X. Specifications of Documents to be Submitted
§ 93. Purpose.
The documents to be submitted are intended to provide the approving authority with sufficient information and data to assure compliance with all Township codes and specifications and ensure that the proposed development meets the design and improvement standards contained in this chapter. The specification of documents to be submitted is based on the type of development and particular stage of development application.
§ 94. Document Submission Requirements. [Ord. O.16.10, 11/8/10]
A. Submission Requirements Checklists. The documents to be submitted for an application for development, interpretation or appeal are as indicated on tables entitled "Submission Requirements Checklist • Subdivisions, Site Plans, GDP's, and Conditional Uses" and "Submission Requirements Checklist • N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70 a., b., c., and d."; which accompanies and are made a part of this chapter, and which are adopted herein and included by reference. Requested waivers from submitting the required items in the checklists shall be decided by the Development Review Committee pursuant to the procedures in §84.
B. Site Environmental Assessment.
1. When required. The impact on the environment generated by land development projects necessitates a comprehensive analysis of the variety of problems that may result and the actions that can be taken to minimize these problems. It is further recognized that the level of detail required for various types of applications will vary depending on the size of the project, the nature of the site and the location of the project. Therefore, having determined that flexibility is needed in preparing the environment impact statement, the requirements for such a document pertaining to different types of development applications are listed below:
a. All agricultural operations conducted in accordance with a plan approved by the soil conservation district and all tree cultivation operations conducted in accordance with a plan prepared by a professional forester are exempted from the submission of a site environmental assessment.
b. Any variance application to the Zoning Board of Adjustment not involving a site plan or subdivision application shall not require a site environmental assessment unless specifically requested by the Zoning Board. The Zoning Board may request a site environmental assessment where review indicates that there are significant critical areas or suspected environmental hazard on the site in question. The Zoning Board or its designee shall inform the applicant regarding the scope of the information that may be required.
Deptford Township UDO Specifications of Documents to be Submitted
May 5, 2014 Page 310
c. Any minor subdivision and/or minor site plan applications to the Board of Jurisdiction shall not require a site environmental assessment unless specifically requested by the applicable Board. The Board of Jurisdiction may request a site environmental assessment where review indicates that there are significant critical areas or suspected environmental hazard on the site in question. The Board of Jurisdiction or its designee shall inform the applicant regarding any information that may be required.
d. All preliminary major subdivision applications shall be accompanied by a site environmental assessment.
e. All preliminary major site plan applications that propose fifty (50) or more dwellings or two hundred thousand (200,000) or more gross square feet of non-residential development shall be accompanied by a site environmental assessment.
f. Notwithstanding the categories of development that are excluded from the requirement to submit a site environmental assessment, the Board of Jurisdiction may require the submission of information that may be included in the document that is reasonably necessary to make an informed decision on the application before it.
2. When a site environmental assessment is required, it shall be prepared in accordance with §55.B.
C. Community Impact Statements
1. When required. All applications for preliminary major subdivision approval where more than fifty (50) lots are proposed and all applications for preliminary major site plan approval in excess of two hundred thousand (200,000) gross square feet of floor area shall be accompanied by a community impact statement analyzing the proposed development and its expected impacts upon existing municipal facilities and services. A general development plan application shall be submitted with an abbreviated community impact statement consisting of items -2.a and -2.e, below. The community impact statement shall indicate why, in the applicant’s opinion, the proposed development is in the public interest as well as providing data and opinions concerning the impacts in subsection -B.
2. Submission Format. When a community impact statement is required, the applicant shall retain one or more competent professionals to perform the necessary work. All applicable material on file in the Department of Community Development pertinent to local conditions may be consulted. Any additional material pertinent to the evaluation of regional impacts shall also be considered. All community impact statements shall consist of written and graphic materials which clearly present the required information addressing the following areas:
Deptford Township UDO Specifications of Documents to be Submitted
May 5, 2014 Page 311
a. Population impact. An analysis of the number of people expected to be added to the municipal population as a result of the proposed development, including those attracted to the Township for the number of projected jobs in non-residential development, according to the following age cohorts:
1) 0-4 years
2) 5-17 years
3) 17-24 years
4) 25-44 years
5) 45-64 years
6) 65 years and older
b. School impact. An analysis of the anticipated number of public school students projected to be added and the ability of the existing public school facilities to absorb the additional population projected ten (10) years into the future. The overall anticipated cost of facilities necessitated and the development's share of the cost on a pro rata basis by the increase in student population shall be provided.
c. Community facilities impact. An analysis of the existing community facilities and infrastructure available to serve the proposed development and its impact on the adequacy of existing public water facilities, public sewerage facilities; recreational facilities; library facilities, and senior services. Should such facilities be determined inadequate to serve the proposed development, the remedies, either expected or proposed by the applicant, shall be indicated along with the estimated costs for such additional facilities.
d. Services impact. An analysis of the existing services provided by the municipality to serve the proposed development and the impact of the development upon police protection, fire protection, solid waste disposal, and street maintenance services.
e. Fiscal impact. An analysis of the revenues expected to be generated from the development compared to the anticipated costs which the proposed development is expected to generate. Revenues and costs shall be shown for the municipality and the municipal school system.
D. Circulation Impact Study.
Deptford Township UDO Specifications of Documents to be Submitted
May 5, 2014 Page 312
1. When required. A circulation impact study shall be submitted for all general development plans, preliminary major subdivisions and preliminary major site plans.
2. Submission format. Circulation impact studies shall consist of two components, a planning report and a traffic impact report.
a. Planning report. The planning report component of the circulation impact study shall include the following:
1) An introduction indicating the applicant, the location of the site in question, and a description of the site from a land use and transportation perspective.
2) The extent to which any proposed street system meets requirements for street hierarchy, street connectivity, right-of-way and cartway width, and sidewalks.
3) The extent to which the proposed circulation system conforms to the Circulation Element of the Master Plan.
4) The extent to which internal circulation for vehicles, people and the movement of goods is adequate.
5) The extent to which the safety of pedestrians, bicyclists and the traveling public is protected.
6) The provisions made to provide connectivity to the street system, pedestrian generators, and the local and regional greenway network.
b. Traffic impact report. The traffic impact report component of the circulation impact study shall include the following:
1) A description of the project phasing, access points, and connection to other existing or proposed developments.
2) An analysis of existing conditions, including:
(a) A description of the study area and the rationale behind choosing this area;
(b) A description of the study area's roadway facilities, including number of lanes, functional classification, condition, location and type of traffic signals, and location of other traffic control devices or signs;
Deptford Township UDO Specifications of Documents to be Submitted
May 5, 2014 Page 313
(c) The location of transit routes and stops and any transit facilities, including on-street, off-street, and private facilities, and service frequency;
(d) The location of school bus routes and stops;
(e) The location of pedestrian crosswalks, sidewalks, and bicycle pathways;
(f) Traffic volume data including turning movement counts at key intersections during the peak periods of the day, truck movements, pedestrian counts, and transit use;
(g) Volume/capacity analysis and an assessment of existing conditions.
3) Traffic characteristics of the site.
(a) Traffic generation of the proposed uses in the development;
(b) Traffic distribution.
4) Future demands on the transportation system.
(a) Projection of non-site related traffic to the build-out year or years of the site (base conditions);
(b) Projection of all traffic, including site traffic, to the build-out year or years of the site.
5) Impact analysis and recommendations.
(a) Levels of service shall be computed for each analysis year both with and without the inclusion of site traffic;
(b) Comparison of levels of service conditions with site traffic, and, with site traffic after recommended improvements are constructed;
(c) Recommendations for passenger vehicle reduction techniques;
(d) Schematic plan of any recommended improvements.
6) Site plan analysis, if applicable.
(a) Location of access points;
Deptford Township UDO Specifications of Documents to be Submitted
May 5, 2014 Page 314
(b) Demand for parking and loading;
(c) Sight distance analysis.
E. Lot grading plan submission requirements. The following information shall be submitted for each lot grading plan, unless waived by the Township Engineer.
Lot Grading Plan Checklist
[ ]
1.
Title block indicating the address of the site, lot and block numbers, name and address of the applicant and the title “Lot Grading Plan.”
[ ]
2.
The plan shall be signed and sealed (embossed) by a professional land surveyor, professional engineer and architect licensed in the State of New Jersey, as the situation warrants. The plan shall also include the address of the person preparing the plan.
[ ]
3.
The plan shall be legibly drawn at a scale of one inch equals thirty (30) feet, indicate a North arrow and refer to the vertical datum on which the plan is based.
[ ]
4.
The plan shall indicate all property lines, easements and required setback lines. All property lines shall indicate bearings and dimensions, and the width of all easements shall be shown on the plan.
[ ]
5.
The distance between all existing and proposed structures and adjoining property lines shall be indicated on the plan.
[ ]
6.
The plan shall indicate the right-of-way and cartway widths of all adjoining streets as well as the location of all existing and proposed curbs, sidewalks and driveway aprons along the entire frontage of the subject property.
[ ]
7.
The plan shall indicate existing and proposed contours at one-foot intervals a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet over the entire lot area to be disturbed and fifty (50) feet beyond the limit at grading. Spot elevations should also be provided at all inlets, catch basins, outfalls, culvers and other hydraulic structures.
[ ]
8.
The plan shall indicate existing and proposed spot elevations at all property corners.
[ ]
9.
The plan shall also indicate existing topography 50 feet beyond all property lines and spot elevations for all adjacent building corners.
[ ]
10.
The plan shall also indicate the location and dimensions of all structures and site improvements including building, sheds, decks, swimming pools, fences and any drainage facilities.
Deptford Township UDO Specifications of Documents to be Submitted
May 5, 2014 Page 315
[ ]
11.
The plan shall indicate all stream encroachment, wetlands and wetland buffer lines and floodplains.
[ ]
12.
The plan shall indicate all trees over six inches in diameter, including type and condition and limits of clearing.
Additional Requirements for Grading Plans for New Structures and Additions.
[ ]
13.
The plan shall indicate the first-floor and basement elevations for all proposed structures. Spot elevations for all building corners shall be indicated. If a basement is planned, certified soil boring(s) will be necessary showing soil types and the depth to seasonal high water table.
[ ]
14.
The plan shall indicate the location of all existing and proposed utility services, including vents and cleanouts.
Additional Requirements for Grading Plans for Swimming Pools
[ ]
15.
The plan shall indicate swimming pool finished elevations, deck elevations, first-floor elevations for all dwellings and the type, height and location of fencing.
[ ]
16.
The plan shall indicate limits of land disturbances as well as cut/fill areas.
F. Tree protection management plan requirements. When an application for a minor subdivision, preliminary major subdivision or site plan application is submitted pursuant to this chapter, a tree protection management plan shall be submitted if there are ten (10) or more total non-specimen trees, or one (1) or more total specimen trees, cut or removed or proposed to be cut or removed during development, unless it is an exempt project in accordance with §31.K.2. The tree protection management plan shall include the information required in §31.K.4.
Deptford Township UDO Fees, Guarantees and off Tract Improvements
May 5, 2014 Page 316
Article XI. Fees, Guarantees and Off-Tract Improvements
§ 95. Fees.
A. A. Nonrefundable application fees - Each applicant who files an application before the Deptford Township Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall pay the applicable application fee listed below for such application. The application fee provided for herein shall be nonrefundable and is required for purposes of offsetting the administrative and clerical costs of operating the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment and for costs which may be incurred by the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment in the normal processing of such applications (exclusive of the legal, planning, engineering and other professional services deemed necessary by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment).
B. Creation of escrow accounts.
1. In addition to the nonrefundable application fees referred to above, each applicant before the Planning Board and/or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall establish and make the required payments to an escrow account to be maintained by the Township for the purpose of providing sufficient moneys to pay the costs of review by professionals engaged by the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment. The requirement that an escrow account be established shall apply regardless of whether the application is to be heard before the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
2. Upon submitting an application for development to either the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, the applicant shall be required to deposit with the Director of Finance the sums hereinafter provided and execute an escrow agreement requiring the applicant to pay all necessary and reasonable costs incurred by the Township for technical and professional review by the approving authority. The escrow agreement shall be in a form approved by the Township Council. The amounts specified below to be placed in escrow are estimates of professional fees only and should not be considered as a minimum or maximum fee which may be required of the applicant to compensate the Township for legal, engineering, traffic engineering, planning or other professional services. Said fees must be paid prior to either Board certifying the application as complete; provided, however, that payment of the fee in and of itself shall not be deemed as making the application complete.
In the event that the amounts required to be posted by this section are not sufficient to cover the professional charges incurred by the Township of Deptford for such application, then the applicant shall pay the amount required which is over and above the funds previously collected and shall not receive any approvals or other permits from the Township before such fees are paid in full.
In the event the amounts posted as fees shall be in excess of the amount required for all professional review, the excess funds shall be returned to the applicant
Deptford Township UDO Fees, Guarantees and Off Tract Improvements
May 5, 2014 Page 317
within thirty (30) days of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the project which the application fee covers.
The Board Secretary shall periodically advise the Board Chairperson of the balance of all escrow accounts and whether additional funds are required as provided for hereinafter. In the event additional funds are required, the Board Chairperson or Secretary shall notify the applicant of the amounts required as additional fees. In the event the applicant refuses or fails to make the payments required within ten (10) days of demand, the Board Secretary shall notify the approving authority. If the additional fees are not paid, the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment (as applicable) may deny the application before it, and no other permits or certificates shall be issued by the Township to the applicant for the applicable project until payment is made in full. In the event additional fees are required, the applicant shall pay such fees to the Township in accordance with the same agreement already entered into or under any additional terms which may be agreed to by the applicant and the approving authority.
3. Before issuing a construction permit or certificate of occupancy for any element of a project, the applicable code official for the Township of Deptford shall first determine from the applicable Board Secretary whether there are sufficient escrow funds to pay all pending or reasonably anticipated bills attributable for professional review to the particular project. The applicable code officer shall not issue the requested construction permit or certificate of occupancy until the amounts which are due or necessary to provide sufficient funds in escrow to pay such pending or reasonably anticipated bills are paid in full by the applicant.
C. Fees and escrows - The following is a schedule of fees to be paid by the applicant upon filing an application:
1. Conceptual - Major subdivision or site plan.
Application fee - $ 100
Engineering (if required) - 250
Planning (if required) - 350
Traffic Engineering (if required) - 300
Legal - 200
Legal - Township Solicitor (if required) - 100
2. Minor subdivision.
a. Application fee - $ 100
b. In-house staff -
Deptford Township UDO Fees, Guarantees and Off Tract Improvements
May 5, 2014 Page 318
Engineering - 325
Planning - 200
c. Outside consultants -
Engineering (if required) - 500 plus $25/lot
Planning (if required) -
- Residential - 400 plus $25/lot
- Non-residential - 800 plus $25/lot
3. Major subdivision, preliminary.
Application fee - $750
Engineering - 1,600 plus $100/lot
Planning -
- Residential - 750 plus $25/lot
- Non-residential - 750 plus $50/lot
Traffic Engineering (if required) - 500
Legal - 600 plus $10/lot
Legal - Township Solicitor (if required) - 200
Publication - 25
4. Major subdivision, final.
Application fee - $500
Engineering - 800 plus $50/lot
Planning -
- Residential - 500 plus $20/lot
- Non-residential - 300 plus $50/lot
Traffic Engineering (if required) - 500
Legal - 300 plus $25/lot
Deptford Township UDO Fees, Guarantees and Off Tract Improvements
May 5, 2014 Page 319
Legal - Township Solicitor (if required) - 350
Publication - 100
5. General Development Plan - Planned Unit Development.
Application fee - $ 2,000
Engineering - 2,500 plus $20/unit
Planning - 2,000 plus $20/unit
Traffic Engineering (if required) - 1,500 plus $20/unit
Legal - 1,000 plus $10/unit
Legal - Township Solicitor (if required) - 350
Publication - 100
6. Minor site plan.
a. Application fee - $ 300
b. In-house staff -
Engineering 325
Planning 200
c. Outside consultants -
Engineering (if required) 500
Planning (if required) 500
Traffic Engineering (if required) 350
Legal 300
Publication 25
6. Major site plan, preliminary.
Application fee - $ 500
Engineering - 1,500 plus $200/acre over one
Planning -
Deptford Township UDO Fees, Guarantees and Off Tract Improvements
May 5, 2014 Page 320
-Residential - 750 plus $20/unit
-Non-residential - 750 plus $20/1,000 sq. ft.
Traffic Engineering - 500 plus $20/unit
Legal - 500 plus $10/1,000 sq. ft.
Publication - 25
7. Major site plan, final.
Application fee - $ 500
Engineering - 750 plus $50/acre over one
Planning -
- Residential - 500 plus $10/unit
- Non-Residential - 500 plus $10/1,000 sq. ft.
Traffic Engineering - 400 plus $20/unit
Legal - 350 plus $10/1,000 sq. ft.
Legal - Township Solicitor (if required) - 350
Publication - 25
8. Regional shopping center.
Application fee - $ 2,000
Engineering - 10,000
Planning - 1,000 plus $20/1,000 sq. ft.
Traffic Engineering (if required) - 2,500
Legal - 2,500
Legal - Township Solicitor (if required) - 350
Publication - 100
9. Use variance - (Applications made under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70.d.)
Residential Commercial Industrial
Deptford Township UDO Fees, Guarantees and Off Tract Improvements
May 5, 2014 Page 321
a. Application fee - $ 100 $ 300 $ 350
b. In-house staff
Engineering - 50 75 100
Planning - 100 150 150
c. Outside consultants
Engineering - 75 100 125
Planning - 350 350 500
Legal - 300 500 500
Legal -Twp. Sol. (if req'd) 50 75 100
Publication - 25 25 25
10. Bulk variance - (Applications made under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70.c.)
Residential Commercial Industrial
a. Application fee - $ 50 $ 200 $ 250
b. In-house staff
Engineering - 100 150 150
Planning - 150 150 150
c. Outside consultants
Engineering (if required) 100 100 100
Planning 200 300 300
Legal 200 200 200
Publication 25 25 25
11. Appeals - (Applications made under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70.a.)
Residential Commercial Industrial
Application fee - $ 50 $ 100 $ 150
Engineering (if required) - 100 100 100
Deptford Township UDO Fees, Guarantees and Off Tract Improvements
May 5, 2014 Page 322
Planning (if required) - 100 100 100
Legal - 200 200 200
Publication - 25 25 25
12. Interpretations (Applications made under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70.b.)
Residential Commercial Industrial
Application fee - $ 50 $ 100 $ 150
Engineering (if required) 100 100 100
Planning (if required) 100 100 100
Legal 150 250 250
Publication Fees 25 25 25
13. Conditional Use review.
Application fee - $ 100
Engineering - 100
Planning - 150
Legal - 200
Publication - 25
14. Miscellaneous.
Application fee - $ 200
Engineering (if required) - 150
Planning (if required) - 150
Legal - 200
15. Zoning change request.
Application fee - $ 100
Engineering - 1500
Planning - 1500
Deptford Township UDO Fees, Guarantees and Off Tract Improvements
May 5, 2014 Page 323
Traffic Engineering - 1000
Legal - 350
Legal - Township Solicitor - 500
Publication - 25
17. Soil erosion & sediment control.
a. Application fee - $250
b. In-house staff engineering - $85/acre up to 5 ac.
$70/acre up to 25 ac.
$60/acre up to 100 ac.
$50/acre in excess of 100 ac.
c. Outside consultants engineering - $400 plus $60/acre over one acre
18. Lot grading plan review [Ord. O.16.10, 11/8/10]:
Application fee - $35
Engineering escrow – initial submission $350
Engineering escrow – revised submission $50
Inspection fee - $130 All fees are per lot
D. Professional fees - The engineering, traffic engineering, legal and planning escrows as set forth in the aforesaid provisions are minimum amounts representing an estimate of the anticipated costs for such services based on the hourly rates of the respective professional. The hourly rates to be charged each applicant for the services of such professionals shall be the same as those set forth in the contracts between the Township and said professionals.
§ 96. Improvement and Maintenance Guarantees.
A. Before recording final subdivision plats or as a condition of final site plan approval or as a condition to the issuance of a zoning permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65d, the approving Board, for the purpose of assuring the installation and maintenance of on- and off-tract (pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42) improvements, shall require and accept in accordance with the standards adopted by this chapter, the following:
1. The furnishing of a performance guarantee in favor of the Township of Deptford in an amount not to exceed one hundred twenty percent (120%) of the cost of
Deptford Township UDO Fees, Guarantees and Off Tract Improvements
May 5, 2014 Page 324
installation, which cost shall be determined by the Township Engineer according to the method of calculation set forth in §97 for improvements which the Board may deem necessary or appropriate, including but not limited to: streets, grading, pavement, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, street lighting, shade trees, surveyor's monuments as shown on the final subdivision plat and required by the Map Filing Law (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.), culverts, storm sewers, drainage structures, erosion control and sedimentation control devices, public improvements of open space and, in the case of site plans only, other on-site improvements and landscaping.
The Township Engineer shall prepare an itemized cost estimate of the improvements covered by the performance guarantee, which itemized cost estimate shall be appended to each performance guarantee posted by the obliger.
2. Provision for a maintenance guarantee to be posted with the Township Council for a period not to exceed two (2) years after final acceptance of the improvement, in an amount not to exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the cost of the improvement, which cost shall be determined by the Township Engineer according to the method of calculation set forth in §97. In the event that other governmental agencies or public utilities automatically will own the utilities to be installed or the improvements are covered by a performance or maintenance guarantee to another governmental agency, no performance or maintenance guarantee, as the case may be, shall be required by the Township for such utilities or improvements.
B. The time allowed for installation of the improvements for which the performance guarantee has been provided may be extended by the Township Council by resolution. As a condition or as part of any such extension, the amount of any performance guarantee shall be increased or reduced, as the case may be, to an amount not to exceed one hundred twenty percent (120%) of the cost of the installation, which cost shall be determined by the Township Engineer according to the method of calculation set forth in §97 as of the time of the passage of the resolution.
C. If the required improvements are not completed or corrected in accordance with the performance guarantee, the obliger and surety, if any, shall be liable thereon to the Township for the reasonable cost of the improvements not completed or corrected and the Township may either prior to or after the receipt of the proceeds thereof complete such improvements. Such completion or correction of improvements shall be subject to the public bidding requirements of the Local Public Contracts Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.).
D. Estimate of cost for installation of improvements. A performance guarantee estimate shall be prepared by the Township Engineer, setting forth all requirements for improvements as fixed by the Board and their estimated cost. The estimated cost of the installation of improvements determined by the Township Engineer shall be based on documented construction costs for public improvements prevailing in the general area of the Township. The developer may appeal the Township Engineer's estimate to the Township
Deptford Township UDO Fees, Guarantees and Off Tract Improvements
May 5, 2014 Page 325
Council. The Township Council shall decide the appeal within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the appeal in writing by the Township Clerk. After the developer posts a guarantee with the Township based on the cost of the installation of improvements as determined by the Township Council, he may institute legal action within one (1) year of the posting in order to preserve the right to a judicial determination as to the fairness and reasonableness of the amount of the guarantee.
1. The cost of the installation of improvements for the purposes of Section 41 of P. L. 1975, c.291 (C.40:55D 53) shall be estimated by the Municipal Engineer based on documented construction costs for public improvements prevailing in the general area of the municipality. The developer may appeal the Municipal Engineer's estimate to the County Construction Board of Appeals established under Section 9 of P.L. 1975, c.217 (C.52:27D 127).
E. Approval by Township Solicitor.
The applicant shall present two (2) copies of the performance guarantee in an amount equal to the amount of the approved performance guarantee estimate for approval as to form and execution by the Township Solicitor.
F. Bonding and cash requirements.
1. The performance guarantee posted by the applicant shall be in the form acceptable to the Township Solicitor. Performance and maintenance bonds shall be provided by an acceptable surety company licensed to do business within the State of New Jersey with a rating of no less than a B+ by AM Best. The performance guarantee in favor of the Township shall be in an amount not to exceed one hundred twenty percent (120%) of the cost of the installation and improvements. The Director of Finance shall issue its receipt for such cash deposits and shall cause the same to be deposited in a bank named by the Township for this purpose to be retained as security for completion of all requirements and to be returned to the developer on completion of all required work and expiration of the period of maintenance guarantee or, in the event of default on the part of the applicant, to be used by the Township of Deptford to pay the cost and expense of obtaining completion of all requirements.
2. The Township shall accept a performance guarantee or maintenance guarantee for the purposes herein which is an irrevocable letter of credit if it:
a. Constitutes an unconditional payment obligation of the issuer running solely to the Township for an express initial period of time in the amount determined pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53;
b. Is issued by a banking or savings institution authorized to and doing business in the State of New Jersey;
c. Is for a period of time of at least one (1) year; and
Deptford Township UDO Fees, Guarantees and Off Tract Improvements
May 5, 2014 Page 326
d. Permits the Township to draw upon the letter of credit if the obliger fails to furnish another letter of credit which complies with the provisions of this subsection thirty (30) days or more in advance of the expiration date of the letter of credit or such longer period in advance thereof as is stated in the letter of credit.
G. Inspections, tests and as-built requirements [Ord. O.16.10, 11/8/10].
1. All improvements and utility installations shall be inspected during the time of their installation under the supervision of the Township Engineer to ensure satisfactory completion. The cost of said inspection shall be the responsibility of the applicant, and he or she shall deposit with the Township Director of Finance for placement in an escrow account an amount not to exceed, except for extraordinary circumstances, the greater of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or five percent (5%) of the amount of the performance guarantee estimate of the cost of improvements pursuant to §97, Off-Tract Improvements. The obligor shall reimburse the Township for all reasonable inspection fees paid to the Township Engineer for the foregoing inspection of improvements. For those developments for which the reasonably anticipated fees are ten thousand dollars ($10,000) or greater, the fees may, at the option of the developer, be paid in four installments. The initial amount deposited by a developer shall be twenty-five percent (25%) of the anticipated fees. When the balance on deposit drops to ten percent (10%) of the anticipated fees because of payments to the Township Engineer for inspection, the developer shall make additional deposits of twenty-five percent (25%) of the anticipated fees. The Township Engineer shall not perform any inspection if sufficient funds to pay for such inspection are not on deposit.
2. Site maintenance. It shall be the responsibility of the developer to maintain the entire construction site in a safe and orderly condition during construction. Necessary steps shall be taken by the developer to protect occupants of the construction site and the general public from hazardous and unsightly conditions during the entire construction period. Sub-paragraphs –a through –f list the necessary site operations and activities that shall be maintained on construction sites.
a. Every effort shall be made by the developer’s contractor to close excavations by the end of the work day. Unavoidable excavations left open during non-construction hours shall be enclosed by fencing or barricades or covered by appropriate steel traffic plates during non-construction hours. Movable barricades shall be equipped with yellow flashing hazard markers or other lighting accepted by the Township Engineer during the hours of darkness. All locations and activities on the construction site that are hazardous shall be marked with signs indicating such hazard.
b. The excavation of previously installed sidewalk and pavement areas which provide access to an occupied building on a site shall be clearly marked
Deptford Township UDO Fees, Guarantees and Off Tract Improvements
May 5, 2014 Page 327
with signs and barricades. Alternate safe access shall be provided for pedestrians to the occupied buildings and motor vehicles to the site. Safe vehicular and pedestrian access to occupied buildings in the site or subdivision shall be provided at all times.
c. Materials stored on the site shall be screened from the view of next door occupants of residential property and the traveling public on public roads.
d. Construction equipment and trucks shall not be stored within one hundred (100) feet of occupied residential buildings during non-construction hours.
e. Construction debris, including but not limited to scrap materials, cartons, boxes and wrappings shall be removed daily from the construction at the end of each working day or placed in appropriate dumpsters.
f. Whenever construction activities take place within or adjacent to any traveled way or interfere with existing traffic patterns in any manner, suitable warning signs, conforming to the requirements of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, shall be erected and maintained by the developer.
g. Should the developer fail in his obligation to maintain the site or subdivision in a safe and orderly condition, the Township may, on five days' written notice, or immediately in the case of hazard to life, health or property, undertake whatever work may be necessary to return the site or subdivision to a safe and orderly condition and deduct the cost thereof from the ten-percent-cash-or-certified-check portion of the performance guaranty. Upon notice of such deduction, the developer shall, within 10 days, restore the full ten-percent-cash balance, or his performance guaranty will be held to be void, and the Township may take action as if final plat approval had not been obtained.
h. The Construction Official shall, upon receiving notice from the Township Engineer that a developer is in violation of this sub-section, suspend further issuance of certificates of occupancy and building permits and may order cessation of work on any outstanding permits until such time as the condition is rectified.
3. In no case shall any paving work or other construction activities requiring inspection by the Township Engineer be started without his or her permission. At least forty-eight (48) hours notice shall be given to the Township Engineer or qualified representative assigned to Deptford Township prior to any such construction so that the required inspection of improvements may be scheduled and inspected.
4. Any improvement installed without notice for inspection pursuant to subsection -G.3 above shall constitute just cause for:
Deptford Township UDO Fees, Guarantees and Off Tract Improvements
May 5, 2014 Page 328
a. Removal of the uninspected improvement;
b. The payment by the developer of any costs for material testing.
c. The restoration by the developer of any improvements disturbed during any material testing; and/or
d. The issuance of a stop work order by the Township Engineer pending the resolution of any dispute.
5. Final inspection and as-built drawings. A final inspection of all improvements and utilities shall be undertaken by the Township Engineer to determine whether the work is satisfactory and in agreement with the approved final plan drawings and Township specifications or as a field change approved in writing by the Township Engineer. Any minor deviation from the final approved plan may be approved by the Township Engineer. Any deviation deemed substantial by the Township Engineer shall require submission of an amended final site plan or subdivision, as the case may be, to the Board of Jurisdiction. If the improvements have been constructed under a performance guarantee after approval of a subdivision or site plan, the developer shall submit an as-built plan showing as-built grades, profiles and sections and locations of all subsurface utilities, including but not limited to, stormwater management piping, endwalls, headwalls, control systems and basins; lawn and roof drainage; sanitary sewage conveyance and disposal systems; public and individual waterlines and control valves; natural and propane gas lines; telephone, cable television, telecommunications conduits; monuments and other property markers; and any other utilities or improvements installed. The as-built plan shall be certified by a licensed New Jersey professional land surveyor. If any improvements are constructed prior to final plat approval, the final plat shall reflect all changes and as-built conditions and be so certified. As-built plan(s) shall be submitted on reproducible media, CAD file or other media as directed by the Township Engineer.
6. Inspection of any work by the Township Engineer or authorized representative shall not be considered to be final approval or rejection of the work but shall only be considered to be a determination of whether or not the specific work involved was being done to Township specifications or other required standards at the time of inspection. Any damage to such work or other unforeseen circumstances, including but not limited to, the weather, other construction, changed physical or topographical conditions, and settlement of soils between the time of installation and the time of a request for full or partial performance guarantee release shall be the entire responsibility of the developer, and no work shall be considered accepted until release of the performance guarantee. Upon a final inspection report, action will be taken to release or declare in default the performance guarantee covering such improvements and utilities.
7. Inspection by the Township of the installation of improvements and utilities by the applicant shall not subject the Township to liability for claims, suits or any
Deptford Township UDO Fees, Guarantees and Off Tract Improvements
May 5, 2014 Page 329
other liability of any kind that may at any time arise because of defects or negligence during construction or at any time thereafter; it is recognized that the responsibility to maintain safe conditions at all times during construction and to provide proper utilities and improvements is upon the applicant and his contractors, if any. No declaration, written or otherwise, shall be made by the Township Council, the Township Engineer or any of their agents, employees or other representatives as a precedent to the release of payments to contractors by the developer.
H. Reduction of guarantees.
1. Upon substantial completion of all required on- and off-site improvements (except for the top course of road paving) and appurtenant utility improvements, and the connection of same to the public system, the obliger may request of the Township Council in writing, by certified mail addressed in care of the Township Clerk, that the Township Engineer prepare, in accordance with the itemized cost estimate prepared by the Township Engineer and appended to the performance guarantee pursuant to §97, a list of all uncompleted or unsatisfactory completed improvements. If such a request is made, the obliger shall send a copy of the request to the Township Engineer. The request shall indicate which improvements have been completed and which improvements remain uncompleted in the judgment of the obliger. Thereupon the Township Engineer shall inspect all improvements covered by the obliger's request and shall file a detailed list and report, in writing, with the Township Council, and shall simultaneously send a copy thereof to the obliger not later than forty-five (45) days after receipt of the obliger's request.
2. The list prepared by the Township Engineer shall state, in detail, with respect to each improvement determined to be incomplete or unsatisfactory, the nature and extent of the incompleteness of each incomplete improvement or the nature and extent of, and remedy for, the unsatisfactory state of each completed improvement determined to be unsatisfactory. The report prepared by the Township Engineer shall identify each improvement determined to be complete and satisfactory together with a recommendation as to the amount of reduction to be made in the performance guarantee relating to the completed and satisfactory improvement, in accordance with the itemized cost estimate prepared by the Township Engineer and appended to the performance guarantee.
3. The Township Council, by resolution, shall either approve the improvements determined to be complete and satisfactory by the Township Engineer, or reject any or all of these improvements upon the establishment in the resolution of cause for rejection, and shall approve and authorize the amount of reduction to be made in the performance guarantee relating to the improvements accepted, in accordance with the itemized cost estimate prepared by the Township Engineer and appended to the performance guarantee. This resolution shall be adopted not later than forty-five (45) days after receipt of the list and report prepared by the Township Engineer. Upon adoption of the resolution by the Township Council,
Deptford Township UDO Fees, Guarantees and Off Tract Improvements
May 5, 2014 Page 330
the obliger shall be released from all liability pursuant to its performance guarantee, with respect to those approved improvements, except for that portion adequately sufficient to secure completion or correction of the improvements not yet approved; provided that thirty percent (30%) of the amount of the performance guarantee posted for each line item may be retained to ensure completion and acceptability of all improvements.
For the purpose of releasing the obligor from liability pursuant to its performance guarantee, the amount of the performance guarantee attributable to each approved improvement shall be reduced by the total amount for each such improvement, in accordance with the itemized cost estimate prepared by the Municipal Engineer and appended to the performance guarantee pursuant to Subsection a. of this Section, including any contingency factor applied to the cost of installation. If the sum of said improvements would exceed 70% of the total amount of the performance guarantee, the municipality may retain 30% of the amount of the total performance guarantee to ensure completion and acceptability of all improvements, as provided above.
4. If the Township Engineer fails to send or provide the list and report as requested by the obliger within forty-five (45) days from receipt of the request, the obliger may apply to the court in a summary manner for an order compelling the Township Engineer to provide the list and report within a stated time and the cost of applying to the court, including reasonable attorney's fees, may be awarded to the prevailing party.
If the Township Council fails to approve or reject the improvements determined by the Township Engineer to be complete and satisfactory or reduce the performance guarantee for the complete and satisfactory improvements within forty-five (45) days from the receipt of the Township Engineer's list and report, the obliger may apply to the court in a summary manner for an order compelling, within a stated time, approval of the complete and satisfactory improvements and approval of a reduction in the performance guarantee for the complete and satisfactory improvements in accordance with the itemized cost estimate prepared by the Township Engineer and appended to the performance guarantee, and the cost of applying to the court, including reasonable attorney's fees, may be awarded to the prevailing party.
5. In the event that the obliger has made a cash deposit with the Township or approving authority as part of the performance guarantee, then any partial reduction granted in the performance guarantee pursuant to this subsection shall be applied to the cash deposit in the same proportion as the original cash deposit bears to the full amount of the performance guarantee.
6. If any portion of the required improvements is rejected, the approving authority may require the obliger to complete or correct such improvements and, upon completion or correction, the same procedure of notification, as set forth in this section shall be followed.
Deptford Township UDO Fees, Guarantees and Off Tract Improvements
May 5, 2014 Page 331
7. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to limit the right of the obliger to contest by legal proceedings any determination of the Township Council or the Township Engineer.
8. The obligor shall reimburse the municipality for all reasonable inspection fees paid to the Municipal Engineer for the foregoing inspection of improvements; provided that the municipality may require of the developer a deposit for the inspection fees in an amount not to exceed, except for extraordinary circumstances, the greater of $500 or 5% of the cost of improvements, which cost shall be determined pursuant to Section 15 of P.L.1991, c.256 (C.40:55D-53.4). For those developments for which the inspection fees are less than $10,000, fees may, at the option of the developer, be paid in two installments. The initial amount deposited by a developer shall be 50% of the inspection fees. When the balance on deposit drops to 10% of the inspection fees because the amount deposited by the developer has been reduced by the amount paid to the Municipal Engineer for inspection, the developer shall deposit the remaining 50% of the inspection fees. For those developments for which the inspection fees are $10,000 or greater, fees may, at the option of the developer, be paid in four installments. The initial amount deposited by a developer shall be 25% of the inspection fees. When the balance on deposit drops to 10% of the inspection fees because the amount deposited by the developer has been reduced by the amount paid to the Municipal Engineer for inspection, the developer shall make additional deposits of 25% of the inspection fees. The Municipal Engineer shall not perform any inspection if sufficient funds to pay for those inspections are not on deposit.
9. In the event that final approval is by stages or sections of development pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38, the provisions of this section shall be applied by stage or section.
10. To the extent that any of the improvements have been dedicated to the municipality on the subdivision plat or site plan, the municipal governing body shall be deemed, upon the release of any performance guarantee required pursuant to subsection a. of this Section, to accept dedication for public use and any other improvements made thereon according to site plans and subdivision plats approved by the approving authority, provided that such improvements have been inspected and have received final approval by the Municipal Engineer.
I. Conditions for acceptance of improvements; maintenance guarantee.
The approval of any plat under this chapter by the approving Board or Township Council, or both, shall in no way be construed as acceptance of any street or drainage system or any other improvement required by this chapter, nor shall such plat approval obligate the Township in any way to maintain or exercise jurisdiction over such street or drainage system or other improvement. No improvement shall be accepted by the Township Council unless and until all of the following conditions have been met.
Deptford Township UDO Fees, Guarantees and Off Tract Improvements
May 5, 2014 Page 332
1. The Township Engineer shall have certified in writing that the improvements are complete and that they comply with the requirements of this chapter.
2. The final plat shall have been approved by the Board.
3. Maintenance guarantee.
a. After final acceptance of all improvements, the developer shall have filed with the Township Council a maintenance guarantee in an amount equal to not more than fifteen percent (15%) of the original estimate of the cost of installing the improvements and shall run for a period not exceeding two (2) years. The procedures and requirements governing such maintenance guarantee shall be identical with the procedures and requirements for a performance guarantee set forth in this chapter. The requirements for a maintenance guarantee may be waived by the Township Council only if the Township Engineer has certified that the improvements have been in continuous use for not less than two (2) years from the date the Township Engineer certified completion of such improvements and that during this period the developer has maintained the improvements in a satisfactory manner.
b. As-built plans and profiles (one (1) reproducible and two (2) paper copies) of all utilities and roads are submitted to the Administrative Officer, with certification signed and sealed by a New Jersey licensed professional engineer as to the actual construction as approved by the Township Engineer, shall be provided.
c. In the event that any other Township or governmental agencies or public utilities automatically will own the utilities to be installed, or the improvements are covered by a maintenance guarantee to another municipal or governmental agency, no maintenance guarantee shall be required by the Township for such utilities or improvements.
J. Guarantee status reports. The Director of Finance shall issue a semi-annual status report on all non-cash performance and maintenance guarantees held by the Township. The report shall give an accounting of each guarantee, specifically noting its expiration date. The report shall be submitted to the Township Engineer, Construction Official, Zoning Officer, and the Secretary's of both the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment.
K. Certificate of occupancy. Occupancy permits will be issued only when the installation of any curbs, all utilities, all functioning water supply and sewage treatment facilities, all necessary storm drainage to ensure proper drainage of the lot and surrounding land, rough grading of lots, base course for the driveway and base course for the streets are installed to serve the lot and structure for which the permit is requested. Streets, if installed prior to final approval, shall not be paved until all heavy construction is complete; shade trees shall not be planted until all grading and earthmoving is completed; and seeding of grass areas shall be the last operation. The issuance of a certificate of occupancy will follow
Deptford Township UDO Fees, Guarantees and Off Tract Improvements
May 5, 2014 Page 333
the procedures outlined in this chapter and the chapter of the Township Code administering the Uniform Construction Code. A separate certificate of occupancy shall also be required when any change occurs in the use or occupancy of an existing structure.
§ 97. Off-Tract Improvements.
This section is intended to ensure a pro rata share allocation of the costs for off-tract improvements necessitated by new development.
As a condition of final subdivision or site plan approval, the Planning Board may require a developer to pay his/her pro rata share of the cost of providing reasonable and necessary improvements for off-tract costs directly related to the development. These costs may include that of land and/or easements for, and construction of, improvements to circulation, water, sewerage, drainage facilities which are located off-tract of the property limits of the subdivision or development but for which substantially all the cost of said improvements is necessitated or required directly by the development. In addition, a development may be liable for its share of the cost of the impact of the development to Township and/or regional capital improvements provided that the cost shall not duplicate off-tract improvements for which the developer is primarily responsible. The Planning Board shall provide in its resolution of approval the basis of the required improvements.
Where a developer pays the amount determined as his pro-rata share under protest they shall institute legal action within one year of such payment in order to preserve the right to a judicial determination as to the fairness and reasonableness of such amount.
A. Calculation of proportionate costs.
1. Full allocation.
In cases where off-tract improvements are necessitated by the proposed development, and where no other property owner(s) receive(s) a special benefit thereby, the developer may be required at his sole expense and as a condition of approval, to provide and install such improvements. In such case where the Planning Board determines that the full improvement is required to service this development, the developer shall fully install the entire improvement at his expense with no reimbursement.
2. Proportionate allocation.
a. Where it is determined that some properties outside the development will also be benefitted by the off-tract improvement, the following criteria shall be utilized in determining the proportionate share of the cost of such improvements to the developer.
b. Allocation formula.
Deptford Township UDO Fees, Guarantees and Off Tract Improvements
May 5, 2014 Page 334
1) Roadways - The applicant's proportionate share of street improvements, alignment, channelization, barriers, new or improved traffic signalization, signs, curbs, sidewalks, trees, utility improvements uncovered elsewhere, the construction or reconstruction of new or existing streets, and other associated street or traffic improvements shall be as follows:
(a) The municipal engineer, traffic engineer or planner shall provide the applicant with the existing and reasonably anticipated future peak hour traffic for the off-tract improvement;
(b) The applicant shall furnish a plan for the proposed off-tract improvement which shall include the estimated peak-hour traffic generated by the proposed development and the proportion thereof which is to be accommodated by the proposed off-tract improvement. The ratio of the peak hour traffic generated by the proposed development which is to be accommodated by the off-tract improvement to the future additional peak-hour traffic anticipated to impact the proposed off-tract improvement shall form the basis of the proportionate share. The proportionate share shall be computed as follows:
Capacity of enlargement
Total cost of enlargement or improvement
or improvement = (peak-hour traffic)
Developer's Cost Development peak-hour
traffic to be accommodated
by the enlargement
or improvement
2) Drainage improvements - The applicant's proportionate share of storm water and drainage improvements including the installation, relocation or replacement of storm drains, culverts, catch basins, manholes, rip-rap, improved drainage ditches and appurtenances thereto, and relocation or replacement of other storm drainage facilities or appurtenances associated therewith, shall be determined as follows:
Deptford Township UDO Fees, Guarantees and Off Tract Improvements
May 5, 2014 Page 335
(a) The capacity and the design of the drainage system to accommodate storm water runoff shall be based on the standards specified in §35. of this chapter and related appendices, computed by the developer's engineer and approved by the municipal engineer.
(b) The capacity of the enlarged, extended, or improved system required for the subdivision and areas outside of the developer's tributary to the drainage system shall be determined by the developer's engineer subject to approval of the municipal engineer. The plans for the improved system shall be prepared by the developer's engineer and the estimated cost of the enlarged system calculated by the municipal engineer. The prorated share for the proposed improvement shall be computed as follows:
Capacity of enlargement
or improvement (total
Total cost of enlargement capacity expressed in
or improvement = cubic feet per second)
Developer's Cost Development-generated
peak rate of runoff
expressed in cubic feet
per second to be accom-
modated by the enlarge-
ment of improvement
B. Future funds.Where the proposed off-tract improvement is to be undertaken at some future date, the monies required for the improvement shall be deposited in a separate interest-bearing account to the credit of the Township of Deptford until such time as the improvement is constructed. If the off-tract improvement is not begun within ten (10) years of deposit, all monies and interest shall be returned to the applicant.
Deptford Township UDO Administration, Enforcement and Amendments
May 5, 2014 Page 336
§ 98. Administrative Guidelines.
A. The Chief Financial Officer of a municipality shall make all of the payments to professionals for services rendered to the municipality or approving authority for review of applications for development, review and preparation of documents, inspection of improvements or other purposes under the provisions of PL. 1975, c.291 (C.40:55D 1 et seq.). Such fees or charges shall be based upon a schedule established by resolution. The application review and inspection charges shall be limited only to professional charges for review of applications, review and preparation of documents and inspections of developments under construction and review by outside consultants when an application is of a nature beyond the scope of the expertise of the professionals normally utilized by the municipality. The only costs that shall be added to any such charges shall be actual out of pocket expenses of any such professionals or consultants including normal and typical expenses incurred in processing applications and inspecting improvements. The municipality or approving authority shall not bill the applicant, or charge any escrow account or deposit authorized under subsection b. of this Section, for any municipal clerical or administrative functions, overhead expenses, meeting room charges, or any other municipal costs and expenses except as provided for in this Section, nor shall a municipal professional add any such charges to his bill. If the salary, staff support and overhead for a municipal professional are provided by the municipality, the charge shall not exceed 200% of the sum of the products resulting from multiplying (1) the hourly base salary, which shall be established annually by ordinance, of each of the professionals by (2) the number of hours spent by the respective professional upon review of the application for development or inspection of the developer's improvements, as the case may be. For other professionals the charge shall be at the same rate as all other work of the same nature by the professional for the municipality when fees are not reimbursed or otherwise imposed on applicants or developers.
B. If the municipality requires of the developer a deposit toward anticipated municipal expenses for these professional services, the deposit shall be placed in an escrow account pursuant to Section I of P.L.1985, c.315 (C.40:55D 53. 1). The amount of the deposit required shall be reasonable in regard to the scale and complexity of the development. The amount of the initial deposit required shall be established by ordinance. For review of applications for development proposing a subdivision, the amount of the deposit shall be calculated based on the number of proposed lots. For review of applications for development proposing a site plan, the amount of the deposit shall be based on one or more of the following: the area of the site to be developed, the square footage of buildings to be constructed, or an additional factor for circulation intensive sites, such as those containing drive through facilities. Deposits for inspection fees shall be established in accordance with Subsection h. of Section 41 of P.L. 1975 c.291 (C.40:55D 53).
C. Each payment charged to the deposit for review of applications, review and preparation of documents and inspection of improvements shall be pursuant to a voucher from the professional, which voucher shall identify the personnel performing the service, and for each date the services performed, the hours spent to one quarter (¼) hour increments, the hourly rate and the expenses incurred. All professional shall submit vouchers to the Chief Financial Officer of the municipality on a monthly basis in accordance with
Deptford Township UDO Administration, Enforcement and Amendments
May 5, 2014 Page 337
schedules and procedures established by the Chief Financial Officer of the municipality. If the services are provided by a municipal employee, the municipal employee shall prepare and submit to the Chief Financial Officer of the municipality a statement containing the same information as required on a voucher, on a monthly basis. The professional shall send an informational copy of all vouchers or statements submitted to the Chief Financial Officer of the municipality simultaneously to the applicant. The Chief Financial Officer of the municipality shall prepare and send to the applicant a statement which shall include an accounting of funds listing all deposits, interest earnings, disbursements, and the cumulative balance of the escrow account. This information shall be provided on a quarterly basis, if monthly charges are $1,000 or less, or on a monthly basis if monthly charges exceed $1,000. lf an escrow account or deposit contains insufficient funds to enable the municipality or approving authority to perform required application reviews or improvement inspections, the Chief Financial Officer of the municipality shall provide the applicant with a notice of the insufficient escrow or deposit balance. In order for work to continue on the development or the application, the applicant shall within a reasonable time period, post a deposit to the account in an amount to be agreed upon by the municipality or approving authority and the applicant. In the interim, any required health and safety inspections shall be made and charged back against the replenishment of funds.
D. The following closeout procedure shall apply to all deposits and escrow accounts established under the provisions of P.L. 1975, c.291 (C.40:55D 1 et seq.) and shall commence after the approving authority has granted final approval and signed the subdivision plat or site plan, in the case of application review escrows and deposits, or after the improvements have been approved as provided in Section 41 of P. L. 1975, c.291 (C.40:55D 53). in the case of improvement inspection escrows and deposits. The applicant shall send written notice by certified mail to the Chief Financial Officer of the municipality and the approving authority, and to the relevant municipal professional, that the application or the improvements, as the case may be, are completed. After receipt of such notice, the professional shall render a final bill to the Chief Financial Officer of the municipality within 30 days, and shall send a copy simultaneously to the applicant. The Chief Financial Officer of the municipality shall render a written final accounting to the applicant on the uses to which the deposit was put within 45 days of receipt of the final bill. Any balances remaining in the deposit or escrow account, including interest in accordance with Section I of P. L. 1985, c.315 (C.40:55D 53.1) shall be refunded to the developer along with the final accounting.
E. All professional charges for review of an application for development, review and preparation of documents or inspection of improvements shall be reasonable and necessary, given the status and progress of the application or construction. Review fees shall be charged only in connection with an application for development presently pending before the approving authority or upon review of compliance with conditions of approval, or review of requests for modification or amendment made by the applicant. A professional shall not review items which are subject to approval by any State environmental agency and not under municipal jurisdiction except to the extent consultation with a State agency is necessary due to the effect of State approvals in the
Deptford Township UDO Administration, Enforcement and Amendments
May 5, 2014 Page 338
subdivision or site plan. Inspection fees shall be charged only for actual work shown on a subdivision or site plan or required by an approving resolution. Professionals inspecting improvements under construction shall charge only for inspections that are reasonably necessary to check the progress and quality of the work and such inspections shall be reasonably based on the approved development plans and documents.
F. If the municipality retains a different professional or consultant in the place of the professional originally responsible for development, Application review, or inspection of improvements, the municipality or approving authority shall be responsible for all time and expenses of the new professional to become familiar with the application or the project, and the municipality or approving authority shall not bill the applicant or charge the deposit or the escrow account for any such services.
§ 99. Waivers.
A. An applicant shall notify in writing the governing body with copies to the Chief Financial Officer, the approving authority and the professional whenever the applicant disputes the charges made by a professional for service rendered to the municipality in reviewing applications for development, review and preparation of documents, inspection of improvements, or other charges made pursuant to the provisions of P.L.1975, c.291 (C.40:55D I et seq.). The governing body, or its designee, shall within a reasonable time period attempt to remediate any disputed charges. If the matter is not resolved to the satisfaction of the applicant, the applicant may appeal to the County Construction Board of Appeals established under Section 9 of P.L. 1975, c.217 (C.52:27D 127) any charges to an escrow account or a deposit by any municipal professional or consultant, or the cost of the installation of improvements estimated by the Municipal Engineer pursuant to Section 15 of P. L. 199 1. c.256 (C.40:55D 53.4). An applicant or his authorized agent shall submit the appeal in writing to the County Construction Board of Appeals. The applicant or his authorized agent shall simultaneously send a copy of the appeal to the municipality, approving authority, and any professional whose charges is the subject of the appeal. An applicant shall file an appeal within 45 days from receipt of the informational copy of the professional's voucher required by Subsection c. of Section 13 of PL. 1991, c.256 (C.40:55D 53.2), except that if the professional has not supplied the applicant with an informational copy of the voucher, then the applicant shall file his appeal within 60 days from receipt of the municipal statement of activity against the deposit or escrow account required by Subsection c. of Section 13 of P.L.1991, c.256 (C.40:55D 53.2). An applicant may file an appeal for an ongoing series of charges by a professional during a period not exceeding six months to demonstrate that they represent a pattern of excessive or inaccurate charges. An applicant making use of this provision need not appeal each charge individually.
B. The County Construction Board of Appeals shall here the appeal, render a decision thereon, and file its decision with a statement of the reasons therefore with the municipality or approving authority not later than ten business days following the submission of the appeal, unless such period of time has been extended with the consent of the applicant. The decision may approve, disapprove, or modify the professional charges appealed from. A copy of the decision shall be forwarded by certified or
Deptford Township UDO Administration, Enforcement and Amendments
May 5, 2014 Page 339
registered mail to the party making the appeal, the municipality, the approving authority and the professional involved in the appeal. Failure by the Board to hear an appeal and render and file a decision thereon within the time limits prescribed in this Subsection shall be deemed a denial of the appeal for purpose of a complaint, application, or appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction.
C. The County Construction Board of Appeals shall provide rules for its procedure in accordance with this Section. The Board shall have the power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant evidence and the provisions of the "County and Municipal Investigations Law," P.L.1953, c.38 (C.2A:6AA 1 et seq.) shall apply.
D. During the pendence of any appeal, the municipality or approving authority shall continue to process, hear, and decide the application for development, and to inspect the development in the normal course, and shall not withhold, delay, or deny reviews, inspections, signing of subdivision plans or site plans, the reduction or release of performance or maintenance guarantees, the issuance of construction permits or certificates of occupancy, or any other approval or permit because an appeal has been filed or is pending under this subsection. The Chief Financial Officer may pay charges out of the appropriate escrow account or deposit for which an appeal has been filed. If a charge is disallowed after payment, the Chief Financial Officer shall reimburse the deposit or escrow account in the amount of any such disallowed charge or refund the amount to the applicant. If a charge is disallowed after payment to a professional or consultant who is not an employee of the municipality, the professional or consultant shall reimburse the municipality in the amount of any such disallowed charge.
§ 100. Enforcement.
A. It shall be the duty of the Construction Official and Zoning Officer of the Township to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. No new structure shall be erected unless a building permit is obtained from the Construction Official, and no structure or lot shall be used in violation of this chapter.
1. It shall be the duty of the Construction Official to keep a record of all applications and all construction permits which are either issued or denied, with notations of any conditions involved, which data shall form a part of the Township public records. A monthly report of construction permits shall be filed with the Tax Assessor and the Township Council.
2. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to inspect the structures and land in the Township and order the owner, in writing, to remedy any condition found to exist in violation of the provision(s) of this chapter or any condition in violation of any application for development as duly approved by the Township under the terms of this chapter. For purposes of this inspection, the Zoning Officer shall have the right to enter any building or premises during reasonable hours, subject to due process of law. The owner shall have fifteen (15) days within which time to respond to the purported violations and indicate the remedies to be taken. Such
Deptford Township UDO Administration, Enforcement and Amendments
May 5, 2014 Page 340
response, or lack of response, shall be immediately communicated in writing by the Zoning Officer to the Township Attorney for appropriate referral and action.
3. Upon notice being served of any land use existing in violation of any provision(s) of this chapter, the certificate of occupancy for such use shall thereupon, without further notice, be null and void, and a new certificate of occupancy shall be required for any further use of the structure or land.
B. Administrative Officer.
1. The Township Council shall appoint an Administrative Officer for the purposes of administering this chapter and related land use ordinances.
2. Duties of the Administrative Officer shall be:
a. To interpret this chapter in accordance with its literal intent. The Administrative Officer shall not have the power to permit any construction, subdivision, or change of use of land or building which is not in strict accordance with the terms of this chapter.
b. To interpret this chapter in accordance with its literal intent. The Administrative Officer shall not have the power to permit any construction, subdivision, or change of use of land or building which is not in strict accordance with the terms of this chapter.
c. Upon the request of the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment, to present such facts, records, or similar information so as to assist those agencies in making a decision in a matter brought before it.
d. To be responsible for issuing permits as described below.
1) Zoning permits - A document signed by the Administrative Officer (1) which is required by this chapter as a condition precedent to the commencement of a use or the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion or installation of a structure or building or for any other improvement that is not exempt by this Chapter and (2) which acknowledges that such use, structure or building complies with the provisions of this chapter or a variance therefrom duly authorized by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
2) Subdivision approval certificates - A document certifying whether or not a subdivision has been duly approved by the Planning Board and issued to a prospective purchaser, prospective mortgagee or any other person interested in any land in the Township. A request for a subdivision approval certificate must be in writing and must
Deptford Township UDO Administration, Enforcement and Amendments
May 5, 2014 Page 341
contain a diagram showing the location and dimension of the land to be covered by the certificate and the name of the owner thereof.
C. Issuance of construction permits.
1. Every application for a construction permit shall be accompanied by three (3) sets of plans drawn in ink or a blueprint showing the actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the exact location, size and height of all existing and proposed structures and substructures, a grading plan showing existing and proposed conditions and sufficient offsite grades to evaluate drainage, all existing easements, the existing or intended use of each structure, the number of dwelling units the structure is designed to accommodate, the number and location of off-street parking spaces and off-street loading areas and such other information with regard to the lot and neighboring lots as may be necessary to determine and provide for the enforcement of this chapter. All dimensions on these plans relating to the location and size of the lot to be built upon shall be based on a survey of the lot prepared by a licensed surveyor in the State of New Jersey.
2. A fee shall be charged for each construction permit in accordance with the applicable ordinances of the Township.
3. A construction permit shall be granted or denied in writing within ten (10) days from the date a complete application has been submitted, unless additional time is agreed to in writing by the applicant. One (1) copy of such plan shall be returned to the owner when such plans shall have been approved or denied by the Construction Official, together with such permit as may be granted.
4. The lot and the location of the structure(s) thereon shall be staked out on the grounds before construction is started, and a copy of the construction permit shall be posted conspicuously on the premises affected whenever construction work is being performed thereon.
5. No construction permit shall be issued for any structure until prior site plan, subdivision and variance approvals, as may be necessary, have been granted by the appropriate municipal agency or municipal agencies in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and until all review and inspection fees on the property have been paid.
D. Issuance of certificates of occupancy.
1. It shall be unlawful to use or permit the use of any structure or part thereof, either occupied by a new use or occupant or hereafter erected, altered, converted or enlarged, wholly or in part, until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the Construction Official. Upon the completion of any building or alteration in compliance with this chapter and any other ordinance, rule or regulation, the owner or his agent may apply to the Construction Official, in writing, for the
Deptford Township UDO Administration, Enforcement and Amendments
May 5, 2014 Page 342
issuance of a certificate of occupancy pursuant to the provisions of this section, but only when:
a. The structure or part(s) thereof and the proposed use conform to this chapter and all other applicable codes and ordinances of the Township.
b. Prior site plan, subdivision and variance approvals, as may be necessary, have been granted by the appropriate municipal agency or municipal agencies in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
c. All local taxes and assessments on the property have been paid.
d. A letter from each utility company has been received by the Township stating that the utility has been inspected in accordance with the approved plan and is ready for use.
2. A fee shall be charged for each certificate of occupancy in accordance with the applicable ordinances of the Township.
3. A certificate of occupancy shall be granted or denied in writing within ten (10) days from the date that a written notification if filed with the Construction Official that the erection of the structure is completed, unless additional time is agreed upon by the applicant in writing.
4. With respect to any subdivision and/or site plan, or subsection thereof, granted final approval, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued only upon the completion of the following improvements as such improvements may be required as part of subdivision and/or site plan approval:
a. Curbs.
b. All utilities.
c. Water supply and sewage treatment facilities, which shall be functioning and serving the property in question.
d. Storm water drainage facilities.
e. Rough grading of the property.
f. Base course of the street or streets serving the property.
g. Base course of driveways and parking areas.
5. With respect to any individual residential lot within a subdivision, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued only upon the completion of the following improvements, in addition to those listed in subsection D.4. above, to the extent the same are required as part of the subdivision approval:
Deptford Township UDO Administration, Enforcement and Amendments
May 5, 2014 Page 343
a. Sidewalks.
b. Driveway aprons.
c. Street names and regulatory signs.
6. A copy of any issued certificate of occupancy shall be kept on file at the premises affected and shall be shown to the Construction Official upon request.
7. Should the Construction Official decline to issue a certificate of occupancy, his reasons for doing so shall be stated on two (2) copies of the application and one (1) copy shall be returned to the applicant.
8. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for a new structure or use for which site approval has been granted although not all conditions of said approval have been complied with. Such temporary certificate of occupancy shall be issued only in extenuating circumstances and only with the approval of the Construction Official, who shall establish specific terms and conditions, including, but not limited to, a time limit for the installation of the uncompleted improvements and the receipt of an appropriate performance guarantee assuring the installation of the improvements as indicated on the approved plat or plan.
9. A monthly report on the certificates of occupancy issued shall be filed with the Tax Assessor. A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept in the office of the Construction Official, and copies shall be furnished upon request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the structure or land affected. The charge for each copy shall be established by resolution of the Township Council, except that there shall be no charge to a municipal agency.
10. The following shall be unlawful until a certificate of occupancy is issued by the Construction Official:
a. Occupancy and use of a building erected, constructed, restored, altered or moved or any changes in use of an existing building.
b. Occupancy, use or change in use of vacant land.
c. Any change in the use of a nonconforming use.
d. Occupancy and use of any enlargement to an existing structure.
E. Payment of taxes.
No approval, permit or certificate for any of the following shall be given to an application or to an applicant if any taxes or assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent on the property for which the application is made: preliminary and final site plan; preliminary and final subdivision; minor subdivision; minor site plan; bulk variance; use variance; conditional use; zoning permit or subdivision approval certificate.
Deptford Township UDO Administration, Enforcement and Amendments
May 5, 2014 Page 344
An application for approval or issuance of any of the above items shall not be deemed complete and shall not be considered by the applicable municipal agency unless the applicant submits with the application a certification signed by an authorized representative of the Deptford Township Tax Collector's office stating that no taxes or assessments as described above are due or delinquent on the subject property.
§ 101. Violations and Penalties.
A. Each and every violation of this chapter shall be subject to punishment by a court of appropriate jurisdiction. Said violation may include a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or imprisonment for a term not to exceed ninety (90) days and/or community service of ninety (90) days, or a combination of any of the above.
B. The violation shall be deemed enforceable against the owner, contractor and/or any other person interested as lessee, tenant, or otherwise.
C. Each day that a violation continues to exist shall be deemed to be a separate violation.
D. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to limit the right of any interested person to initiate the prosecution of any person or persons believed to be in violation of this chapter.
§ 102. Amendments.
This chapter may be amended from time to time by the Township Council, after the appropriate referrals, notices, hearings and other requirements of law.
§ 103. Procedure for Amendments.
A. Prior to the hearing on adoption of a zoning ordinance or any amendments thereto, Township Council shall refer any such proposed ordinance or amendment thereto to the Planning Board pursuant to the following requirements:
1. The Planning Board shall issue a report within thirty-five (35) days of referral by the Township Council which identifies any portion of the proposed development regulation, revision or amendment which is inconsistent with the master plan and any recommendations concerning these inconsistencies.
2. The Planning Board may include in its report any other matter which it deems appropriate.
3. Failure of the Planning Board to render a report within the prescribed time period shall relieve the Township Council of its responsibility to wait for that report before acting on the proposed development regulation, revision or amendment.
B. After receipt of the Planning Board report, or after the expiration of the time allocated for delivery of that report, the Township Council shall conduct a public hearing on the merits of the proposed development regulation, revision or amendment.
Deptford Township UDO Administration, Enforcement and Amendments
May 5, 2014 Page 345
C. The Township Council shall evaluate the proposed amendment for its consistency with the master plan.
D. The Township Council may enact an amendment which is in whole or part inconsistent with the master plan and which is not designed to effectuate the land use plan or housing plan elements but only by an affirmative vote of a majority of its full authorized membership. In that instance, the reasons for the action of the Township Council shall be set forth in a resolution and recorded in the minutes of the Township Council.
E. A protest against any proposed amendment or revision of a zoning ordinance may be filed with the Township Clerk, signed by the owners of twenty percent (20%) or more of the area either (a). of the lots or land included in such proposed change, or (b). of the lots or land within two hundred (200) feet in all directions therefrom inclusive of street space, whether within or without the Township. In the event such a protest is filed, the amendment or revision shall require the affirmative vote of two-thirds of all members of Township Council.
F. No zoning amendment shall be submitted to or adopted by initiative or referendum.
§ 104. Severability and Repealer.
A. Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity as a whole or of any other part thereof.
B. Chapters 79, 68 and 48 and the Tree Protection Ordinance (Ordinance No. 0.16.89) of the Code of the Township of Deptford are hereby repealed and are to be replaced with this chapter in full.