Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code by Township Committee
[Adopted 12-10-1990 as Ord. No. 90-204]
Be it ordained and enacted by the Township Committee of the Township of
Dennis, County of Cape May, State of New Jersey, as follows:
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Township of Dennis of
a general and permanent nature adopted by the Township Committee of
the Township of Dennis, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters
and sections by General Code Publishers Corp. and consisting of Chapters
1 through 190, together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted,
ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Township of Dennis," hereinafter
known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1-3. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Municipal Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the
public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance
shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the Township
of Dennis by impressing thereon the Seal of the township, as provided by
law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk of
the township, to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Township of Dennis" shall
be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-5
1:3
inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code, as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-6. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Township of Dennis, pursuant to law, shall cause to be
published, in the manner required, a copy of this adopting ordinance in
a newspaper of general circulation in the township. Sufficient copies of
the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection by
the public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
publication of this adopting ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of
the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered
to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk, or someone authorized and directed by the
Clerk, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the Code
required to be filed in his office for the use of the public. All changes in said
Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective date of this
codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the Code shall,
when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until such changes
or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code book, at which
time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-8. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code book containing the Code may be purchased from the
Clerk upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the Township
Committee, which may also arrange, by resolution, for procedures for the
periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-9. General penalty.
A. Maximum penalty. For violation of any provision of this Code or any
other ordinance of the township where no specific penalty is provided
regarding the section violated, any person, firm, association,
partnership or corporation so violating shall, upon conviction, be
subject to one or more of the following: a fine not less than $50 or a fine
not exceeding $1,000, imprisonment in the county jail for a term not
exceeding 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90
days; all of the aforesaid, however, being in the discretion of the Judge
or other officer having jurisdiction. [Amended 3-22-99 by Ord. No.
99-05]
B. Separate violations. Except as otherwise provided, every day in which a
violation of any provision of this Code or any other ordinance of the
township exists shall constitute a separate violation.
C. Application. The maximum penalty stated in this section is not intended
to state an appropriate penalty for every violation. Any lesser penalty,
§ 1-5 DENNIS CODE § 1-9
1:4
§ 1-10. Altering or tampering with Code; violations and penalties.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Township of
Dennis to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or part
of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not more than
$1,000 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both, in the discretion
of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-11. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-12. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-13. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
adopting ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-14. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-13 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
including a nominal penalty or no penalty at all, may be appropriate for
a particular case or violation.
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to February 26, 1990.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance, or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision, or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
§ 1-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:5
§ 1-15. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending,
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place, or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
the township's indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property, or any lawful contract or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
L. Any ordinance regulating vehicles and traffic in the Township of Dennis.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the Township Committee that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed
had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the following changes, amendments or revisions are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance
(chapter and section number references are to the ordinances as they
have been renumbered and appear in the Code).1
1. Editor's Note: Pursuant to § 1-15B, the following sections were added or amended: §§ 12-1,
12-4A, B and C, 12-5, 40-1, 40-2, 44-2, 68-6B, 70-2, 70-5, 70-6A, 70-10B, 70-11, 70-18,
72-1, 80-5C, 88-4C, E and F, 88-7B, 88-9, 95-12, 98-5, 105-3A, 105-13C(2)(b), 105-14A(1),
105-16B(2), 105-17, 112-3, 118-1, Ch. 139, 145-1A, 145-2, 145-3, 145-4, 165-4, 165-7,
165-9A, F, G, H(8) and J, 165-10B(5), 165-12A, B, C and D(5), 165-13C(7), 165-14D(6),
165-15A(23), 165-18, 165-19, 165-29S(1), 165-31A(2), 165-32, 165-34, 165-45A, 178-1B,
178-2, 178-4C(2) and (3), 178-6, 185-4B, 185-7, 185-8, 185-14A(2) and (3), 185-14G,
185-19B, 185-20C, 185-21B(7), 185-22B(4), 185-25B(3) and (4), 185-27, 185-31B(11),
185-37, 185-38B, 185-41A(4), 185-43B(7), 185-69D(5), 185-72A(3) and (4), 185-73A,
185-75B(2), 185-77D, 185-81D, 185-83A(1), 185-85, 185-87B and C, 185-89A, B, C and E
and 185-90A. In addition, the following original sections were deleted: in Ch 35, Officers
and Employees, Art. I, Chief Financial Officer, the original unnumbered paragraph, which
§ 1-14 DENNIS CODE § 1-15
1:6
designated Joseph Abbot as the Chief Financial Officer, of Ord. No. 89-160; in Ch 68,
Moving of Buildings, original Section VI of Ord. No. 86-127; in Ch. 72, Business Licensee,
original Sections 11 and 13 of Ord. No. 87-133; in Ch. 75, Campgrounds, original Section
9 of Ord. No. 83-101; in Ch. 80, Uniform Construction Codes, original Section III of Ord.
No. 77-39; in Ch 88, Dogs, original Sections X and XIII of Ord No. 74-11; in Ch. 118,
Housing Standards, original Section VII of Ord. No. 84-110; in Ch 126, Littering, original
Section X of Ord. No. 89-182; in Ch. 160, Soil Removal, original Section VII of Ord. No.
86-126; in Ch 172, Trailers and Trailer Parks, Art. I, Trailers, original Section 4 of Ord. No.
65-4, and Art. 11, Trailer Parks, original Section IV of Ord. No. 66-2; in Ch 178, Junked or
Abandoned Vehicles, original Sections IV and XII of Ord. No. 72-2. A complete description
of each of the above changes is included in Ord. No. 90-204, a copy of which is on file in
the office of the Township Clerk.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:7
Chapter 7
CLAIMS APPROVAL
§ 7-1. Statutory authority; legislative intent.
Pursuant to the requirements of N.J.S.A. 40A:5-17, the Township Committee
of the Township of Dennis hereby establishes the following procedures for
the approval or disapproval of claims for moneys owed by said township and
for the payment of approved claims.
§ 7-2. Submission of claim; contents of voucher. [Amended
7-24-1995 by Ord. No. 95-13]
Every claim for moneys due from the Township of Dennis shall be submitted
to the Township's Chief Finance Officer, in writing, on an official township
purchase order/voucher, which shall be issued by the Chief Finance Officer.
On said purchase order/voucher, the claimant shall set forth the details of
the labor or services performed and/or the materials, supplies or equipment
supplied and any other purchases or services rendered, giving a description
of the same, the date of delivery of service and the amount of the claim.
Said purchase order/voucher shall be signed by the claimant or official
representative of the claimant.
§ 7-3. Verification of claim. [Amended 7-24-1995 by Ord. No. 95-13]
The Township Clerk/Administrator or Chief Finance Officer is authorized,
on behalf of the Township Committee, to require any claimant to submit
itemized details of each claim in verification of the claim if said details are
reasonably necessary to the proper consideration of the claim.
§ 7-4. Deadlines for consideration of claim. [Amended 7-24-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-13]
In order to be considered for payment at any regular meeting of the
Township Committee, the purchase order/voucher and any request
verification must be submitted to the Chief Finance Officer at least one
week prior to said meeting. The Chief Finance Officer shall forward the
purchase order/voucher for authorization to the Clerk/Administrator, who
must receive it no later than the Friday preceding the township meeting.
§ 7-5. Approval and authorization. [Amended 7-24-1995 by Ord. No.
95-13]
Prior to any claim being paid, the purchase order/voucher containing said
claim shall be approved by the department head of the department
responsible for ordering the items contained in the claim or by the township
official designated by said department head. The officer's certification on
the township purchase order/voucher shall be signed by such department
head, such designated officer, the Township Clerk/ Administrator, or Chief
§ 1-15 DENNIS CODE § 7-5
1:8
Finance Officer. Following said approval and prior to payment, the payment
of the claim shall be authorized by a majority vote of the Township
Committee by resolution.
§ 7-6. Listing in minutes.
Any and all claims which are approved for payment at any regular or special
meeting shall be listed in the minutes of that meeting.
§ 7-7. Preparation of check. [Amended 7-24-1995 by Ord. No.
95-13]
Following approval of a claim, the check in payment of such claim shall be
prepared by the Chief Finance Officer. The check shall bear the signatures
of the Mayor and the Chief Finance Officer or such other persons as may
otherwise be designated from time to time by resolution of the Township
Committee.
§ 7-8. Notation of date of approval. [Amended 7-24-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-13]
A notation shall be made on the purchase order/voucher of the date upon
which the claim was ordered approved and paid.
Chapter 12
COURT, MUNICIPAL
§ 12-1. Creation of Municipal Court.
Pursuant to the powers and authority granted by N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1, et seq.,
there is hereby created and established, a Municipal Court for the Township
of Dennis, in the County of Cape May, to be known as the "Municipal Court
of the Township of Dennis.
§ 12-2. Interlocal agreement for Municipal Court.
Pursuant to the Uniform Shared Services and Consolidation Act, N.J.S.A.
40A:65-1, et seq., and N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1c, the Township of Dennis may enter
into a shared services agreement to provide jointly for courtrooms,
chambers, equipment, supplies and employees for the Municipal Courts of
the Township of Dennis. If the Township of Dennis enters into a shared
services agreement, the identities of the individual courts shall continue to
be expressed in the captions of orders and all other documents. Pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1d, said interlocal agreement may be terminated as provided
in the agreement. A shared services agreement shall be approved by
Township Committee by resolution.
§ 7-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-3
1:9
§ 12-3. Jurisdiction.
The jurisdiction of the Municipal Court of the Township of Dennis shall be
coextensive with the territory of the Township of Dennis, County of Cape
May, State of New Jersey.
§ 12-4. Municipal Judge—powers, duties and qualifications.
§ 12-5. Municipal Prosecutor.
§ 12-6. Municipal Public Defender.
A. There shall be a Municipal Court Judge to be appointed and serve such
term as is provided by law.
B. The Municipal Court Judge shall have and possess the qualifications
and shall have, possess and exercise all the functions, duties, powers
and jurisdiction conferred by law or ordinance. He or she shall be an
attorney-at-law of the State of New Jersey. Whenever the Municipal
Judge is unable to sit as such, he or she may designate any other judge
authorized by the Administrative Office of Court's Cross—Assigned List
to sit for him or her temporarily (not to exceed two successive weeks)
and hold the Municipal Court. Any person so designated, while sitting
temporarily, shall possess all of the powers of the Municipal Court
Judge.
C. The Municipal Court Judge shall be compensated in the manner
established by ordinance, resolution or as otherwise established
according to law.
A. The Township Committee of the Township of Dennis may employ an
attorney-at-law as a Prosecutor, under the supervision of the County
Prosecutor, who may represent the municipality in any matter within
the jurisdiction of the Municipal Court of the Township of Dennis, in
accordance with P.L. 1999, c. 49 (N.J.S.A. 2B:25-1, et seq.).
B. The Municipal Prosecutor shall be appointed for a one year term
commencing January 1 and ending December 31, and may continue to
serve in office pending reappointment or appointment of a successor.
C. The Municipal Prosecutor shall be compensated as provided in the
current salary ordinance and resolution of the Township of Dennis.
A. There shall be a Municipal Public Defender who shall be appointed by
the Township Committee for a one year term, commencing January 1
and ending December 31.
B. In accordance with the provisions of P.L. 1997, c. 256 (N.J.S.A. 2B:24-1,
et seq.), the Municipal Public Defender shall be qualified as an attorneyat-
law of the State of New Jersey in good standing and shall represent
those defendants appearing in Municipal Court who are determined by
§ 12-3 DENNIS CODE § 12-6
1:10
§ 12-7. Municipal Court Administrator.
§ 12-8. Deputy Municipal Court Administrator.
§ 12-9. Necessary clerical and other assistants.
There may be appointed such other necessary clerical and other assistants
for the Municipal Court as is necessary for the efficient operation of the
Municipal Court. Such clerical and other assistants shall be compensated
as provided in the current salary ordinance or resolution, or as otherwise
established according to law.
§ 12-10. Fee payment schedule for violations.
the Court to be indigent and whose representation is assigned to the
Municipal Public Defender by the Court.
C. The Municipal Public Defender shall be compensated in the manner
established by ordinance, resolution or as otherwise established
according to law.
A. There shall be an Administrator of the Municipal Court who shall
perform the functions and duties prescribed for the Administrator by
law, by the rules applicable to the municipal courts, and by the
Municipal Court Judge.
B. The Administrator shall be appointed by the governing body for a term
of one year, commencing January 1 and ending December 31.
C. The Municipal Court Administrator shall be compensated as specified in
the Municipal Salary Ordinance and resolution, or as otherwise
established according to law.
A. There may be one or more Deputy Administrators of the Municipal
Court who shall be appointed by the Township Committee for a one year
term commencing January 1 and ending December 31.
B. Deputy Municipal Court Administrators shall perform the functions
assigned to them by the Municipal Judge and the Municipal Court
Administrator.
C. The Deputy Municipal Court Administrator shall be compensated as
specified in the Municipal Salary Ordinance and resolution, or as
otherwise established according to law.
A. The following schedule of violations is hereby established:
TOWNSHIP OF DENNIS
STANDARDIZED FINES
Schedule of Violations:
§ 12-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-10
1:11
Chapter 13
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
Code No. Short Description Payable Amount
23-1 False Alarms $110.00
69-4 House Numbering 110.00
69-5 House Numbering 110.00
69-6 House Numbering 110.00
72-3 Business License 60.00
72-16 Contractor's License 60.00
72-25 Vendors License 110.00
88-1 Dog Running at Large 60.00
88-4 Dog License Required 60.00
112-4(A) Illegal Dumping 510.00
126-2 Littering 60.00
139-1 Park and Recreation Area
(prohibited acts)
510.00
142-1 Peddling on Streets 60.00
145-1 Property Maintenance 60.00
178-2 Junk Vehicles 110.00
B. This schedule upon adoption shall be forwarded to the vicinage
Assignment Judge for approval.
C. Upon adoption and approval the Court Administrator shall prominently
post this schedule in accordance with the law.
§ 12-10 DENNIS CODE § 12-10
1:12
ARTICLE I
Water and Sewer Subdepartment
§ 13-1. Incorporation of preamble statements.2
The statements of the preamble are incorporated herein by this reference
thereto as if set forth herein and at length.
§ 13-2. Statement of policy.
§ 13-3. Installation of service lines.
No person, firm, municipal authority, entity or thing shall install any water
service lines in the Township of Dennis without the express written approval
of the Township Committee of the Township of Dennis. Any cost or fees
incurred by the township in reviewing any application, including
professional service fees shall be borne by the applicant.
§ 13-4. Water purveyors.
No person, firm, corporation, authority, entity or thing shall be permitted
to purvey or sell potable water in the Township of Dennis without express
written approval of the Township Committee of the Township of Dennis. The
provision of this section shall not apply to the sale or distribution of bottled
or packaged water within the Township of Dennis.
A. The rules, regulations and rates contained in the chapter are hereby
established for the supply of water.
B. The operation of a water system shall be and remain vested in the
Township Committee of the Township of Dennis who shall employ and
appoint such personnel as may be necessary to properly operate the
system. No work or service of any kind, except in an emergency, will be
performed by township employees on privately owned property without
express written prior approval by the user and the superintendent.
C. The township or its authorized agents shall have the right of access to
premises at reasonable times for any purpose in connection with the
water system.
2. Editor's Note: The preamble of this ordinance provided as follows: Whereas, the Township
of Dennis deems it in the best interest of the municipality to create a subdepartment of
water and sewer within the Department of Public Works; and Whereas, N.J.S.A. 40:40-56-1
et seq., permits the governing body of every municipality to fix and prescribe charges,
rent, rules, regulations, conditions and restrictions as to the connection with the use of
sewers and drains in the municipality; and Whereas, N.J.S.A. 40:56-1 authorizes the
governing body of every municipality to propound such ordinances as it may deem
necessary and proper for the distribution, supply, use and protection of water within the
municipality for the imposition of penalties.
§ 13-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-5
1:13
§ 13-5. Removal of water from the Township of Dennis.
No person, corporation, entity, authority or thing shall remove from the
township water pumped from a well in the township, for distribution or sale
outside of the Township of Dennis.
§ 13-6. Penalties.
Any person, firm, entity, authority, corporation or thing that violates any
provision of this chapter shall, for a first conviction, be subject to a fine of
not more than $200. For a second offense, the penalties shall be a fine of
not less than $200 nor more than $500 and a period of 30 days community
service and/or a period of community service of up to 30 days. For a third
or subsequent offense, the penalties shall be a fine of not less than $500
nor more than $1,000 and imprisonment for not more than 90 days. Each
24 hours that the offense continues shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 13-5 DENNIS CODE § 13-6
1:14
Chapter 14
INDEMNIFICATION OF PUBLIC OFFICIALS AND PUBLIC
EMPLOYEES
§ 14-1. Incorporation of preamble statements.3
The statements of the preamble are incorporated herein by this reference.
§ 14-2. Conditions for indemnification.
The Township of Dennis shall indemnify the Township employees and public
officials for any claim brought arising out of the official duties of the
public employee and public official to the extent as provided under N.J.S.A.
59:10-4.
§ 14-3. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon adoption and publication in
accordance with law.
Chapter 16
(RESERVED)
Editor's Note: Former Chapter 16, Economic Development Council,
previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No.
96-09, was repealed in its entirety 12-6-05 by Ordinance No.
2005-12.
Chapter 16A
EMINENT DOMAIN
§ 16A-1. Preamble.
A. The Township of Dennis, its political subdivisions including the Board of
Education of the Township of Dennis be and the same are hereby
prohibited from taking private property for any purpose except by
strictly following the procedures of this chapter.
B. Prior to instituting any eminent domain proceedings, the municipality
and/or its subdivisions, including the Board of Education, shall first
attempt to purchase the property from the property owner for a fair and
3. Editor's Note: The preamble of this ordinance provided as follows: Whereas, the Tort
Claims Act of the State of New Jersey provides that local entities have the authority to
indemnify public employees and public officials; and Whereas, without such
indemnification, public employees and public officials could not fully and adequately
represent the interest of the municipalities and carry forth their duties; and Whereas, the
Township of Dennis believes it in the best interest of the Township of Dennis to provide for
such indemnification. Now therefore be it ordained, by the Township Committee of the
Township of Dennis, in the County of Cape May, as follows:
§ 13-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16A-1
1:15
Chapter 17
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION
Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2014-01 repealed and dissolved the
Natural Resources Committee, adopted by Ordinance No. 2012-03
and previously codified herein. Any authority or power any person,
or persons, had or was otherwise authorized by the existence of
the Natural Resources Committee is hereby revoked. Any and all
just compensation which compensation shall be set by having the
property independently appraised by a certified appraiser of the State
of New Jersey with at least 20 years of experience in appraising
property values and who shall appraise the property for its value at its
highest and best use.
C. The township must first, after a public hearing, declare a pubic
emergency for the need for the property on notice to the property
owner affording that property owner with the unlimited right to address
the Governing Body and present any arguments the property owner
deems to be relevant prior to the public hearing.
D. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the Governing Body must
unanimously approve and declare the public emergency necessitating
the use of eminent domain.
E. Any political subdivision of the Township of Dennis including the Board
of Education must apply to the Township Committee for the Township
Committee to have the hearing for the Township Committee to
unanimously approve the use of eminent domain.
F. Unless and until the Governing Body has the public hearing as set forth
above and unanimously approves the declaration of emergency
requiring the use of eminent domain, no property can be taken by
eminent domain.
G. In addition to offering the property owner fair and just compensation
for their property at its highest and best use, the township shall
inventory all existing property the township owns and notify the
property owner that an in-kind trade of property could be an option for
the property owner.
H. In any portion, clause, phrase, sentence or paragraph of this chapter
shall be deemed illegal, unconstitutional or unlawful, then only that
portion of this chapter shall be invalid and the remainder shall be in full
force and effect.
I. Any member of this Governing Body who shall violate or participate in
the violation of this chapter shall be deemed to forfeit their office and
shall be deemed to forfeit any rights they have as a member of the
public employees' retirement system.
§ 16A-1 DENNIS CODE § 16A-1
1:16
funds held by the Natural Resources Committee, barring any legal
limitations, shall be immediately turned over by the Treasurer of the
Natural Resources Committee to the Chief Financial Officer of the
Township and the Chief Financial Officer shall place such funds in
the general fund of the Township.
§ 17-1. Commission established.
There is hereby created in the Township of Dennis an Environmental
Commission, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 et seq., with the membership,
powers, duties and responsibilities hereafter set forth in this chapter.
§ 17-2. Membership; compensation; Chairman; alternate members.
§ 17-3. Terms of office; vacancies.
§ 17-4. Removal of members.
A. The Commission shall consist of seven regular and two alternate
members, appointed by the Mayor. One regular member shall also be a
member of the Township Consolidated Land Use Board, and all regular
and alternate members shall be residents of the township.
B. All members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.
C. The Mayor shall designate one regular member to serve as Chairman
and presiding officer of the Commission.
D. Alternate members shall be designated at the time of their appointment
as Alternate No. 1 and Alternate No. 2. An alternate member shall not
be permitted to act on any matter in which he has, either directly or
indirectly, any personal or financial interest. An alternate member may
participate in discussions of the proceedings but may not vote except in
the absence or disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall not be
delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of an
alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which
alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote first.
A. Regular members. Initially, two Commissioners shall be appointed for
one-year terms, two for two-year terms and three for three-year terms.
Thereafter, each appointment shall be for three-year terms. A vacancy
of the Commission occurring otherwise than by expiration of a term
shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the original
appointment.
B. Alternate members. The terms of the alternate members shall be for
two years, except that the terms of the alternate members first
appointed shall be two years for Alternate No. 1 and one year for
Alternate No. 2, so that the term of not more than one alternate
member shall expire in any one year. A vacancy occurring otherwise
than by expiration of term shall be filled by the appointing authority for
the unexpired term only.
§ 16A-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-4
1:17
§ 17-5. Records to be kept; annual report.
The Commission shall keep records of its meetings and activities and shall
make an annual report to the Governing Body of the municipality.
§ 17-6. Meetings and records to be open to the public.
The meetings of the Commission shall be subject to the Open Public
Meetings Act, and its records shall be considered public documents.
§ 17-7. Appropriation; additional employees.
§ 17-8. Powers and duties.
The Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
§ 17-9. Applications for development.
A. The Mayor or Township Committee may remove any regular member of
the Commission for cause, on written charges served upon the member
and after a hearing thereon, at which the member shall be entitled to be
heard in person or by counsel.
B. An alternate member may, after public hearing if he requests one, be
removed by the Township Committee for cause.
A. The Township Committee shall, each year, appropriate funds for the
expenses incurred by the Commission.
B. The Commission may appoint such clerks and other employees as it
may from time to time require and within the limits of the funds
appropriated to it.
A. It shall keep an index of all open areas, publicly or privately owned,
including open marshlands, swamps and other wetlands, in order to
obtain information on the proper use of such areas, and it may from
time to time recommend to the Consolidated Land Use Board plans and
programs for inclusion in the Township Master Plan and for the
development and use of such areas.
B. The Commission may, as it deems fit, conduct research into the use and
possible use of the open land areas of the municipality and may
coordinate the activities of unofficial bodies organized for similar
purposes.
C. The Commission may advertise, prepare, print and distribute books,
maps, charts, plans and pamphlets which in its judgment it deems
necessary for its purposes.
A. When the Commission has prepared and submitted to the Consolidated
Land Use Board the index of natural resources referred to in the
foregoing Section 17-8, the Consolidated Land Use Board shall
§ 17-4 DENNIS CODE § 17-9
1:18
§ 17-10. Studies and recommendations.
The Commission may study and make recommendations concerning open
space preservation, water resources management, air pollution control,
solid waste management, noise control, soil and landscape protection,
environmental appearance, marine resources and protection of flora and
fauna.
§ 17-11. Acquisition of property.
Chapter 19
ETHICS, CODE OF
§ 19-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Dennis Township Code
of Ethics."
§ 19-2. Findings.
The Township Committee of the Township of Dennis finds and declares that:
thereafter make available to the Commission an informational copy of
every application for development submitted to the Consolidated Land
Use Board.
B. The Commission shall review each application and may provide its
advice to the Consolidated Land Use Board, which advice shall be
conveyed through the delegation of one of its members or staff to testify
orally at the hearing on the application and to explain any written
report which may have been prepared and/or submitted to the Board.
A. The Commission may, subject to the approval of the Township
Committee, acquire property, both real and personal, in the name of the
township by gift, purchase, grant, bequest, devise or lease for any of its
purposes and shall administer the same for such purposes subject to
the terms of the conveyance or gift.
B. Any such acquisition may be to acquire the fee or any lesser interest,
development right, easement (including conservation easement),
covenant or other contractual right (including a conveyance on
conditions or with limitations or reversions), as may be necessary to
acquire, maintain, improve, protect, limit the future use of or otherwise
conserve and properly utilize open spaces and other land and water
areas of the township.
A. Public office and employment are a public trust.
§ 17-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-2
1:19
§ 19-3. Purpose; statutory authority.
§ 19-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGENCY — Any agency, board or governing body, including the chief
executive officer, office, commission or other instrumentality within the
Township of Dennis, and any independent local authority created by or
appointed under the authority of the Township of Dennis which performs
functions other than of a purely advisory nature.
BUSINESS ORGANIZATION — A corporation, partnership, firm, enterprise,
franchise, association, trust, sole proprietorship, union or other legal entity.
EMPLOYEE — Any person, whether compensated or not whether parttime
or full-time, employed by or serving on an agency, who is not a local
government officer.
B. The vitality and stability of representative democracy depend upon the
public's confidence in the integrity of its elected and appointed
representatives.
C. Whenever the public perceives a conflict between the private interests
and the public duties of a government office or employee, that
confidence is imperiled.
D. Governments have the duty both to provide their citizens with
standards by which they may determine whether public duties are
being faithfully performed and to apprise their officers and employees
of the behavior which is expected of them while conducting their public
duties.
A. It is the purpose of this chapter to provide a method of assuring that
standards of ethical conduct and financial disclosure requirements for
officers and employees of the Township of Dennis shall be clear,
consistent, uniform in their application and enforceable and to provide
those officers or employees with advice and information concerning
possible conflicts of interests which might arise in the conduct of their
public duties.
B. It is the further purpose of this chapter to implement the provisions of
the Local Government Ethics Law, P .L. 1991, c. 29, N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.1
et seq.
C. This chapter is enacted under the authority of the Local Government
Ethics Law, P. L. 1991, c. 29, N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.1 et seq., and under the
further authority granted to the Township of Dennis under the
provisions of Titles 40 and 40A of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated.
§ 19-2 DENNIS CODE § 19-4
1:20
INTEREST — The ownership or control of more than 10% of the profits,
assets or stock of a business organization, but shall not include the control
of assets in a non-union profit entity or labor union.
MEMBER OF IMMEDIATE FAMILY — The spouse or dependent child of an
officer or employee residing in the same household.
OFFICER — Any person whether compensated or not, whether part-time or
full-time, who is one of the following:
(1) Township Committee member.
(2) Township Solicitor.
(3) Township Prosecutor.
(4) Township Engineer.
(5) Environmental Commission member.
(6) Township Clerk.
(7) Deputy Township Clerk.
(8) Purchasing Agent.
(9) Treasurer/Chief Financial Officer.
(10)Superintendent of Public Works.
(11)Supervisor of Roads.
(12)Construction Official.
(13)Zoning Officer.
(14)Tax Assessor.
(15)Tax Collector.
(16)Deputy Tax Collector.
(17)Code Enforcement Officer.
(18)Municipal Judge.
(19)Deputy Municipal Court Clerk/Deputy Municipal Court Administrator.
(20)Director, Department of Inspections.
(21)Director, Department of Recreation.
(22)Chief of Police.
(23)Captain, Police Department.
(24)Township Planning Consultant.
§ 19-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-4
1:21
OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE — An officer or employee of the Township of
Dennis or of an agency under the authority of or appointed by the Township
of Dennis.
§ 19-5. Ethical standards.
Officers and employees of the Township of Dennis shall comply with the
following provisions:
(25)Township Auditor.
(26)Township Public Defender.
(27)Planning Board member.
(28)Planning Board Administrator.
(29)Zoning Board of Adjustment member.
(30)Zoning Board of Adjustment Solicitor.
(31)Zoning Board of Adjustment Administrator.
(32)Local Assistance Board member.
(33)Director of Public Assistance.
(34)Municipal Utilities Authority member.
(35)Municipal Utilities Authority Executive Director.
(36)Board of Fire Commissioners member.
(37)Fire Chief.
(38)Board of Fire. Commissioners Attorney.
(39)Library Board of Trustees member.
(40)Director, Dennis Township Public Library.
(41)Township Board of Health member.
(42)Municipal Court Administrator/Municipal Court Clerk.
Any other person who is a managerial executive or confidential
employee, as defined in Section 3 of the New Jersey Employer-
Employee Relations Act, N.J.S.A. 34:13A-3, of the Township of Dennis
or of an agency created under the authority of or appointed by the
Township of Dennis.
(43)
A. No officer or employee of the Township of Dennis or member of his or
her immediate family shall have an interest in a business organization
or engage in any business, transaction or professional activity which is
in substantial conflict with the proper discharge of his or her duties in
the public interest.
§ 19-4 DENNIS CODE § 19-5
1:22
B. No officer or employee shall use or attempt to use his or her official
position to secure unwarranted privileges or advantages for himself or
others.
C. No officer or employee shall act in his or her official capacity in any
matter where he, a member of his or her immediate family or any
business organization in which he or she has an interest has a direct or
indirect financial or personal involvement that might reasonably be
expected to impair his or her objectivity or independence or judgment.
D. No officer or employee shall undertake any employment or service,
whether compensated or not, which might reasonably be expected to
prejudice his or her independence of judgment in the exercise of his or
her official duties.
E. No officer or employee, member of his or her immediate family or any
business organization in which he or she has an interest shall solicit or
accept any gift, favor, political contribution, service, promise of future
employment or other thing of value based upon an under-standing that
the gift, favor, loan, contribution, service, promise or other thing of
value was given or offered for the purpose of influencing him, directly
or indirectly, in the discharge of his or her official duties. This provision
shall not apply to the solicitation or acceptance of contributions to the
campaign of an announced candidate for elective public office, if the
officer has no knowledge or reason to believe that the campaign
contribution, if accepted, was given with the intent to influence the
officer in the discharge of his or her official duties.
F. No officer or employee shall use or allow to be used his or her public
office or employment or any information, not generally available to the
members of the public, which he or she receives or acquires in the
course of and by reason of his or her office or employment, for the
purpose of securing financial gain for himself, any member of his or her
immediate family or any business organization with which he or she is
associated.
G. No officer or employee or any business organization in which he or she
has an interest shall represent any person or party other than the
township in connection with any cause, proceeding, application or other
matter pending before any agency of the Township of Dennis. This
provision shall not be deemed to prohibit an employee from
representing another employee where the representation is within the
context of official labor union or similar representational
responsibilities, nor shall this provision be applicable to the Township
Public Defender with respect to representation of defendants in the
Municipal Court.
H. No officer shall be deemed in conflict with these provisions if, by reason
of his or her participation in the enactment of any ordinance, resolution
or other matter required to be voted upon or which is subject to
executive approval or veto, no material or monetary gain accrues to him
§ 19-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-5
1:23
§ 19-6. Financial disclosure statements.
or her as a member of any business, profession, occupation or group
to any greater extent than any gain could reasonably be expected to
accrue to any other member of such business, profession, occupation or
group.
I. No elected officer shall be prohibited from making an inquiry for
information on behalf of a constituent if no fee, reward or other thing of
value is promised to, given to or accepted by the officer or a member of
his or her immediate family, whether directly or indirectly, in return
therefor.
J. Nothing shall prohibit any officer or employee of the Township of
Dennis or members of his or her immediate family, from representing
himself, herself or themselves, in negotiations or proceedings
concerning his, her or their own interests.
K. No officer or employee elected or appointed in the township shall,
without receiving formal written authorization from the appropriate
person or body, disclose any confidential information concerning any
other officer or employee or any other person or any property or
governmental affairs of the township.
L. Approve or disapprove or in any way recommend the payment of any
bill, voucher or indebtedness owed or allegedly owed by the township in
which he has a direct or indirect personal, pecuniary or private interest.
M. No officer or employee elected or appointed in the township shall
request, use or permit the use of any public property, vehicle,
equipment, labor or service for personal convenience or the private
advantage of himself or any other person. This prohibition shall not be
deemed to prohibit an official or employee from requesting, using or
permitting the use of such public property, vehicle, equipment,
material, labor or service which it is the general practice to make
available to the public at large or which are provided as a matter of
stated public policy for the use of officials and employees in the conduct
of official business.
A. Officers of the township shall annually file a financial disclosure
statement. All financial disclosure statements shall include the
following information which shall specify, where applicable, the name
and address of each source and the officer's job title:
(1) Each source of income, earned and unearned, exceeding $2,000
received by the officer or a member of his or her immediate family
during the preceding calendar year. Individual client fees,
customer receipts or commissions on transactions received
through a business organization need not be separately reported as
sources of income. If a publicly traded security is the source of
income, the security need not be reported unless the local
§ 19-5 DENNIS CODE § 19-6
1:24
§ 19-7. Interpretation.
The provisions set forth in § 19-5 of this chapter and the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.1 et seq. shall serve as the Dennis Township Code of
Ethics.
Chapter 22
government officer or member of his or her immediate family has
an interest in the business organization.
(2) Each source of fees and honorariums having an aggregate amount
exceeding $250 from any single source for personal appearances,
speeches or writings received by the local government officer or a
member of his or her immediate family during the preceding
calendar year.
(3) Each source of gifts, reimbursements or prepaid expenses having
an aggregate value exceeding $400 from any single source,
excluding relatives, received by the local government officer or a
member of his or her immediate family during the preceding
calendar year.
(4) The name and address of all business organizations in which the
local government officer or a member of his or her immediate
family had an interest during the preceding calendar year.
(5) The address and brief description of all real property in the state in
which the local government officer or a member of his or her
immediate family held an interest during the preceding calendar
year.
B. The Township of Dennis adopts the financial disclosure statement form
promulgated by the New Jersey Local Finance Board for filing
purposes. The Township Clerk shall make the forms available to the
officers and employees required to file a disclosure statement.
C. The original statement shall be filed with the Township Clerk within 90
days after the effective date of the New Jersey Local Government Ethics
Law. All subsequent statements shall be filed on or before April 30 of
each year. A copy of the statement shall be filed with the Local Finance
Board in the Division of Local Government Services in the Department
of Community Affairs by the Township Clerk.
D. All financial disclosure statements filed shall be public record.
E. The Township of Dennis recognizes that the Local Finance Board in the
Division of Local Government Services in the Department of Community
Affairs shall have jurisdiction to govern and guide the conduct of local
government officers or employees pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.1 et
seq.
§ 19-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-7
1:25
FIRE DISTRICTS
§ 19-7 DENNIS CODE § 19-7
1:26
ARTICLE I
Fire District No. 1
[Adopted 12-22-1969 as Ord. No. 69.4]
§ 22-1. Establishment; Commissioners; description of boundaries.
A. The following described portion of the Township of Dennis is hereby
established as a fire district, and the Commissioners thereof and their
successors shall be a body corporate to be known by the name of the
"Commissioners of Fire District No. 1, in the Township of Dennis and
County of Cape May."
B. Said property is described as follows:
All of the following described southeasterly part of the Township of
Dennis in the County of Cape May and State of New Jersey as shown on
Sheets Index A, 31, 34, 35, 41, 43, 45, 46, 47 and 48 of the Official Tax
Map of said township and bounded as follows:
Beginning at the easterly corner of the Borough of Woodbine in the
southwesterly line of the Township of Upper and running thence (1)
southeastwardly along the southwesterly line of Upper Township to its
intersection with the westerly line of Sea Isle City to the northeasterly
line of Middle Township; thence (2) along the northeasterly line of
Middle Township in a northwesterly and westerly direction until it
intersects the westerly line of land of Atlantic City Electric Company,
formerly railroad property; thence (3) northeastwardly along the
westerly line of said company land to the center of Hagan Road; thence
(4) northwestwardly along the center of Hagan Road to the northerly
line of Lot 19 of Dennis Township Tax Block 342; thence (5) eastwardly
along the northerly line of lots 19 and 18 to the southwesterly corner
of Lot 5, said block; thence (6) northwestwardly along the westerly line
of said Lot 5 to the center of Dennisville Road; thence (7) bounding
thereon in an easterly direction to the westerly line of Lot 119 of Dennis
Township Tax Block 308; thence (8) northwardly along the westerly line
of said Lot 119 to the southerly line of Lot 109, said Block 308; thence
(9) westwardly along the southerly line of Lot 109 to the southwesterly
corner thereof, thence (10) northwardly along the westerly line of Lot
109 to the northwesterly corner of Lot 109; thence (11) eastwardly
along the northerly line of Lot 109 to the southwesterly corner of
Lot 107; thence (12) northwardly along the westerly line of Lot 107
to the northwesterly corner thereof; thence (13) eastwardly along the
northerly line of Lot 107 to the westerly corner of Lot 108; thence
(14) northwardly along the northwesterly line of Lot 108 to a southerly
line of Sea Isle City Estates; thence (15) westwardly along said line
and along the southerly line of Lot 97 to the northwesterly corner
of Lot 97; thence (16) eastwardly along the northwesterly line of Lot
97 to the southerly corner of Lot 90; thence (17) northwestwardly,
southwestwardly, westwardly, northwardly and westwardly along Lot
90 to the easterly line of Lot 100; thence (18) southwardly along said
§ 22-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-1
1:27
§ 22-2. Powers of Commissioners.
line of Lot 100 to the southerly corner thereof; thence (19) westwardly
along the southwesterly line of Lots 100 and 101 to the westerly corner
of Lot 101; thence (20) northwardly along the westerly line of Lots 101,
78 and 33 to the easterly corner of Lot 32; thence (21) southwesterly
along a line known as the "Societies Line" to the southwesterly corner
of Lot 32; thence (22) northwestwardly along the westerly line of Lots
32, 33 and 34 of said Block 308 to the center of Petersburg Road;
thence (23) bounding thereon northeastwardly and northwardly to its
intersection with a southerly line of the Borough of Woodbine; thence
(24) eastwardly along said Borough line to a corner near Long Bridge
Road; thence (25) northeastwardly along the southeasterly line of the
Borough of Woodbine to its intersection with the southwesterly line of
the Township of Upper and place of beginning containing within these
bounds 20 square miles, be the same more or less.
A. Said fire district shall:
(1) Have the power to hold, purchase, lease and convey, in its
corporate name, such real and personal estate as the purposes of
the fire district shall require.
(2) Have the power to make and use a common seal.
(3) Have the power to sue and be sued.
(4) Be entitled to all the rights, powers and privileges, benefits,
advantages and immunities usual or necessary for the purposes of
providing, maintaining and using means for extinguishing fires in
such district
B. In addition, said fire district shall have all the powers provided in
Chapter 151 of Title 40 of the Revised Statutes of the State of New
Jersey, as amended and supplemented,4 and all other applicable laws
and ordinances.
4. Editor's Note: This legislation, consolidated as N.J.S.A. 40:151-1, was repealed by P.L.
1971, c. 197. See now N.J.S.A. 4OA:14-70.
§ 22-1 DENNIS CODE § 22-2
1:28
ARTICLE II
Fire District No. 2
[Adopted 12-8-1975 as Ord. No. 75-21]
§ 22-3. Establishment; Commissioners; description of boundaries.
A. The following described portion of the Township of Dennis is hereby
established as a fire district, and the Commissioners thereof and their
successors shall be a body corporate to be known under the name of the
"Commissioners of Fire District No. 2 in the Township of Dennis, County
of Cape May."
B. Said area is described as follows:
All the following described central part of the Township of Dennis in the
County of Cape May and State of New Jersey as shown on Sheets Index
A, part of Sheets 17 and 22 and all of Sheets 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29,
30, 32, 32A and 33 of the present Official Tax Map of said township and
bounded as follows:
Beginning in the line between the Townships of Dennis and Middle
which runs from Sluice Creek southeastwardly to Uncle Aaron's Creek
and in the westerly line of Lot 5, Block 500, land of Atlantic City Electric
Company, former railroad property, and extending from said beginning
point (1) northeastwardly along the westerly line of said company land
to the center of Hagan Road; thence (2) northwestwardly along the
center of Hagan Road to the northerly line of Lot 19 of Dennis Township
Tax Block 342; thence (3) eastwardly along the northerly line of Lots
19 and 18 to the southwesterly corner of Lot 5, said block; thence (4)
northwestwardly along the westerly line of said Lot 5 to the center of
Dennisville Road; thence (5) bounding thereon in an easterly direction
to the westerly line of Lot 119 of Dennis Township Tax Block 308;
thence (6) northwardly along the westerly line of said Lot 119 to the
southerly line of Lot 109, said block 308; thence (7) westwardly along
the southerly line of Lot 109 to the southwesterly corner thereof, thence
(8) northwardly along the westerly line of Lot 109 to the northwesterly
corner of Lot 109; thence (9) eastwardly along the northerly line of Lot
109 to the southwesterly corner of lot 107; thence (10) northwardly
along to westerly line of Lot 107 to the northwesterly corner thereof;
thence (11) eastwardly along the northerly line of Lot 107 to the
westerly corner of Lot 108; thence (12) northwardly along the
northwesterly line of lot 108 to a southerly line of Sea Isle City Estates;
thence (13) westwardly along said line and along the southerly line of
lot 97 to the northwesterly corner of Lot 97; thence (14) eastwardly
along the northwesterly line of Lot 97 to the southerly corner of Lot
90; thence (15) northwestwardly, southwestwardly, westwardly,
northwardly and westwardly along Lot 90 to the easterly line of Lot
100; thence (16) southwardly along said line of lot 100 to the southerly
corner thereof; thence (17) westwardly along the southwesterly line
of lots 100 and 101 to the westerly corner of Lot 101; thence (18)
§ 22-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-3
1:29
§ 22-4. Powers of Commissioners.
northwardly along the westerly line of Lots 101, 78 and 33 to the
easterly corner of lot 32; thence (19) southwestwardly along a line
known as the "Societies Line" to the southwesterly corner of Lot 32;
thence (20) northwestwardly along the westerly line of Lots 32, 33 and
34 of said Block 308 to the center of Petersburg Road; thence (21)
bounding thereon northeastwardly and northwardly to its intersection
with a southerly line of the Borough of Woodbine; thence (22)
westwardly along said borough line by its various courses and distances
crossing the railroad, Fidler Road, Tyler Road, Myrtle Avenue and
Dudican Road to the center of Washington Avenue; thence (23)
southwestwardly along the center of Washington Avenue to the center
of New Jersey State Highway Route 47; thence (24) southwestwardly
through Blocks 260 and 259, crossing Robbins Trail, to the mouth of
Robbins Branch in Dennis Creek; thence (25) eastwardly up Dennis
Creek to the mouth of Sluice Creek; thence (26) southeastwardly up
Sluice Creek, crossing New Jersey State Highway Route 47, South
Dennis to Cape May Court House Road and the railroad, to the
northwesterly end of the above described line between the Townships
of Dennis and Middle; thence (27) southeastwardly along said line to
the place of beginning, containing within these bounds 15 square miles,
be the same more or less.
A. Said fire district shall:
(1) Have the power to hold, purchase, lease and convey, in its
corporate name, such real and personal estate as the purposes of
the fire district shall require.
(2) Have the power to make and use a common seal.
(3) Have the power to sue and be sued.
(4) Be entitled to all the rights, powers and privileges, benefits,
advantages and immunities usual or necessary for the purposes of
providing, maintaining and using means for extinguishing fires in
such districts.
B. In addition, said fire district shall have all the powers provided in
Chapter 197 of the Laws of 1971, Statutes of the State of New Jersey, as
amended and supplemented,5 and all other applicable laws and
ordinances.
5. Editor's Note: This legislation, consolidated as N.J.S.A. 40:151-1, was repealed by P.L.
1971, c. 197. See now N.J.S.A. 40A:14-70.
§ 22-3 DENNIS CODE § 22-4
1:30
ARTICLE III
Fire District No. 3
[Adopted 12-8-1975 as Ord. No. 75-22]
§ 22-5. Establishment; Commissioners; description of boundaries.
§ 22-6. Powers of Commissioners.
A. The following described portion of the Township of Dennis is hereby
established as a fire district, and the Commissioners thereof and their
successors shall be a body corporate to be known under the name of the
"Commissioners of Fire District No. 3 in the Township of Dennis, County
of Cape May."
B. Said area is described as follows:
All the following described westerly part of the Township of Dennis,
in the County of Cape May and State of New Jersey, as shown on the
Official Tax Map of said township on Sheets Index A, 1 to 16, part of 17,
all of 18, 19, 20 and 21 and part of 22 and bounded as follows:
Beginning at the northerly corner of the Borough of Woodbine in the
southwesterly line of Upper Township and running thence (1)
southwestwardly along the Borough of Woodbine, crossing the road
leading from Woodbine to Belleplain and other streets and roads to
the center of Washington Avenue; thence (2) southwestwardly along
the center of Washington Avenue to the center of New Jersey State
Highway Route 47; thence (3) southwestwardly through Blocks 260 and
259, crossing Robbins Trail, to the mouth of Robbins Branch in Dennis
Creek; thence (4) westwardly down Dennis Creek to the northeasterly
shoreline of Delaware Bay; thence (5) northwestwardly along said
shoreline to the mouth of West Creek; thence (6) northwardly along
the division line between the Counties of Cape May and Cumberland
to the center of Old Cape Road; thence (7) southestwardly along the
division line between the Townships of Dennis and Upper to the place
of beginning, containing within these bounds 29 square miles, be the
same more or less.
A. Said fire district shall:
(1) Have the power to hold, purchase, lease and convey, in its
corporate name, such real and personal estate as the purposes of
the fire district shall require.
(2) Have the power to make and use a common seal.
(3) Have the power to sue and be sued.
(4) Be entitled to all the rights, powers and privileges, benefits,
advantages and immunities usual or necessary for the purposes of
providing, maintaining and using means for extinguishing fires in
such districts.
§ 22-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-6
1:31
B. In addition, said fire district shall have all the powers provided in
Chapter 197 of the Laws of 1971, Statutes of the State of New Jersey, as
amended and supplemented;6 and all other applicable laws and
ordinances.
6. Editor's Note: This legislation, consolidated as N.J.S.A. 40:151-1, was repealed by P.L.
1971, c. 197. See now N.J.S.A. 40A:14-70.
§ 22-6 DENNIS CODE § 22-6
1:32
Chapter 23
FALSE ALARMS
§ 23-1. False alarms prohibited. [Amended 9-6-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-05]
§ 23-2. Personal appearance of owner or caller required. [Amended
9-6-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-05]
Any owner or occupant of real property situated within the confines of
the Township of Dennis who shall maintain a burglar alarm system, dialer
system or any other security system which causes a call to be placed to
the Dennis Township Emergency Dispatch, any volunteer fire company, or
any rescue squad situate within the confines of the Township of Dennis
or any person or entity who shall place a call to the Dennis Township
Emergency Dispatch, any volunteer fire company, or any rescue squad for
purposes of eliciting a response as set forth in Section 23-1 above shall
appear personally or shall cause his, her or its designated representative
to appear personally at the site of said real property within 30 minutes of
the placing of any call seeking a response aforesaid and shall secure said
premises upon arrival thereat.
§ 23-3. List of contact persons to be submitted. [Amended 9-6-2016
by Ord. No. 2016-05]
Within 30 days of final passage of this chapter, each person or entity
utilizing a burglar alarm system, dialer system or any other security system
which causes a call to be placed to the Dennis Township Emergency
Dispatch any volunteer fire company, or any rescue squad situate within
the confines of the Township of Dennis shall file with the Dennis Township
Emergency Dispatch a prioritized list reflecting the names, addresses and
telephone numbers of three contact persons who may be called by the
Dennis Township Emergency Dispatch to secure any premises which has
A. It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person or entity to place a
call to or otherwise communicate with the Dennis Township Emergency
Dispatch or any duly constituted volunteer fire company or rescue
squad situated within the confines of the Township of Dennis for
purposes of eliciting a response from the State Police, fire company or
rescue squad, as the case may be, in the absence of a bona fide police,
fire and/or medical emergency. For purposes of this chapter, the term
"response" shall be deemed to mean a personal appearance by a police
officer, fire official or rescue squad official.
B. It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person or entity to utilize
the 911 service for purposes of eliciting a response from the Police
Department, Fire Department or rescue squad, as the case may be, in
the absence of a bona fide police, fire, and/or medical emergency.
§ 22-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-3
1:33
generated an alarm call to the aforementioned Police Department,
volunteer fire company and/or rescue squad.
§ 23-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-6-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-05]
Chapter 25
FUNDS
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be liable
to one or more of the following: a fine of not less than $100 nor more
than $1,000 or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days or a
period of community service not to exceed 90 days for every offense.
B. Any person convicted of improperly utilizing the 911 services as set
forth above shall be subject to a fine of up to $200 for the first offense
and up to $500 for the second offense and up to $500 for each
subsequent offense. If the violation of this chapter is of a continuing
nature, each day during which it continues shall constitute a separate
offense for the purpose of this section.
§ 23-3 DENNIS CODE § 23-4
1:34
ARTICLE I
Retirement, Sick and Terminal Leave Trust Fund
[Adopted 11-27-1989 as Ord. No. 89-183]
§ 25-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established a trust fund to be known as the "Retirement,
Sick and Terminal Leave Trust Fund," hereinafter referred to as the "fund,"
pursuant to the rules and regulations established by the New Jersey
Department of Community Affairs.
§ 25-2. Responsibility of Chief Financial Officer.
The Chief Financial Officer shall maintain and bear responsibility for the
fund in the same manner as other public funds.
§ 25-3. Interest.
All interest earned on the fund shall accrue to the fund's principal.
§ 25-4. Estimate of exposure.
The Chief Financial Officer shall annually estimate the probable maximum
exposure of the fund during the coming fiscal year. The Municipal Financial
Officer shall make this estimate on factors including:
§ 25-5. Township budget.
The Township Committee may include, as part of the annual operating
budget for the coming fiscal year, the amount over and above the current
balance in the fund needed to cover the estimate of the Chief Municipal
Financial Officer as the fund exposure for the current fiscal year.
§ 25-6. Eligibility.
All employees retiring or terminating from employment with the Township
of Dennis will be eligible for payment from the fund pursuant to current
township policy relating to retirement and terminal leave benefits.
§ 25-7. Payment of benefits.
A. Expressed employees' intentions to retire or terminate.
B. Current salary levels of such employees.
C. Past retirement experience.
D. Current levels of the fund.
A. All valid claims shall be calculated as of the employee's actual date of
retirement or termination.
§ 25-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-7
1:35
§ 25-8. Inadequate balance.
In the event that the amount of any valid claim for retirement or terminal
leave benefits would exceed the cash balance in the fund at any given
time, payment may be made from the township's current fund or operating
budget at the Township Committee's discretion.
B. The township reserves the right to pay such benefits within a
reasonable time, allowing for due processing of said claims, unless
otherwise specified in a written agreement.
§ 25-7 DENNIS CODE § 25-8
1:36
Chapter 27
(RESERVED)
Editor's Note: Former Chapter 27, Historic Committee, previously
codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 94-269
and 2001-10, was repealed in its entirety 12-6-05 by Ordinance No.
2005-12.
Chapter 29
INTERLOCAL AGREEMENTS
§ 25-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-8
1:37

ARTICLE I
Construction Department Services
[Amended 12-6-05 by Ord. No. 2005-11]
§ 29-1. Preamble.
N.J.S.A. 40:8A-3 et seq. authorizes municipalities to enter into a contract for
the exchange of interlocal services pursuant to the provisions of the statute
known as the "Interlocal Services Act."
The Township Committee has determined it is in the best interest of the
municipality to enter into a contract to provide an interlocal shared services
agreement for certain Construction Department services within the
Township of Middle with the Township of Dennis; and
By entering into an interlocal shared services agreement, the Township of
Dennis can provide this necessary service in the most cost efficient and
effective manner.
§ 29-2. Interlocal Shared Services Agreement.
The Township of Dennis is hereby authorized and empowered to enter
into an Interlocal Shared Services Contract with the Township of Middle
pursuant to the provisions of the Interlocal Services Act, N.J.S.A. 40:8A-1 et
seq., to provide for certain Construction Department services.
§ 29-3. Services/contract.
The Interlocal Shared Services Contract authorized in Section 29-2 hereof
shall cover those services enumerated in said contract, a copy of which is
attached hereto and made a part hereof as an exhibit.7
§ 29-4. Authorization to municipal officials.
The appropriate officers of the Township of Dennis are hereby authorized
and directed to execute an Interlocal Shared Services Agreement with the
Township of Middle for the exchange of said services as set forth herein,
effective on such a date as prescribed by the terms of the statute.
§ 29-5. Statutory requirements.
The Interlocal Shared Services Contract between the Township of Middle
and the Township of Dennis shall meet and satisfy the requirements of
N.J.S.A. 40:8A-6.
§ 29-6. Contract term.
This Article authorizes such Interlocal Shared Services Contract for a term
which will expire December 31, 2009.
7. Editor's Note: The contract referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk.
§ 29-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-6
1:39

ARTICLE II
Dispatching of Emergency Services
[Adopted 3-16-04 as Ord. No. 2004-03]
§ 29-7. Preamble.
N.J.S.A. 40:8A-3 et seq. authorizes municipalities to enter into a contract for
the exchange of interlocal services pursuant to the provisions of the statute
known as the "Interlocal Services Act"; and
The Township Committee has determined it is in the best interest of the
municipality to enter into a contract to provide an interlocal agreement for
the dispatching of emergency services within the Township of Dennis with
the Township of Middle.
By entering into an interlocal agreement, the Township of Dennis can
provide this necessary service in the most cost efficient and effective
manner.
§ 29-8. Interlocal Services Agreement.
The Township of Dennis is hereby authorized and empowered to enter into
an Interlocal Services Contract with the Township of Middle pursuant to the
provisions of the Interlocal Services Act, N.J.S.A. 40:8A-1 et seq., to provide
for dispatching services.
§ 29-9. Services Contract.
The Interlocal Services Contract authorized in Section 29-8 hereof shall
cover those services enumerated in said contract, a copy of which is
attached hereto and made a part hereof as an exhibit.8
§ 29-10. Authorization to Municipal Officials.
The appropriate officers of the Township of Dennis are hereby authorized
and directed to execute an Interlocal Services Agreement with the Township
of Middle for the exchange of said services as set forth herein, effective on
such a date as prescribed by the terms of the statute.
§ 29-11. Statutory Requirements.
The Interlocal Services Contract between the Township of Middle and the
Township of Dennis shall meet and satisfy the requirements of N.J.S.A.
40:8A-6.
§ 29-12. Contract term.
This Article authorizes such Interlocal Services Contract for a term which
will expire December 31, 2006.
8. Editor's Note: The contract referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk.
§ 29-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-12
1:41
Chapter 30
LOCAL ASSISTANCE BOARD
The Local Assistance Board of the Township of Dennis created
pursuant to law consists of five members who serve four-year terms
as provided in NJ.S.A. 44:8-115 et seq.
Chapter 35
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
§ 29-12 DENNIS CODE § 29-12
1:42
ARTICLE I
Chief Financial Officer
[Adopted 2-13-1989 as Ord. No. 89-160]
§ 35-1. Creation of position.
This municipal body herewith creates the position of Chief Financial
Officer.9
§ 35-2. Powers and duties.
The Chief Financial Officer shall have the powers and duties established by
the laws of the State of New Jersey and the ordinances of the Township of
Dennis.
§ 35-3. Compensation.
Compensation for the position of Chief Financial Officer shall be as fixed by
the Township Salary Ordinance.10
9. Editor's Note: The unnumbered paragraph which immediately followed this section and
which appointed Joseph Abbot Chief Financial Officer was deleted at time of adoption of
Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
10.Editor's Note: See Ch. 47, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 35-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-3
1:43

ARTICLE II
Administrative Officer
[Adopted 3-13-1989 as Ord. No. 89-165]
§ 35-4. Assignment of position.
The secretary assigned to the Construction Code Official shall be the
Administrative Officer for the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Dennis
Township.
§ 35-5. Compensation.
Compensation, if any, shall be provided in the Salary Ordinance of the
Township of Dennis.11
11.Editor's Note: See Ch. 47, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 35-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-5
1:45

ARTICLE III
Township Administrator
[Adopted 1-27-1992 as Ord. No. 92-222]
§ 35-6. Creation of position.
The office of Township Administrator is hereby created in and for the
Township of Dennis pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-136, et seq.
§ 35-7. Appointment and term.
The township Administrator shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the Township Committee, and the term of office
of the Township Administrator shall be at the pleasure of the Township
Committee.
§ 35-8. (Reserved) [Repealed 2-3-04 by Ord. No. 2004-01]
§ 35-9. Compensation.
Compensation, if any, to perform the duties and responsibilities of Township
Administrator shall be determined and established by the Township
Committee according to law.
§ 35-10. Qualifications. [Amended 2-3-04 by Ord. No. 2004-01]
The Township Administrator shall possess knowledge and experience in
local government for the appointment as Township Administrator indicated
herein to become effective.
§ 35-11. Powers and duties. [Amended 3-26-19 by Ord. No. 2019-03]
It shall be the duty of the Township Administrator, under the supervision
and control of the Mayor and Township Committee, and to the extent not
prohibited by law:
A. To act as liaison between the Mayor, the Township Committee and all
boards, departments and officers of the Township.
B. To be responsible for the maintenance of sound personnel policies and
administrative practice and to study and make recommendations in
respect to personnel, organization and policies of the Township and any
of its departments. He/she shall have the authority to recommend to the
Mayor and Township Committee discipline of all Township personnel
after the following steps have been taken:
(1) He/she has the authority to issue Preliminary Notices of
Disciplinary Action to Township personnel;
(2) Thereafter, if appealed by the employee, a local hearing on the
disciplinary charges will be held in accordance with the employee's
§ 35-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-11
1:47
§ 35-12. Relationship to other officials or bodies.
Nothing herein contained shall derogate from the powers and duties of the
elective, appointive or other officials of the Township of Dennis or of the
boards and commissions thereof established pursuant to law, nor shall the
rights and tenure of any elected official be affected.
collective bargaining agreement and/or rights vested under the
Civil Service Act, N.J.S.A. 11A and/or the Administrative Code;
(3) The Township Committee has the right to serve as the hearing
officer or the Township Committee, by resolution, has authority to
appoint an independent third party to serve as hearing officer, on a
yearly or individual basis;
(4) If appointed the hearing officer will make his/her findings and
present his/her recommendations to the Township Committee, who
may accept, reject, or modify the same prior to the issuance of a
Final Notice of Disciplinary Action:
(5) The Township Committee can also either confirm, amend, or ignore
the recommended discipline of the hearing officer prior to the
issuance of a Final Notice of Disciplinary Action;
(6) The Township Committee will remain as the final authority and will
keep the absolute power in implementing or rejecting discipline of
Township personnel.
C. To aid in the preparation of the budget, alert department heads to the
submission of their portion thereof and to assist the Township
Committee in obtaining necessary data for the preparation of the
municipal budget.
D. To investigate all complaints regarding township services and, after
consultation with the department head of the service involved, to
answer the same and report the disposition thereof to the Township
Committee.
E. To coordinate for the Township Committee the general affairs of the
township, including purchasing, administration and enforcement of
contracts, leases and franchises.
F. To attend all meetings as directed and authorized by the Township
Committee.
G. To perform such other duties as may from time to time be specifically
assigned to the Township Administrator by the Township Committee.
§ 35-11 DENNIS CODE § 35-12
1:48
ARTICLE IV
Director of Public Works
[Adopted 3-13-00 as Ord. No. 2000-01]
§ 35-13. Position created.
The position of Director of Public Works is hereby created.
§ 35-14. Job description.
§ 35-15. Classification of position.
The Director of Public Works shall be a salaried, nonclassified employee.
§ 35-16. Salary.
The salary for this position shall be $35,000 annual. Thereafter, the annual
salary shall be listed in the Salary Ordinance.12
A. The job description as detailed by the New Jersey Department of
Personnel in its most recent publication will be utilized.
B. The Director of Public Works shall report to the Township Committee,
Township Administrator or designee.
12.Editor's Note: See Ch. 47, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 35-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-16
1:49

ARTICLE V
Dennis Township Historian
[Adopted 6-6-05 as Ord. No. 2005-06]
§ 35-17. Position Created.
There is created the position of Dennis Township Historian.
§ 35-18. Term of office.
The term of office shall be three years.
§ 35-19. Compensation.
The Dennis Township Historian shall serve without compensation but may
be reimbursed for actual out of pocket expenses.
§ 35-20. Powers and duties.
The Dennis Township Historian shall have those powers and duties as set
forth in N.J.S.A. 40:10A-7.
§ 35-21. Clerical assistance.
The local historian may employ such clerical assistance as may be necessary
in order to carry out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this act,
within the limits of such funds as may be made available by the governing
body for such purpose in the annual budget of the local unit.
§ 35-22. Appointment.
The Dennis Township Historian shall be appointed by the Dennis Township
Committee.
§ 35-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-22
1:51

ARTICLE VI
Municipal Engineer
[Adopted 4-16-2012 as Ord. No. 2012-05]
§ 35-23. Appointment.
§ 35-24. Duties; compensation.
A. There shall be a Municipal Engineer appointed by the governing body.
B. The position of Township Engineer within the Township of Dennis salary
ordinance and within the Township of Dennis Civil Service position
listings is hereby eliminated and such position shall be solely on the
basis of a professional services award in accordance with law.
A. Duties.
(1) All contract work related to township projects requiring
engineering is to be compensated out of bond funds; grant funds or
other funds not part of the general fund of the township to the
greatest extent feasible and shall be done on a fixed fee basis to be
negotiated between the Engineer and the Township Committee
prior to the commencement of work on any such project and shall
include all tasks commonly associated with such projects, including
but not limited to preliminary cost estimates, plans, specifications,
processing of change orders, preparation of estimates for payment
of contractors, negotiations with contractors when required
attendance at meetings related to the project, furnishing of line and
grade for contractor, causal inspections of work during
construction and making final inspection of the project. The
township reserves the right to assign such project to alternate
engineer(s) in the sole discretion of the township.
B. Compensation.
(1) The Engineer shall be reimbursed for attending all Township
Committee meetings at the rate established by the governing body.
(2) All other engineering work assigned by the township to the
Municipal Engineer other than work related to Subsection A above,
shall be compensated as per the fee schedule (and contract, if any),
on file with the Township Clerk.
(3) All expenses and out of pocket costs for environmental impact
statements, permit fees, aerial photography, etc. shall be
reimbursed at cost.
§ 35-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-24
1:53

ARTICLE VII
Purchasing Agent
[Adopted 8-3-2015 as Ord. No. 2015-06]
§ 35-25. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Purchasing Agent for the Township
of Dennis.
§ 35-26. Appointment.
The Purchasing Agent shall be appointed by the Township Committee.
§ 35-27. Qualifications.
The Purchasing Agent is required to possess a valid Qualified Purchasing
Agent certificate, as issued by the New Jersey Division of Local Government
Services, Department of Community Affairs.
§ 35-28. Powers and duties.
The Purchasing Agent shall have, on behalf of the Township Committee of
the Township of Dennis, the authority, responsibility and accountability for
the purchasing activity pursuant to Local Public Contracts Law (N.J.S.A.
40A:11-1 et seq.); to prepare public advertising for and to receive bids and
requests for proposals for the provision or performance of goods, services
and construction contracts; to award contracts pursuant to New Jersey law
in accordance with the regulations, forms and procedures promulgated by
state regulatory agencies; and conduct any activities as may be necessary
or appropriate to the purchasing function of the Township of Dennis.
§ 35-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-28
1:55
Chapter 40
PERSONNEL POLICIES
§ 35-28 DENNIS CODE § 35-28
1:56
ARTICLE I
Insurance for Retired Employees
[Adopted 9-24-1984 as Ord. No. 84-114; amended 7-15-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003-05]
§ 40-1. Continuance of coverage.13
The continuance of group insurance coverage after retirement benefits
provided by N.J.S.A. 40A:10-22 shall be available to retired employees of the
township.
§ 40-2. Costs of coverage.14 [Amended 10-21-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-09]
A. As to retired employees with 25 years or more of service, or with 20
years of continuous service upon attaining the age 62, the township
shall assume the entire costs of such coverage for the retired
employees and their spouses, as provided by N.J.S.A. 40A:10-23.
B. As to retired employees on a disability pension, who have met the State
of New Jersey Public Employees' Retirement System qualifications, the
township shall assume the entire costs of such coverage for the retired
employees and their dependents, as provided by N.J.S.A. 40A:10-23.
13.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
14.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 40-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-2
1:57

ARTICLE II
Retiree Health Benefits
[Adopted 8-25-97 by Ord. No. 97-12; amended 7-15-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003-05]
§ 40-3. Preamble.
The Township of Dennis currently participates in the New Jersey State
Health Benefits Program for health benefits coverage for its employees.
The township desires to clarify the position regarding retiree health
benefits; and the Township Committee intends to establish this policy
pursuant to the provisions contained in this Article.
§ 40-4. Policy established. [Amended 10-21-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-09]
A. The averments of the preamble are incorporated herein by reference.
B. All employees who retire with 25 years of continuous service, or with 20
years of continuous service upon attaining the age 62, shall, for
themselves and their spouses, continue to receive those health
insurance benefits afforded to full time employees until they qualify for
Medicare at which time the township will continue to supply the
necessary supplemental insurance pursuant to the provisions then
existing with the New Jersey State Health Benefits Plan, as provided by
N.J.S.A. 52:14-17.38.
C. All employees who retire on a disability pension, who have met the
State of New Jersey Public Employees' Retirement System
qualifications shall, for themselves and their dependents, continue to
receive those health insurance benefits afforded to full time employees
until they qualify for Medicare at which time the township will continue
to supply the necessary supplemental insurance pursuant to the
provisions then existing with the New Jersey State Health Benefits Plan.
D. In the event that, at the time of the retired employee's death there is a
surviving spouse, the township shall provide the same benefits to the
surviving spouse as it would have provided to the retired employee.
[Amended 5-8-00 by Ord. No. 2000-05]
E. In the event that, at the time of the disabled retired employee's death
there is a surviving spouse and dependents, the township shall provide
the same benefits to them as it would have provided to the disabled
retired employee.
F. In the event that the township, at its sole option, becomes self-insured
or it provides any other form of health insurance to its full time
employees, for medical coverage, the retired and the disabled retired
employees and their qualifying dependents, if any, shall receive the
same benefits afforded to full time employees including the same
§ 40-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-4
1:59
supplements then necessary to supplement Medicare benefits in order
to equalize them with the then existing benefits given to full time
employees.
G. This policy shall be incorporated into the Township of Dennis Personnel
Handbook under the section entitled, "Employee Benefits".
§ 40-4 DENNIS CODE § 40-4
1:60
ARTICLE III
Required Criminal History Record Background Checks
[Adopted 10-01-01 as Ord. No. 2001-09]
§ 40-5. Definitions.
As used in this Article:
§ 40-6. Requests for criminal record history background check;
costs.
A. CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD BACKGROUND CHECK - A
determination of whether a person has a criminal record by crossreferencing
that person's name and/or fingerprints with those on file
with the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Identification Division and/or
the State Bureau of Investigation of the New Jersey State Police.
B. CRIMINAL RECORD HISTORY INFORMATION OR CRHI - Information
collected by criminal justice agencies concerning persons and stored in
the computerized databases of the New Jersey State Police SBI
Criminal History Information System, the National Law Enforcement
Telecommunications System ("NLETS") or other states' computerized
repositories containing criminal history record information consisting
of identifiable descriptions and notations of arrests, indictments, or
other formal criminal charges, and any dispositions arising therefrom,
including convictions, dismissals, acquittals, sentencing, correctional
supervision and release.
C. NON-CRIMINAL JUSTICE PURPOSE - Any purpose, other than
administration of criminal justice or criminal justice purpose, including
employment and licensing, for which applicant fingerprints or name
search requests are submitted by authorized requesters, as required or
permitted by a federal or state statute, rule or regulation, executive
order, administrative code provision, local ordinance, resolution or by
this chapter, to the State Bureau of Identification for the dissemination
of criminal history record information.
D. EMPLOYEES INVOLVED WITH TOWNSHIP PROGRAMS OR SERVICES
FOR MINORS - Employees of the Township of Dennis who are assigned
to the Recreation Department.
E. CERTAIN EMPLOYEES INCLUDING CONSTRUCTION OFFICE
INSPECTORS, CONSTABLES AND TAX OFFICE FIELD INSPECTORS -
Employees assigned to the Construction Office who perform
inspections, employees with the designation of Constable and
employees assigned to the Tax Assessor's Office who participate in field
inspections.
F. STATE BUREAU OF IDENTIFICATION OR S.B.I. - The State Bureau of
Identification created by P.L. 1930, c. 65 (N.J.S.A. 52:1-12 et seq.) as a
bureau within the Division of State Police.
§ 40-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-6
1:61
§ 40-7. Conditions under which an employee shall be disqualified
from employment.
A. The township requires that all current and prospective employees of the
abovementioned departments submit to criminal record history
background checks through the State Bureau of Investigation.
B. All such current and prospective employees of the abovementioned
departments shall complete and execute a "Request for Criminal
History Record Information" form SBI-19 or SBI-19A (for a criminal
record history background check by fingerprint analysis), form SBI-212
or SBI-212A (for a criminal record background check by name search),
or any other form prescribed by the State Bureau of Investigation as
requested by the Clerk/Administrator of the Township of Dennis, or his
designee. The employees shall complete these forms in their entirety
and shall provide all the information required to complete the check,
including the name of the subject, the date of birth of the subject, the
social security number of the subject, and where required, an
impression of the subject's fingerprints. Pursuant to the Privacy Act of
1974 (P.L. 93-579), the furnishing of social security numbers is
voluntary, and the employee's social security number may only be used
for purposes of processing requests for criminal history record
information.
C. The Clerk/Administrator and the Township Solicitor of the Township of
Dennis shall be responsible for implementation and administration of
the provisions of this Article, provided, however, that the
responsibilities contained herein may be delegated in whole or in part
to one or more subordinate officers.
D. The township shall bear any costs associated with conducting criminal
record history background check for employees for the
abovementioned departments.
A. An employee may be disqualified from serving in such a capacity if that
person's criminal record history background check reveals a record of
conviction of any of the following crimes and offenses:
(1) In New Jersey, any crime:
(a) Involving danger to the person, meaning those crimes set forth
in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1 et seq., N.J.S.A. 2C:12-1 et seq., N.J.S.A.
2C:13-1 et seq., N.J.S.A. 2C:14-1 et seq., or N.J.S.A. 2C: 15-1 et
seq.;
(b) Against the family, children or incompetents, meaning those
crimes set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C: 14-1 et seq.;
(c) Involving theft as set forth in Chapter 20 of Title SC of the New
Jersey Statutes;
§ 40-6 DENNIS CODE § 40-7
1:62
§ 40-8. Submissions; exchange of background check information.
§ 40-9. Limitations on access to criminal history record
information.
(d) Involving any controlled dangerous substance or controlled
substance analog as set forth in Chapter 35 of Title 2C, except
Paragraph (A) of subsection (a) of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-10.
(2) In any other state or jurisdiction, conduct which, if committed in
New Jersey, would constitute any of the crimes described in
Subsection A(1) of the section.
B. For purposes of interpreting the information recorded in a criminal
history record to determine the qualifications of the employee for
prospective or continued employment, the township shall presume that
the employee is innocent of any charges or arrests for which there are
no final dispositions indicated on the record.
A. Current and prospective employees shall submit all information
required, including without limitation their name, address, fingerprints
and written consent to the township for the criminal record history
background check to be performed.
B. The Clerk/Administrator of the township shall act as a clearinghouse for
the collection and dissemination of information obtained as a result of
conducting criminal record history background checks pursuant to this
Article.
A. Access to criminal history record information for non-criminal justice
purposes, including licensing and employment applications, shall be
limited to members of the Township Committee, the Clerk/
Administrator, or the Clerk/Administrator's designee(s), on a need to
know basis, as authorized by federal or state statute, rule or regulation,
executive order, administrative code, local ordinance or resolution
regarding obtaining and dissemination of criminal history record
information obtained under this Article.
B. Such persons or organizations shall limit their use of criminal history
record information solely to the authorized purpose for which it was
obtained and criminal history record information shall not be
disseminated to persons or organizations not authorized to receive the
records for authorized purposes. Use of this record shall be limited
solely for the authorized purpose for which it was given and it shall not
be disseminated to any unauthorized persons. The records so obtained
shall be destroyed immediately after it has served its intended and
authorized purpose. Any person violating federal or state regulations
governing access to criminal history record information may be subject
to criminal and/or civil penalties.
§ 40-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-10
1:63
§ 40-10. Employee may challenge accuracy of report.
If any information obtained by a criminal record history background check
may disqualify the employee from continued or prospective employment,
the person making such a determination shall provide the employee with
an opportunity to complete and challenge the accuracy of the information
contained in the criminal history record. The employee shall be afforded a
reasonable period of time to correct and complete the record. For purposes
of interpreting the information recorded in a criminal history record to
determine the qualifications of the employee for prospective or continued
employment, the township shall presume that the employee is innocent of
any charges or arrests for which there are no final dispositions indicated on
the record.
§ 40-10 DENNIS CODE § 40-10
1:64
Chapter 41
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
§ 40-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-10
1:65

ARTICLE I
Recognition of Senior Citizen and/or Cultural and Heritage
Organizations
[Amended 2-16-10 by Ord. No. 2010-01]
§ 41-1. Application for recognition.
§ 41-2. Standards for review.
The standards of review to be applied by the Municipal Clerk shall be as
follows:
§ 41-3. Submission of the application to the Township Committee.
A. The Municipal Clerk shall provide an application form to any township
organization desiring to assist the township in promoting senior citizen
and/or cultural and heritage activities with township support. See
appendix for form of application.15
B. Upon receipt of a completed application the Municipal Clerk shall
review the same within 30 days and render a written report of
recommendations to the Township Committee.
A. Review bylaws.
(1) Nondiscrimination. Any bylaws which contain discriminatory or
unfair provisions or discriminate in membership shall be rejected.
(2) Equipment. Bylaws must contain provisions that any equipment
purchased and to be used in the activity of the organization is to be
donated to the township for use by that organization.
(3) Minutes and financial records. Bylaws are to provide that written
minutes be maintained of all meetings of the organization and that
said minutes shall be available during normal business hours for
review by the public at a location within the township. The bylaws
shall provide that all financial records and statements of the
organization be deposited annually with the Administrator and
housed within the township and shall be available during normal
business hours for review by the public.
B. Need for organization. The Municipal Clerk shall conduct a review to
determine the need by the township for the assistance offered by the
organization.
C. Membership. Membership in the organization shall be comprised of at
least 60% township residents.
15.Editor's Note: The appendix referred to herein is included as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 41-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 41-3
1:67
§ 41-4. Supervision of organization.
§ 41-5. Annual reapplication.
All recognized organizations shall, on an annual basis, reapply for
recognition by the township. Said organization shall submit an application
at least 30 days prior to the expiration of one year recognition. The
Municipal Clerk shall review the application in the same manner as noted
above with the Township Committee to review as noted above.
§ 41-6. through § 41-8. (Reserved)
A. Upon completion of said application and application procedure, the
Municipal Clerk shall submit the application and his/her
recommendation to the Township Committee.
B. The Township Committee shall review the application, consider the
recommendations of the Municipal Clerk and public comment. The
Township Committee shall render a decision by resolution on whether
to recognize an applicant organization.
A. Any recognized organization shall be under the control, supervision and
direction of the sponsoring township agency.
B. Any recognized organization shall have the responsibility of reporting
to the Committee member in charge of said department, who shall have
the final decision making authority.
§ 41-3 DENNIS CODE § 41-6
1:68
ARTICLE II
Volunteer Incentives
[Adopted 8-13-01 by Ord. No. 2001-05]
§ 41-9. Purpose.
It is desirable to establish an incentive program to increase and maintain
enrollment in the Volunteer Fire Department, Rescue Squad and Office of
Emergency Management within the Township of Dennis and to reward such
volunteers for their tireless efforts and many hours spent to preserve and
protect the health, property and welfare of the residents of the Township of
Dennis which services are provided without compensation 24 hours per day.
§ 41-10. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to this Article:
§ 41-11. Incentives.
All active members of the Township of Dennis Fire Department, Rescue
Squad and Office of Emergency Management defined above shall be entitled
to the following benefits:
A. VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATION - The Fire Department, Rescue Squad
and Office of Emergency Management of the Township of Dennis.
B. ACTIVE MEMBER - Individuals residing in the Township of Dennis and
who are members of the Volunteer Fire Department, Rescue Squad and
Office of Emergency Management who meet the definition of either
active member or exempt member as established by the bylaws of the
volunteer organizations as are in effect on the effective date of this
Article.
C. FEES - Limited to those charges listed below which are fully retained by
the Township of Dennis as revenue. Specifically excluded is any portion
of the fee collected by the township on behalf of another entity,
including but not limited to the state, county, or outside vendor.
A. Exemption from the municipal portion of the Uniform Construction
Code fees for the issuance of a building permit required in connection
with either the construction of a new single family home or an addition
or repairs to an existing single family home. Said fee exemption is not to
exceed $500 and the dwelling must be owned and occupied by the
active member.
B. Exemption from the municipal portion of the fees for the issuance of a
permit required in connection with the use of the municipal boatlaunching
ramp.
C. Exemption from the municipal portion of marriage license fees for the
active member; certified copies of marriage licenses for the active
member, and certified copies of birth and death certificates for
§ 41-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 41-11
1:69
§ 41-12. Administration.
§ 41-13. Exclusions.
No exemption shall be allowed for the following fees:
immediate members of the active member's family (father, mother,
children).
A. On or about January 1st of each calendar year the township's Fire
Chiefs, Rescue Chiefs and Coordinator of Emergency Management
shall submit to the Township Clerk a list of all individuals who meet the
definition for active member status, updated to add those individuals
who have completed their probationary period or to delete individuals
who have been dropped from membership or who no longer meet the
criteria for active member status.
B. All active members and their family where applicable, must comply with
all registration procedures and complete all application forms
established by the Township of Dennis.
A. Fees, licenses and permits associated with any for profit activity.
B. Inclusion in programs when the registration is received after maximum
registration has been reached.
C. Fees and escrows required by either the Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment in connection with any site plan or subdivision application.
D. Escrows associated with engineering inspections.
E. Posting of Performance Guarantees where required or permitted by law.
§ 41-11 DENNIS CODE § 41-13
1:70
ARTICLE III
Criminal Background Checks for Volunteer Youth Sports Coaches
[Adopted 7-18-06 as Ord. No. 2006-12]
§ 41-14. Required.
No volunteer shall coach any Dennis Township recognized youth sports
team without obtaining a criminal background check.
§ 41-15. Policy.
The Recreation Department shall prepare a written policy for criminal
background checks.16
16.Editor's Note: The Policy for Criminal Background Checks is included as an attachment to
this chapter.
§ 41-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 41-15
1:71

ARTICLE IV
Administration and Operation of Government
[Adopted 11-16-10 as Ord. No. 2010-07]
§ 41-16. Required courses in local government.
All elected officials in the Township of Dennis shall attend basic courses on
their responsibilities and obligations in local government.
§ 41-17. Absence from Meetings Policy adopted.
The township herewith adopts the State's absence from meetings policy as
the official Absence from Meetings Policy of the Township of Dennis.
§ 41-18. Shared Services Agreements.
The Township of Dennis shall establish greater Shared Service Agreements
either as a provider or receiver for Public Works equipment, rolling stock
or services on a regular basis. The township does have a Shared Services
Agreement with the Township of Middle for Public Works Equipment as
well as one with the Township of Upper providing for township personnel in
Upper Township and Dennis Township to act for each other in the event of
conflicts or unavailability.
§ 41-19. Minutes available on township website.
Approved minutes and agendas of the Township of Dennis Planning Board,
Zoning Board and Township Committee as well as any other commission in
the Township of Dennis, shall be made available on the Dennis Township
website.
§ 41-20. Proposed ordinances and public notices on township
website.
Proposed ordinances for public hearing and all other public notices shall be
on the Dennis Township website.
§ 41-21. Shared equipment with the Board of Education.
The Township of Dennis has from time to time and shall continue in the
future to share equipment and other purchases with the Dennis Township
Board of Education.
§ 41-22. Open budget presentation for school budget and municipal
budget.
Commencing forthwith the Township Committee shall establish a meeting
with the Dennis Township School Board and establish a procedure to have
an open budget presentation of both the school budget and the municipal
budget in the same form for public review and questions.
§ 41-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 41-22
1:73
Chapter 42
POLITICAL FUNDRAISING
§ 41-22 DENNIS CODE § 41-22
1:74
ARTICLE I
Prohibited On or By Use of Public Property
§ 42-1. Short title.
An ordinance banning the use of government buildings and equipment for
political fundraising.
§ 42-2. Purpose.
Our laws in New Jersey do not presently ban solicitation or acceptance of
political contributions by public office holders and employees while in any
room or building occupied in the discharge of official duties.
Solicitation and acceptance of political contributions in rooms and buildings
occupied in the discharge of official municipal business undermines the
efficiency of government by taking officials and employees away from the
people's business, and leads to the appearance of improper influence of
political contributions on government functions.
Prohibiting the solicitation and acceptance of political contributions in
rooms and buildings occupied in the discharge of official duties will address
these harms and leave open ample alternative venues for political
fundraising.
Our laws in New Jersey do not presently recognize the misuse of public
property for political fundraising as a distinct offense.
Therefore, it is accordingly found and determined that the municipality's
interests in an independent and efficient government workforce and a
government that is undermined by neither the fact nor appearance of
improper influence of political contributions on government decisions
require the prohibition of political fundraising in rooms or buildings
occupied in the discharge of official duties or through the use of public
property.
§ 42-3. Definitions.
A. CANDIDATE — (1) any individual seeking election to a public office of
the federal, state, county or municipal government, or school district or
political party, and (2) any individual who shall have been elected or
failed of election to any such office.
B. POLITICAL CONTRIBUTION — Any loans and transfers of money or
other things of value to any candidate, elected official, or representative
of any political organization, or other commitments or assumptions of
liability to make any such transfer. Political contributions shall be
deemed to have been made upon the date when such commitment is
made or liability assumed.
C. POLITICAL ORGANIZATION — Any two or more persons acting jointly,
or any corporation, partnership or other incorporated or
§ 42-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-3
1:75
§ 42-4. General Regulations.
unincorporated association which is organized to, or does, aid or
promote the nomination, election or defeat of any candidate or
candidates for federal, state, county, municipal or school board office
or political party office. "Political organization" includes, but is not
limited to, organizations defined in N.J.S.A. 19:44A-3 as a "political
party committee", "joint candidate committee", "continuing political
committee", "political party committee", "candidate committee", or
"legislative leadership committee."
D. MUNICIPALITY — The government of the municipality, including any
officer, department, board, commission or agency thereof.
E. MUNICIPAL OFFICIAL, EMPLOYEE and APPOINTEE — Any person
holding elective municipal office or holding an appointed position in the
municipal government, or in any agency, commission, board, or office
thereof, whether the position is a full time or part time, compensated or
uncompensated; and any employee of municipal government or of any
municipal agency, commission, board, or office thereof, whether the
position is full time or part time.
F. SOLICIT — To ask for, by oral or written communication, a contribution
as that term is defined herein.
G. PUBLIC PROPERTY — All personal property owned, leased, or
controlled by the municipal government, including but not limited to
vehicles, phones, fax machines, computers, stationery including
municipal letterhead, postage, and other office equipment.
A. Prohibition against soliciting or accepting political contribution in
rooms or buildings occupied in the discharge of public duties. No
municipal official, employee or appointee may solicit, commit to pay, or
receive payment of or a commitment to pay any political contribution
for any candidate, elected official or political organization while in any
room or building occupied in the discharge of official municipal
business. This section shall include solicitation or acceptance of
political contributions made over a private cell phone or by use of a
private computer, if the person soliciting or accepting the political
contribution, or using the cell phone or computer for purposes of
soliciting or accepting the political contribution, is in any room or
building occupied in the discharge of official municipal business.
B. Prohibition against use of public property for political fundraising. No
municipal official, employee, or appointee may solicit, commit to pay, or
receive payment of or a commitment to pay any political contribution
for any candidate, elected official or political organization, while
utilizing public property.
C. Violation. Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished by
a period of community service not exceeding 90 days or imprisonment
§ 42-3 DENNIS CODE § 42-4
1:76
in the county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days or a fine not
exceeding $1,000.
§ 42-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-4
1:77
Chapter 44
PURCHASING
§ 42-4 DENNIS CODE § 42-4
1:78
ARTICLE I
Cooperative Pricing Agreement
[Adopted 4-13-1987 as Ord. No. 87-135]
§ 44-1. Title.
This Article shall be known and may be cited as the "Cooperative Pricing
Ordinance of the County of Cape May."
§ 44-2. Authorization for entry into agreements. [Amended
12-10-1990 by Ord. No. 90-204]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:11-11(5), the Township of Dennis
is hereby authorized to enter into a cooperative pricing agreement with the
County of Cape May, hereinafter referred to as the "lead agency," or any
other contracting unit within the County of Cape May for the purchase of
work, materials and supplies.
§ 44-3. Compliance with statutes required.
The lead agency entering into contracts on behalf of the Township of Dennis
shall be responsible for complying with the provisions of the Local Public
Contracts Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.) and all other provisions of the New
Jersey Statutes Annotated.
§ 44-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-3
1:79

ARTICLE II
Purchasing Procedures
[Adopted 6-10-1991 as Ord. No. 91-21017]
§ 44-4. Statement of policy.
It is the established policy of this township that no article or service shall
be contracted for or purchased by any department, board, agency, office
or employee of the Township of Dennis except in accordance with the
procedures set forth herein.
§ 44-5. Disclaimer of liability; noncompliance by township
personnel.
The Township of Dennis will not be bound by any purchase or contract
which is made contrary to the policy expressed in this Article and
particularly in § 44-4 hereof. Any officer, official, employee or representative
of the Township of Dennis who violates the policy may be subject to
disciplinary action as well as personal liability for any costs or obligations
improperly incurred.
§ 44-6. Standard purchasing procedures.
A. Standard purchasing procedures. The initial step in the purchasing
cycle is the preparation of a request for purchase (requisition), which is
a two-part form used to request goods, materials and services. The
request for purchase requisition should be typewritten or printed. The
department head should only requisition budgeted items. Nonbudgeted
items or services shall require the prior approval of the Chief Finance
Officer/Treasurer with the concurrence of the member of the Township
Committee assigned to oversee such department. Purchases of an
emergent nature will be processed using the emergency procedures.
Adjustments to a department's budgeted items should be considered
when purchasing previously nonbudgeted items.
B. Quote comparison sheets. Quote comparison sheets will be available
from the Chief Finance Officer/Treasurer's Office and shall be prepared
for items totaling more than $6,000, or as set forth in statutes, at the
Chief Finance Officer/QPA's discretion. [Amended 12-6-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-09; 3-26-19 by Ord. No. 2019-02]
C. Request for purchase. The following information is required for all
requests for purchase. The numbers preceding each item of information
will correspond to those found on sample forms which may be obtained
from the Chief Finance Officer/ Treasurer's Office.
(1) Vendor's name and address: complete name and address of the
vendor. Please include all post office box numbers and zip codes.
17.Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. II, Purchasing Procedures,
adopted 5-11-1987 as Ord. No. 87-136.
§ 44-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-6
1:81
(2) Purchase order number: this number will be filled in by the Chief
Finance Officer/Treasurer's Office at the time of Purchase Order
approval.
(3) Account or appropriation number: account number to be charged.
(4) Department/Division: full name of department or division
requesting purchase.
(5) Date: date of request.
(6) Required delivery date: date that you would require delivery; to
assure delivery is on time, ascertain as applicable lead time(s),
including ordering, design, manufacture or production and
shipping data, if item is not stocked.
(7) Deliver to: delivery point, Township Hall or Public Works. Specific
information is to be supplied, including full name and to whom
delivery should be made, if applicable.
(8) Quantity: provide specific data relative to quantity required and
shipping unit (box, carton, case, etc.).
(9) Description/stock number: provide full description of requested
purchase. Be as specific as possible. Description should include
model number, size, full specifications of required purchase.
(10) Price: exact price of each unit.
(11) Amount: provide total price, including shipping charges. While
every attempt should be made to determine the total price, it may
be necessary, on occasion, to estimate shipping charges.
(12) Signature: signature of person requesting purchase [see
Subsection C(13) below].
(13) Approval: signature of department head or individual to whom
authority has been delegated by department head. A request for
purchase of budgeted items were total cost will not exceed $500
requires only the approval of the department head and Chief
Finance Officer. Purchases where the total costs exceed five
hundred dollars ($500.00) dollars would require the approval of the
department head, Chief Finance Officer/Treasurer and
Administrator. [Amended 7-24-1995 by Ord. No. 95-14;
3-26-19 by Ord. No. 2019-02]
(14) Approval as to availability of funds: the signature of the Chief
Finance Officer/Treasurer shall be required, indicating funds are
available for this purchase.
D. No order is to be placed or a commitment made except by an approved
written purchase order issued in accordance with the procedures
§ 44-6 DENNIS CODE § 44-6
1:82
outlined herein or by the Emergency Purchase Procedure which is
hereinafter specified.
E. The request for purchase must be approved and signed by the
department head. The request for purchase should be submitted well in
advance of the time the goods, materials or service is needed to allow
sufficient time for review and for preparation of specifications, for
advertisements for bids (when required) or for the solicitation of
informal quotations for other than routine purchases and for those
quotations which involve more complex or technical purchases.
F. The original of the request for purchase shall be forwarded to the Chief
Finance Officer/Treasurer. The requesting department should retain a
photocopy for its file. If the request for purchase is not properly
completed, it will be returned to the originating department head for
correction, additional information or clarification. The Chief Finance
Officer/Treasurer will also review a unit's requisition, making necessary
consolidations and standardizations with the requests of other units.
Requesting units should be advised and consulted when
standardizations are made. Based on the total and aggregate dollar
amount of the purchase requests, written specifications and sealed bids
or informal solicited quotations may be required. To record the request,
the original of the requisition is retained by the Chief Finance Officer/
Treasurer's Office and filed numerically with the approved purchase
order. State-approved contract vendors or cooperative pricing system
vendors pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:11-11(5), as amended and
supplemented from time to time, may also be used to fulfill the
contracting unit's needs. Before any formal commitment is made to a
vendor and prior to the issuance of a purchase order, the availability of
funds must be determined pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:30-14.5, as amended
and supplemented from time to time.
G. If the purchase order cannot be approved, the Chief Finance Officer/
Treasurer's Office will provide the requesting department head with a
written explanation. In the case of an emergency, the preparation and
release of a purchase order is the sole and exclusive duty of the Chief
Finance Officer/Treasurer.
H. The Chief Finance Officer/Treasurer's Office shall prepare, as a
minimum, a threepart purchase order. The numbers shown below
correspond to the numbers found on the sample form available from the
Chief Finance Officer/Treasurer's Office: [Amended 7-25-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-14; 12-6-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-09; 3-26-19 by Ord.
No. 2019-02]
(1) Part One: Voucher for Payment.
(a) Vendor's certification: signature of vendor and date.
§ 44-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-6
1:83
(b) Department head approval: the voucher will be returned to the
department head by the Chief Finance Officer/Treasurer's
Office for signature.
(c) Date of payment: shall be inserted by the Chief Finance
Officer/Treasurer's Office at time of payment.
(d) Check number: the check number will be inserted by the Chief
Finance Officer/Treasurer's Office at time of payment.
(e) Approval as to availability of funds: The signature of Chief
Finance Officer/Treasurer or Deputy Treasurer shall be
required, indicating funds are available for this purchase.
(2) Part Two: Vendor or file copy.
(a) Vendor/name and address: complete name and address of
vendor. Please include all post office box and zip codes.
(b) Purchase order number: This number is preprinted and
consecutively numbered.
(c) Department/division: full name of department or division and
account number to be charged.
(d) Date: date purchase order is typed.
(e) Deliver to: delivery point, Township Hall or Public Works.
Specific information to be supplied, including full name and to
whom delivery should be made, if applicable.
(f) Attention of: specific person to whom delivery should be made.
(g) Quantity/unit: provide specific date relative to quantity
required and shipping unit (box, carton, case, etc.).
(h) Full description of requested purchase: a full description of the
items or services to be purchased. Additional sheets shall be
used if necessary. Under no circumstances should an additional
purchase order form be utilized.
(i) Price: exact price of each unit.
(j) Amount: provide total price, including shipping charges. While
every attempt should be made to determine the total price, it
may be necessary, on occasion, to estimate shipping charges.
(k) Contract number: enter the state contract number of vendor,
or if bid item, the date of award.
(l) Required delivery date: date that you would require delivery;
to assure delivery is on time, ascertain as applicable lead
time(s), including ordering, design, manufacture or product
ion and shipping data, if item is not stocked.
§ 44-6 DENNIS CODE § 44-6
1:84
§ 44-7. Emergency purchases. [Amended 3-26-19 by Ord. No.
2019-02]
Emergency purchases shall only be authorized when a situation requires
the immediate purchase or delivery of goods or services to meet an actual
danger to the public health, safety or welfare. The head of the department
requesting an emergency purchase shall contact the Administrator in order
to receive approval. In the absence, of the Administrator, the Chief Finance
Officer should be requested to declare an emergency. On the next working
day following the emergency, the department head shall submit a written
report to the Chief Finance Officer/Treasurer describing the emergency and
the steps taken to resolve the matter. The Chief Finance Officer/Treasurer
should execute a purchase order, and the request for purchase should be
submitted routinely to the Chief Finance Officer/Treasurer's Office.
§ 44-8. Availability of funds. [Amended 3-26-19 by Ord. No.
2019-02]
The Chief Finance Officer/Treasurer's Office shall properly complete and
determine that legally appropriated and sufficient funds are available. The
availability of funds will be certified by the Chief Finance Officer/Treasurer
or the Deputy Treasurer pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:30-14.5, as amended and
supplemented. The certified purchase order forms shall be signed by the
Chief Finance Officer/Treasurer's Office, the purchase order parts shall be
distributed as follows:
§ 44-9. Responsibility of vendor. [Amended 3-26-19 by Ord. No.
2019-02]
On receipt of the purchase order, the vendor performs accordingly in
providing the goods or services. The vendor returns the signed voucher
(Part 1) and the original invoice(s) to the Chief Finance Officer/Treasurer's
Office, which forwards to the requesting department head for signature.
(m) Total: enter the total cost for all of the items on the purchase
order.
(3) Part Three: Department Copy.
A. Parts One and Two: forwarded to the vendor to place the order, Part 2 to
remain with the vendor, Part 1 (voucher) to be returned by the vendor
with his invoice(s) when requesting or claiming payment.
B. Part Three: forwarded to the requesting department serving notice that
the order has been placed, to be filed in an open requisition file by
commodity service title and stapled with the duplicate requisition.
§ 44-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-10
1:85
§ 44-10. Prior authorization required for training, seminars or
education. [Amended 7-24-1995 by Ord. No. 95-14]
Prior to the enrollment of any training course, seminar or continuing
education program, the employee shall be required to submit a letter of
request to their department head who shall then be required to submit his/
her recommendation to the Administrator for his approval or denial. Upon
approval of the Administrator, the employee shall then prepare a requisition
for submission to the Chief Finance Officer.
§ 44-10 DENNIS CODE § 44-10
1:86
ARTICLE III
South Jersey Power Cooperative
[Adopted 8-9-99 as Ord. No. 99-11]
§ 44-11. Title.
This Article shall be known and may be cited as the Cooperative Pricing
Ordinance of the South Jersey Power Cooperative.
§ 44-12. Authorization to enter agreement.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:11-11(5), the Township of Dennis
is hereby authorized to enter into a cooperative pricing agreement with the
lead agency for the purchase of electricity and natural gas.
§ 44-13. Compliance with statutes required.
The lead agency entering into contracts on behalf of the Township of Dennis
shall be responsible for complying with the provisions of the Local Public
Contracts Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.) and all other provisions of the
Revised Statutes of the State of New Jersey.
§ 44-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-13
1:87
Chapter 44A
RECREATION CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM
§ 44A-1. Incorporation of provisions.
The statements of the preamble are incorporated herein by this reference
thereto as if set forth in length.18
§ 44A-2. Designation of recreation sites.
The Township of Dennis determines that the following sites are designated
as important to recreational activities of the Township of Dennis and are to
be developed in accordance with the needs of the township:
Site Designation Block Lot
Belleplain 31 13
Dennisville [Amended 11-25-1991 by
Ord. No. 91-220]
120 103, 105, 110
and 111
Academy Road
(Elementary School Site)
70 19
South Dennis [Added 3-28-1994 by
Ord. No. 94-258]
101, 102, 103,
104, 105, 106,
107, 108, 109,
110, 111, 112,
113, 114 and
115
—
§ 44A-3. Construal of provisions.
This chapter shall be liberally construed in order that the ends of the
furtherment and betterment of recreational programs within the Township
of Dennis shall be accomplished.
18.Editor's Note: The preamble of the ordinance which adopted this chapter provided as
follows: "WHEREAS, the Township Committee of the Township of Dennis, having
previously ordered an investigation into the recreation needs for the township; and
"WHEREAS, the Township Committee having received and reviewed the Recreation Capital
Improvement Program for Dennis Township, dated July 19, 1991, as prepared by the
Dennis Township Engineer, Richard L. Carter, P.E., P.P., and as more fully indicated within
that capital improvement program, which program includes specific site location
recommendations; and "WHEREAS, the Recreation Capital Improvement Program is
intended to be a guideline, all development of sites shall be reviewed by the Township
Committee prior to any expenditures by the township; and "WHEREAS. The Township
Committee having heard input from members of the public and deeming it prudent and
necessary to the development of Dennis Township that a Recreation Capital Improvement
Program be put in place."
§ 44-13 DENNIS CODE § 44A-3
1:88
Chapter 45
(RESERVED)
Editor's Note: Former Ch. 45, Board of Recreation Commissioners,
adopted 2-26-1990 as Ord. No. 90-189, was repealed 5-13-1991 by
Ord. No. 91-208. Said ordinance also provided that the powers and
duties of the Recreation Commissioners be and the same are hereby
transferred to the Recreation Department," and that "the Recreation
Department is to be headed by the Recreation Leader, a civil service
employee of the Township of Dennis. The Recreation Leader shall
report to the elected member of the Township Committee in charge
of the Recreation Department, as appointed by the Mayor," and
that "the Dennis Township Committee has full responsibility and
accountability for all moneys appropriated, collected and expended
by the Recreation Department."
Chapter 47
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
The salaries and compensation of the officers and employees of the
Township of Dennis are set forth from time to time by ordinance
of the Township Committee. A copy of the currently effective Salary
Ordinance is on file in the office of the Township Clerk and available
for examination during office hours.
Chapter 49
STREET VACATION GUIDELINES
§ 49-1. Purpose.
The Township Committee enacts this chapter to present a uniform set of
guidelines, consistent with N.J.S.A. 40:67-1 et seq., governing the vacation
of township streets.
§ 49-2. Guidelines for vacation of township streets.
A. A request for the vacation of any street or portion of any street which
has been dedicated but not accepted, must be made in writing and
addressed to the Township Clerk and accompanied by a nonrefundable
$250 administrative fee, and funds to be held in escrow by the Township
of Dennis in the amount of $2,500.
B. The Municipal Engineer and Attorney shall review the request, and
make a determination if the request can be granted.
C. A surveyor shall survey the area of the proposed vacated street or
portion of street, and provide a metes and bounds description.
§ 44A-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 49-2
1:89
§ 49-3. Fees and expenses.
§ 49-4. Reservations.
Any street vacation is made subject to the following reservations and
restrictions:
D. Any street vacation ordinance shall be noticed and recorded in
accordance with state law by the Municipal Clerk.
A. Any and all expenses associated with the consideration and/or
completion of a street vacation request are to be paid by the property
owner who makes the request. These expenses include, but are not
limited to, engineering fees, attorney fees, survey fees, publication and
mailing expenses, recording fees, and tax map revision fees. Any and all
expenses shall be paid by the property owner who makes the request,
even if Township Committee decides not to consider an ordinance, or if
an ordinance fails to be approved. The township and its professional's
bills shall be paid from the escrow fees. It is anticipated that this
process will work similarly to the escrow posted by an applicant to a
land use board. Any interest shall accrue to the benefit of the Township
of Dennis.
B. If total costs are less than the funds placed in escrow, the balance shall
be refunded. If total costs are more than the funds placed in escrow, the
property owner who requested the street vacation shall pay the
remainder into the escrow funds. The Municipal Clerk shall not record
the street vacation unless all expenses are paid.
A. All rights and privileges then possessed by public utilities, as defined in
N.J.S.A. 48:2-13, and by any cable television company, as defined in the
"Cable Television Act," P.L. 1972, c. 186, (N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq.), to
maintain, repair and replace their existing facilities in, adjacent to, over
or under the street, highway, lane, alley, square, place or park, or any
part thereof, to be vacated.
B. To the Township of Dennis, for itself, its successors and assigns, the
right to construct, install, build, operate, maintain, use, repair, replace
and relocate such public utilities and cable television facilities, within
the described premises, which it may, at any time hereafter, deem
necessary for the public health, safety, convenience and welfare; and
further, the right to use, maintain, repair, replace and relocate all
existing utilities and cable television facilities owned or controlled by it
located in, adjacent to, upon or through said land; and further, an
easement over, under, through and across the portion of the land
described as may be necessary or expedient for the purpose of
maintaining, replacing, relocating, installing, leveling, constructing and
repairing its utilities, mains and appurtenances, if any, wherever there
exists a pipeline and appurtenances thereto beneath the surface of the
aforesaid described land; and further, to its own benefit and the benefit
of any utility or cable television company the right to maintain, repair,
§ 49-2 DENNIS CODE § 49-4
1:90
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 54
RIGHT TO FARM
§ 54-1. "Right to farm" activities protected.
In accordance with purposes and preambles set forth herein, the following
farming activities shall be deemed established as acceptable, recognized,
and entitled to encouragement and protection as the collective embodiment
of the "right to farm," subject in all cases, however, to any supervening
applicable federal, state, or county laws, or regulations respecting the
public health, safety or otherwise:
and replace utilities or facilities installed by them in, adjacent to, over
or through the aforesaid land. All of the aforesaid rights are to be
exercised solely at the option and discretion of the Township of Dennis
and this is not an obligation of the Township of Dennis to provide such
services.
C. To the rights of any others in the property.
D. The property owner(s) who is to take title to any land vacated by the
ordinance takes said land in "as is" condition. The township makes no
representation as to the condition of the same, nor does the township
make any warranty, implied or expressed, conditional or unconditional,
regarding said land.
A. Produce agricultural and horticultural crops, trees and forest products,
livestock, poultry and other related commodities.
B. Process and package the agricultural output of the commercial farm.
C. Provide for the wholesale and retail marketing, including "U-Pick"
marketing and sales, of the agricultural output of the commercial farm,
and related products that contribute to farm income, including the
construction of buildings and parking areas in conformance with the
applicable municipal standards.
D. Replenish soil nutrients, including, but not limited to the spreading of
manure and applying chemical and organic fertilizers.
E. Use federally-approved products, in accordance with labeled
instructions, as recommended by the New Jersey Agricultural
Experiment Station and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, for
control of pests, predators, varmints, diseases affecting plants and
livestock, and for the control of weed infestation.
F. Clear woodlands using permitted open burning and other accepted
techniques and install and maintain vegetative and terrain alterations
§ 49-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-1
1:91
§ 54-2. Notice of farm use.
For the purpose of giving due notice of nearby farming uses to proposed
new residential areas adjacent to land then being commercially farmed
or suitable therefor, the Planning Board shall require an applicant for an
adjacent major or minor subdivision, as a condition of approval of such
application, to include a provision in each and every contract for and deed
conveying all or any portion of the lands thereby subdivided, as well as
on filed final subdivision maps, the following record notice to and waiver
by grantees of such present or future proximate farming uses, which such
provision shall be made to run with the land:
"Grantee hereby acknowledges notice that there are presently or may in the
future, be farm uses adjacent or in close proximity to the above described
premises. Grantee further acknowledges that the Township of Dennis, in its
adopted "Right to Farm" Ordinance, has deemed established as acceptable,
activities which may result in the emanation of noise, odors, dust and
fumes caused by such necessary activities when conducted in accordance
with recognized agricultural practices. Such activities include, but are not
limited to, the production and processing of agricultural and horticultural
crops and livestock, aerial and ground spraying and spreading of manure
and chemical and organic fertilizers, and the wholesale and retail marketing
of agricultural and related products. Grantee further acknowledges that
such activities may occur on holidays, weekends, and at all times of the day,
including early morning, evening and nighttime hours. By acceptance of this
conveyance, Grantee does hereby waive objection to such activities."
§ 54-3. Definitions.
For purpose of interpretation or clarification of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply:
and other physical facilities for water and soil conservation and surface
water control in wetland areas, in accordance with approved soil and
water conservation management plans.
G. Use irrigation pumps and equipment and undertake aerial and ground
seeding and spraying, using airplanes, tractors and other necessary
equipment.
H. Hire and utilize necessary farm labor.
I. Construct fences.
J. Transport large, slow-moving equipment over roads within the
Township of Dennis.
K. Conduct farming activities on holidays and Sundays as well as
weekdays, in the evening and during the day, notwithstanding the
production thereby of normal but unavoidable noise, dust, odors and
fumes caused by such necessary activities when conducted in
accordance with recognized agricultural practices.
§ 54-1 DENNIS CODE § 54-3
1:92
AQUACULTURE — The farming of aquatic organisms, including fish,
mollusks, crustaceans and aquatic plants. Farming implies some form of
intervention in the rearing process to enhance production, such as regular
stocking, feeding, protection from predators, etc. Farming also implies
individual or corporate ownership of the stock being cultured. For statistical
purposes, aquatic organisms, which are harvested by an individual or
corporate body that has owned them throughout their rearing period,
contribute to aquaculture, while aquatic organisms, which are exploitable
by the public as a common property resource with or without appropriate
licenses, are the harvest of fisheries.
COMMERCIAL AGRICULTURE — The production, principally for sale to
others, of plants and animals or their products, including but not limited
to, forage and sod crops, grain and feed crops, dairy animals and dairy
products, livestock, including beef cattle, poultry, sheep, swine, horses,
ponies, mules, goats, and fur bearing animals, the breeding and grazing
of such animals, bees and apiary products, fish and aquaculture products,
fruits of all kinds, including grapes, nuts and berries, and vegetables,
nursery, floral ornamental and greenhouse products.
FARM — A lot at least five acres, excluding dwelling unit, of single or
multiple contiguous or noncontiguous parcels, which is actively devoted to
agricultural or horticultural use, including, but not limited to, cropland,
pasture, idle or fallow land, woodland, wetlands, farm ponds, farm roads
and certain farm buildings and other enclosures related to agricultural
pursuits.
HOME AGRICULTURE — The production, principally for home use or
consumption, of plants, animals or their products, and for sale to others
where such sales are incidental, including but not limited to, gardening,
fruit production, and poultry and livestock products for household use only,
and livestock boarding and breeding.
Chapter 57
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Editor's Note: The voters of the Township of Dennis approved a
binding referendum at the November 6, 2001 General Election
permitting the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages in the
Township.
§ 57-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, words and phrases herein shall have the
same meaning as set forth in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq. and the rules and
regulations of the Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control of
the State of New Jersey.
§ 54-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 57-2
1:93
§ 57-2. Licenses.
The Township Committee of the Township of Dennis shall issue two retail
consumption licenses and one retail distribution license pursuant to the
Population Quota Law, N.J.S.A. 33:1-12.14 in a manner so determined by
the Township Committee of the Township of Dennis on conditions set by the
said Township Committee and in a manner of sale approved by the Township
Committee.
§ 57-3. Laws applicable.
All applications for licenses, all licenses issued and all proceedings under
this chapter shall be in accordance with the act, rules and regulations
referred to in this chapter and all other applicable laws of the State of New
Jersey or the United States of America.
§ 57-4. Issuing authority.
All licenses required by this chapter shall be issued by the Township
Committee, which shall also administer the provisions of this chapter.
§ 57-5. License required.
No person shall sell or distribute alcoholic beverages within the Township
of Dennis without obtaining a license in accordance with this act and in
accordance with the rules and regulations of the State of New Jersey,
Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control and N.J.S.A. 33: 1-1 et seq.
§ 57-6. License fee. [Amended 3-7-06 by Ord. No. 2006-01; 5-2-06
by Ord. No. 2006-09; 5-23-17 by Ord. No. 2017-03]
The annual fee for the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages in the
Township of Dennis shall be as follows:
Plenary retail consumption license $1,200
Plenary retail distribution license $1,200
Club License $63
§ 57-7. Hours of sale.
No licensee shall sell, serve, deliver, allow, permit or suffer the sale or
delivery of any alcoholic beverage or allow the consumption of any alcoholic
beverages on a licensed premises during weekdays between the hours of
1:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m.
§ 57-8. Sundays. [Amended 6-7-11 by Ord. No. 2011-04]
No licensee shall sell, serve, deliver, allow, permit or suffer the sale or
delivery of any alcoholic beverage or allow the consumption of any alcoholic
§ 57-2 DENNIS CODE § 57-8
1:94
beverages on a licensed premises on Sundays between the hours of 1:00
a.m. and 10:00 a.m.
§ 57-9. Sales to certain persons.
No licensee or employee of a licensee shall sell, serve or deliver, directly
or indirectly, any alcoholic beverages to any habitual drunkard, intoxicated
person or minor, nor permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on any
licensed premises by any of the above named classes or persons or permit
any such persons to congregate in or about the licensed premises.
During the hours sales of alcoholic beverages are hereinabove prohibited,
the entire licensed premises shall also be closed and no person shall be
admitted or permitted to remain therein, except the licensee or bona fide
employees of the licensee.
§ 57-10. Minors.
§ 57-11. Music regulations.
No licensee shall allow or permit on the licensed premises any vocal or
instrumental music from one hour before the time herein fixed, when the
sale of alcoholic beverages are required to stop until the hour of sales may
be resumed.
§ 57-12. Air conditioning required.
All licensees shall provide for the air conditioning of their premises. The air
conditioning shall be of sufficient capacity so that windows and doors in the
A. Presence: No minor shall be allowed in any premises where alcoholic
beverages are sold or served for consumption on the premises unless
accompanied by his parents or guardian, provided however, a minor
may enter any licensed premises in the regular pursuit of his business,
trade or occupation, or for the purchase of food or be a guest in a bona
fide hotel or restaurant.
B. Purchase of alcoholic beverages by a minor. No minor shall purchase,
attempt to purchase, or have another purchase for him any alcoholic
beverage on any premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages.
C. Purchase of alcoholic beverages for a minor. No person shall purchase
or attempt to purchase alcoholic beverages for a minor. It shall be
unlawful for any person to induce or attempt to induce any licensee or
any employee of a licensee to sell, serve, or deliver alcoholic beverages
to a minor.
D. Consumption within family dwelling unit. It shall be unlawful for a
minor to consume or to have consumed any alcoholic beverage other
than with parental consent, within the family dwelling unit, and within
the presence and supervision of his parents or others acting in loco
parentis.
§ 57-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 57-12
1:95
establishment may remain closed so as not to disturb the neighborhood. The
windows and doors shall, in fact, be kept closed when necessary so as to
not disturb the neighborhood. This Section shall not apply to plenary retail
distribution licenses.
§ 57-13. Distance from public buildings, schools and houses of
worship.
No licensee shall operate within 1,000 feet of a public building, school, or
house of worship.
§ 57-14. Club licenses. [Amended 9-7-10 by Ord. No. 2010-04]
No club licenses shall be issued in the Township of Dennis except to duly
recognized veterans' organizations which have an existing facility located in
the Township of Dennis.
§ 57-15. Revocation of licenses.
§ 57-16. Penalties.
Any person, firm, organization, corporation, licensee or entity who shall
violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of up to
$1,000 and/or imprisonment in the county jail for up to six months or both.
Jurisdiction for hearings of violation of this chapter shall be in the Municipal
Court of the Township of Dennis.
Chapter 68
BUILDINGS, MOVING OF
§ 68-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases and words
shall have the meanings hereinafter designated:
A. Suspension or revocation. Any license issued under this chapter may be
suspended or revoked for violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter or any provision of any applicable statute or any of the rules
and regulations of the State Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
B. Proceedings. Proceedings for suspension or revocation shall be in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 33:1-31, by service of a five day notice of
charges preferred against the licensee and affording a reasonable
opportunity for a hearing.
C. Additional Penalties. Suspension or revocation of a license shall be in
addition to any other penalty which may be imposed for a violation of
this chapter.
§ 57-12 DENNIS CODE § 68-1
1:96
BUILDING — A structure designed, built or occupied as a shelter or roofed
enclosure for persons, animals or property and used for residential,
business, mercantile, storage, commercial, industrial, institutional,
assembly, educational or recreational purposes. Any structure having less
than 100 square feet of floor area shall be exempt from the provisions of
this chapter.
CONSTRUCTION OFFICIAL — The Construction Official of the Township of
Dennis, County of Cape May, State of New Jersey.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any type.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the Township of Dennis.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Dennis, County of Cape May, State of New
Jersey.
§ 68-2. Permit required; building transit permit; fee.
No person shall move any building over, along or across any highway, street
or public way in the township without first obtaining a permit from the
Construction Official. If the building is being moved through the township
but was not previously located in the township and is not being relocated
in the township, a building transit permit shall be required; a fee of $250
must be paid; the route, date and time of moving must be approved by the
Construction Official; and the building shall not be parked or stored within
the township. All other sections of this chapter shall be applicable to the
issuance of a building transit permit, except where noted.
§ 68-3. Application for permit.
A person seeking the issuance of a permit hereunder shall file an application
for such permit with the Construction Official, which said application shall
be in writing on forms provided by the Construction Official. The application
shall set forth:
A. A description of the building proposed to be moved, including the
construction materials, dimensions, number of rooms and the condition
of the exterior and interior.
B. A description of the lot from which the building is to be moved, giving
the lot and block, street address and municipality.
C. The highways, streets and alleys over, along or across which the
building is proposed to be moved.
D. The proposed moving date and hours.
E. The name and address of the person who shall perform the moving of
the building and who shall be responsible for placing security for
damages, etc.
§ 68-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 68-3
1:97
§ 68-4. Additional information and documentation.
The following shall be filed with the application:
F. The block and lot numbers and street address of the lot to which the
building is to be moved.
G. A statement as to whether the building is intended to be used as a
principal residence of the applicant.
H. Any additional information which the Construction Official and/or the
Planning Board finds necessary to a fair determination of whether a
permit should be issued.
A. Sufficient evidence that the building and lot from which it is to be
removed are free of any legal entanglements and that all taxes and any
municipal charges against the same are paid in full, evidenced by the
Municipal Clerk's and Municipal Tax Collector's signatures on the
application form.
B. A certificate of ownership or entitlement. The applicant, if other than
the owner, shall file with the application a written statement or bill of
sale signed by the owner or other sufficient evidence that he is entitled
to move the building.
C. Certification to the township by a licensed pest-control specialist that
no vermin or rodent infestation exists in the building or that approved
control measures have been taken to prevent the spread of any
infestation which may exist.
D. A permit fee in the amount of $1,000.
E. Evidence of structural stability. The applicant must provide written
certification by a professional engineer and/or licensed architect
verifying the structural stability of the building to be moved and that
the structure meets or exceeds the most recent BOCA Code
requirements. If the premises is not in such condition, a complete plan
for compliance, including specific details as to the measures taken and
the time periods within which they are to be completed, must be
submitted for review and approval, and the applicant must secure a
performance bond in an amount necessary to complete the repairs. The
amount of such performance bond shall be subject to approval by the
Township Engineer, and the form of the performance bond shall be
subject to approval by the Township Solicitor.
F. Pictures. Persons seeking the issuance of a permit shall file with the
Construction Official pictures of all the exterior parts of the building
that is to be moved.
G. Plans. Applicants must also file with the Construction Official a plot
plan of the premises to which the building is proposed to be moved and
placed. All plans shall be based on accurate information at a scale of not
§ 68-3 DENNIS CODE § 68-4
1:98
less than one inch equals 100 feet. They shall be drawn by a licensed
New Jersey professional engineer or land surveyor and shall show or
include the following information:
(1) Location and key map: the entire tract to which the structure is to
be moved, giving the accurate location of all street lines and
including a key map at a scale of one inch equals not more than
1,000 feet. If the applicant can demonstrate that a survey of the
entire tract would be a hardship, this requirement may be waived
by the Township Engineer.
(2) Zoning: the zoning classification of the premises and of the
adjacent land.
(3) Structures, wooded areas and topography: the location of existing
and proposed houses, structures, wells and septic systems, with
accurate dimensions from all applicable lot lines; wooded areas;
and the topography within the portion to be used and within 50 feet
thereof at contours of two feet.
(4) The delineation of wetland areas and a notation of their location in
a flood hazard zone, if applicable.
(5) Owners: the names of the owner, all adjoining property owners and
those across streets as disclosed by the most recent municipal tax
records.
(6) Identity: the Tax Map sheet, date of revision and block and lot
numbers.
(7) Streets, easements, watercourses and right-of-way: the location of
streets, roads, easements, utility services and driveways, public
rights-of-way, streams, bridges, culverts, drainage ditches and
natural watercourses in and within 50 feet of the premises in
question.
(8) Lots: lot layout, lot dimensions, all required setback lines and the
lot area in square feet and acreage.
(9) Percolation tests: if individual sewage disposal systems are
proposed, the location of all percolation tests and test results,
including those that failed and soil logs.
(10) The date of original preparation and the date of revision, if any, of
the plan as well as the old name if submitted previously under a
different title.
H. Report by Construction Official. The Construction Official or his
designated representative shall inspect the building proposed to be
moved and issue a report to the Planning Board of all relevant
information concerning the same.
§ 68-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 68-4
1:99
§ 68-5. Cash deposit; insurance; bond.
I. Certification of mover. The Construction Official or his designated
representative shall review information which must be supplied by the
mover as to the names and address of the business entity, the insurance
coverage, including workmen's compensation, in effect, the number of
employees, the equipment and vehicle list, any past experience at
moving buildings and such additional information as the Construction
Official or the Township Engineer shall deem relevant. The
Construction Official and/or the Township Engineer or his/ their
designated representative shall issue a report to the Planning Board
concerning this information.
J. Notice to adjacent lot owners. Any person seeking issuance of a permit
shall give 10 days' prior written notice to all landowners within a radius
of 1,000 feet of the location upon which any building is to be placed,
which notice shall state the time and place when the Planning Board
shall determine whether or not a permit shall be issued. Such
notification shall be by certified mail, with return receipt requested. No
such notice to adjoining property owners shall be served by an
applicant until the date for the hearing on his application shall be
specifically designated by the Secretary of the Planning Board and he is
so notified.
K. Certification of engineer. The applicant must provide a written
certification by a professional engineer verifying that the structure is
asbestos-free and contains no hazardous materials. If asbestos or such
materials are contained upon such premises, the materials shall be
identified and the location noted in any certification submitted.
L. The applicant shall submit copies of necessary permits:
(1) Well and septic permit issued by the appropriate authority.
(2) Permit to move building from the present location.
(3) Permit from the state to move the building along its highways.
(4) Permission of utility companies for potential disturbance of lines
along the route of travel.
A. An application shall be accompanied by a cash deposit in an amount
determined by the Township Engineer as an indemnity for any cost
which the township may sustain by reason of damage or injury to any
highway, pathway, fire hydrant, sidewalk, curb or other property of the
township which may be caused by or be incidental to the moving of the
building over, along or across any street or pathway in the township and
to indemnify the township against any claim for damages to persons or
private property. No less than 30 days after the moving project is
complete, the Township Engineer may, in his sole discretion, authorize
the refund of the unused portion of the deposit to the applicant if no
claims remain outstanding.
§ 68-4 DENNIS CODE § 68-5
1:100
§ 68-6. Review by Planning Board.
B. The application shall also be accompanied by liability insurance issued
by a company authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey,
under which the township is named as an additional insured. Said
insurance shall be in the amount of $500,000 combined single limit. The
applicant shall submit evidence that all involved employees are covered
by workmen's compensation insurance. Proof of the foregoing shall be
by certificate of insurance issued to the township.
C. In addition to the foregoing, if the building is to be located within the
township, a performance bond to the township shall be required in an
amount determined by the Construction Official and/or the Township
Engineer as sufficient to bring the building into compliance with all
applicable codes and ordinances. The Construction Official and/or the
Township Engineer shall note deficiencies and establish a time limit for
the applicant's completion of the required work. The performance bond
to the township shall reflect the required time period for completion of
all required improvements. The bond shall cover all required site
improvements. The form of the bond shall be approved by the Township
Solicitor.
A. All required applications, information, accompanying proofs, evidence
of deposits, evidence of insurance coverage and performance bonds
shall be subject to review by the Planning Board at a designated
hearing date established by the Planning Board Secretary.
B. Standards for issuance. The Planning Board shall refuse to issue a
permit if it finds that:
(1) Any application fee, bond, deposit, certification or other
requirement has not been complied with by the applicant.
(2) The building is too large to move without endangering persons or
property.
(3) The building is in such a state of deterioration or disrepair or is
otherwise so structurally unsafe that it could not be moved without
endangering persons and property.
(4) The building is structurally unsafe or unfit for the purpose for
which it shall be moved if the new location is in the township.
(5) The mover's equipment is unsafe and persons and properties would
be endangered by its use.
(6) The Zoning Ordinance or other ordinances would be violated by the
building in its new location.19
19.Editor's Note: See Ch. 185, Zoning.
§ 68-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 68-6
1:101
§ 68-7. Duties of Construction Official.
(7) For any other reason, persons or property in the township would be
endangered by the moving of the building.
(8) The building does not satisfy all applicable codes and ordinances
and the proposed plan to bring the building into compliance is
insufficient, requires too great a period of time and/or is not
sufficiently covered by a performance bond to the township.
C. Other considerations. The Planning Board shall take into consideration
the general construction in the neighborhood to which the residence is
being located and issue such conditions as to ensure the quality of the
neighborhood.
A. Fees and deposits.
(1) The Construction Official shall file certificates of insurance and
performance bonds with the Township Clerk and deposits with the
Township Treasurer.
(2) Upon the Planning Board's refusal to authorize a permit, the
Treasurer shall return to the applicant all applicable deposits. The
Clerk shall return all certificates of insurance and performance
bonds filed with the application. Permit fees filed with the
application shall not be returned.
(3) After the building has been moved, the Construction Official and/or
the Township Engineer shall furnish the Township Committee with
a written statement of all costs incurred in removing and replacing
the property belonging to the township, together with a statement
of all known damages caused to or inflicted upon property
belonging to the township. The Township Committee shall
authorize the Construction Official to return to the applicant all
deposits after the Township Treasurer deducts the sum sufficient to
pay for all the costs and expenses and for all damages, if any, done
to the property of the township or to any private property of which
the township has been made aware by reason of the moving of the
building. In the event that the sum deposited is insufficient to meet
such costs and expenses, the permittee shall be billed for the
excess. If he does not pay the amount billed, the township may
initiate legal action. The usual township procedures for release of
performance bonds shall be followed with regard to such bonds as
are required by this chapter.
B. Designated streets for removal. The Construction Official shall procure
from the Superintendent of Public Works a list of designated streets
over which the building may be moved. The list shall be approved by the
New Jersey State Police and reproduced upon the permit, in writing, by
the Construction Official. In making their determinations, the aforesaid
Superintendent and representative of the New Jersey State Police shall
§ 68-6 DENNIS CODE § 68-7
1:102
§ 68-8. Duties of permittee.
Every permittee shall:
§ 68-9. Enforcement.
act to assure maximum safety to persons and property in the township
and to minimize congestion and traffic hazards on public streets.
C. Issuance of permits. The Construction Official shall issue a building
moving permit when the Planning Board has approved the application
after holding a public hearing and after all other requirements for the
permit set forth in this chapter have been satisfied by the applicant.
A. Use designated streets, moving the building only over streets listed for
such use in the written permit.
B. Notify the Construction Official and New Jersey State Police, in writing,
of a desired change in the moving date and hour from that proposed in
the application.
C. Notify the Construction Official, in writing, of any and all damage done
to property belonging to the township or any private owner with 24
hours after the damage or injury has occurred.
D. Notify the Construction Official, in writing, within 24 hours of any
bodily injuries sustained by any person while moving the building.
E. Comply with the Construction Code and all subcodes thereof, the Fire
Prevention Code, the Zoning Ordinance, the Site Plan Ordinance20 and
all other applicable ordinances, codes and laws, local, county or state
upon relocating the building in the township.
F. Notify the gas and electric service companies to remove their services
and shall also be responsible for taking necessary steps in leaving
water, sewage and drainage facilities at the old location of the building
in a safe condition.
A. The Construction Official, Township Engineer, Code Enforcement
Officer and Superintendent of Public Works shall enforce and carry out
the requirements of this chapter.
B. The permittee shall be liable for any expenses, damages or costs in
excess of deposited amounts, and, if necessary, the Township Attorney
shall prosecute an action against the permittee in a court of competent
jurisdiction for the recovery of such amounts.
C. The township may proceed to do the work necessary to leave the
original premises in a safe and sanitary condition where the permittee
does not comply with the requirements of this section, and the cost
20.Editor's Note: See Ch. 80, Construction Codes, Uniform; Ch 102, Fire Prevention; and Ch.
185, Zoning.
§ 68-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 68-9
1:103
§ 68-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to one or more of the
following: a fine in an amount not to exceed $1,000 or imprisonment for
a term not to exceed 90 days. Each and every day on which a violation of
any provision of this chapter is committed or permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
Chapter 69
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
§ 69-1. Uniform system of numbering adopted.
The Township Committee hereby adopts a uniform system for the
numbering of all buildings located within the Township of Dennis, which
system has been prepared by Charles Kona, P.E., dated December 1989, and
is of record in the office of the Municipal Clerk.
§ 69-2. All buildings to be numbered; applicability.
All buildings situated within the Township of Dennis, whether residential,
industrial or commercial, shall be numbered in accordance with this
chapter. This chapter only applies to those buildings which constitute the
principal use on a lot or parcel of ground and does not apply to detached
garages or other accessory uses which are incidental to the principal use.
§ 69-3. Assignment of number.
Each building within the township will be assigned a number by the
Township of Dennis, which shall be displayed on the said building. Buildings
which are hereafter constructed shall be assigned a house number by the
Township Construction Official at the time of construction; said number
shall be prominently displayed on said building as required by this chapter.
§ 69-4. Number to be displayed.
The owner and/or occupant of every building in the township shall cause to
be placed thereon the number which has been assigned by the township.
The placement of said numbers shall be in such a manner as to be plainly
visible from the street or roadway and shall be not less than three inches in
height and shall plainly display the number of the building.
thereof shall be charged against the permittee by taking the same from
his deposit, if adequate, or by its taking such legal action as may be
deemed necessary. The township may enforce the performance bond
and/or take such other actions as are deemed necessary to enforce
compliance with all codes and ordinances when the building is
relocated within the township.
§ 68-9 DENNIS CODE § 69-5
1:104
§ 69-5. Display of number in rural delivery areas.
Whenever the building is situated in such an area where rural delivery
of mail by the United States Postal Service is in effect, then, in addition
to displaying the numbers on the building as required by § 69-4 hereof,
the owner and/or occupant shall also cause such building number to be
prominently displayed upon the mailbox where mail delivery is customarily
and routinely made.
§ 69-6. Additional display requirements.
Whenever a building is situated in such a way that it is set back 35 or more
feet from the roadway and whenever the building is obscured by a fence,
shrubbery or any other obstacle which impairs visibility from the street,
then, in addition to displaying the numbers on the building as required by
§ 69-4 hereof, each owner or occupant of the property shall cause to be
displayed, at or near the front property line, the building number, which
shall be set forth in figures at least three inches in height and placed upon a
post not to exceed six inches square, having a minimum height of 30 inches
and a maximum height of 72 inches.
§ 69-7. When effective; enforcement date.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon adoption and publication as
required by law. The enforcement of the terms and provisions of this chapter
shall become effective on and after September 1, 1990.
§ 69-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine not to exceed $100 for the first offense and
not to exceed $500 for the second or subsequent offense.
Chapter 70
BUILDINGS, UNSAFE
§ 70-1. Findings.
It is hereby found and determined that there exist in the Township of
Dennis buildings which are unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use
due to dilapidation, defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other
calamities, lack of ventilation, light or sanitary facilities or due to other
conditions rendering such building or buildings or part thereof unsafe or
insanitary or dangerous or detrimental to the health or safety or otherwise
inimical to the welfare of the residents of the Township of Dennis and that a
public necessity exists for the repair, closing or demolition of such building
or buildings or part thereof.
§ 69-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-2
1:105
§ 70-2. Appointment of public officers. [Amended 7-9-1984 by Ord.
No. 84-11221]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3 et seq., as the same may presently exist or be
hereinafter amended, the Code Enforcement Officer/ Construction Official
of the Township of Dennis and the Health Board of the Township of Dennis
or its designee are hereby designated and appointed as the public officers
to exercise the powers prescribed by this chapter.
§ 70-3. Powers and duties of public officer.
A. Whenever the public officer of the Township of Dennis designated
herein finds that there exists in the Township of Dennis any building or
buildings which are unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use due
to dilapidation, defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other
calamities, lack of ventilation, light or sanitary facilities, disrepair,
structural defects, uncleanliness or due to other conditions rendering
such building or buildings or part thereof unsafe or insanitary or
dangerous or detrimental to the health or safety or otherwise inimical
to the welfare of the residents of the Township of Dennis, the public
officer shall exercise the power vested under this chapter and under its
police powers to repair, close or demolish or cause the repairing,
closing or demolition of such building or buildings or part thereof in the
manner provided.
B. The public officer or other official designated under this chapter may
exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out
and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this chapter, including
but not limited to the following powers, in addition to the others herein
granted:
(1) To investigate the building conditions in the Township of Dennis in
order to determine which buildings therein are unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use.
(2) To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and
receive evidence.
(3) To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations in
accordance with applicable ordinances and statutes; provided,
however, that entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the
least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession.
(4) To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees
as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
(5) To delegate any of his functions and powers under this chapter to
such officers and agents as he may designate.
21.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 70-2 DENNIS CODE § 70-4
1:106
§ 70-4. Unsafe conditions.
The public officer may determine that a building is unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use if he finds that conditions exist in such
building which are dangerous or injurious to the health or safety of the
occupants of such building, the occupants of neighboring buildings or other
residents of the Township of Dennis. Such conditions may include the
following.
§ 70-5. Issuance of complaint; hearing.22
Whenever a petition is filed with said public officer by at least five residents
of the Township of Dennis, charging that any building within the Township
of Dennis is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use, or whenever it
appears to the public officer that any building is unfit for human habitation
or occupancy or use, the public officer shall, if his preliminary investigation
discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the
owner of and parties in interest in such building a complaint stating the
charges in that respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held
before the public officer or his designated agent at a place therein fixed
not less than seven days nor more than 30 days after the serving of said
complaint; that the owner and parties in interest shall be given the right to
file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or otherwise and
give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint; and that the
rules of evidence prevailing in the courts shall not be controlling in hearings
before the public officer.
§ 70-6. Service of complaint or order; posting and recording.
A. Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other
calamities.
B. Lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities.
C. Dilapidation.
D. Disrepair.
E. Structural defects.
F. Uncleanliness.
A. A complaint or order issued by the public officer pursuant to this
chapter shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered
mail, but if the whereabouts of such persons is unknown and cannot be
ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence
and the public officer shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the
serving of such complaint or order upon such persons shall be made by
publishing the same once in a newspaper printed and published in the
municipality or, in the absence of such newspaper, in one printed and
22.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. 1.
§ 70-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-6
1:107
§ 70-7. Order to repair or remove.
§ 70-8. Action upon noncompliance.
§ 70-9. Resolution by Township Committee required.
The public officer shall not contract for nor proceed with the repair,
alteration, improvement, removal or demolition of any building or buildings
unless and until the Township Committee, by appropriate resolution, directs
that such action be taken.
published in Cape May County and circulated in the Township of
Dennis.23
B. A copy of such complaint or order shall be posted in a conspicuous
place on premises affected by the complaint or order.
C. A copy of such complaint or order shall be duly recorded or lodged for
record in the office of the Cape May County Clerk.
A. If, after notice and hearing, said public officer determines that the
building under consideration is unfit for human habitation or occupancy
or use, he shall state, in writing, his findings of fact in support of such
determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner
thereof and parties in interest an order requiring the repair, alteration
or improvement of said building to be made by the owner, within a
reasonable time, which time shall be set forth in the order, or, at the
option of the owner, to vacate or have said building vacated and closed
within the time set forth in the order.
B. If the building is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the
health and safety of persons on or near the premises and the owner fails
to repair, alter or improve said building within the time specified in the
order, then the owner shall be required to remove or demolish said
building within the reasonable time specified in the order of removal.
A. If the owner shall fail to comply with the order to repair, alter or
improve or, at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the building,
the public officer may cause such building to be repaired, altered or
improved or to be vacated and closed; and the public officer may cause
to be posted on the main entrance of any building so closed a placard
with the following words: "This building is unfit for human habitation or
occupancy or use; the use or occupation of this building is prohibited
and unlawful."
B. If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the
building, the public officer may cause such building to be removed or
demolished or may contract for the removal or demolition thereof after
advertisement for and receipt of bids therefor.
23.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. 1.
§ 70-6 DENNIS CODE § 70-10
1:108
§ 70-10. Costs to be a lien; disposition of credits.
§ 70-11. Procedure to contest amount of lien.25
Any owner or party in interest may, within 30 days from the date of the filing
of the lien certificate, proceed in a summary manner in the Superior Court
to contest the reasonableness of the amount or the accuracy of the costs set
forth in the municipal lien certificate.
§ 70-12. Emergency proceedings; construal. [Amended 7-9-1984 by
Ord. No. 84-112]
A. The cost of the filing of legal papers, expert witnesses' fees, search fees
and advertising charges incurred in the course of any proceeding taken
under this chapter determined in favor of the municipality and such
cost of such repairs, alterations or improvements or vacating and
closing or removal or demolition, if any, or the amount of the balance
thereof remaining after deduction of the sum, if any, realized from the
sale of materials derived from such building or from any contract for
removal or demolition thereof shall be a municipal lien against the real
property upon which such cost was incurred.
B. If the building is removed or demolished by the public officer, he shall
sell the materials of such building. There shall be credited against the
cost of the removal or demolition thereof, including the clearance and,
if necessary, leveling of the site, the proceeds of any sale of such
materials or any sum derived from any contract for the removal or
demolition of the building.24
C. If there are no such credits or if the sum total of such costs exceeds the
total of such credits, a detailed statement of the aforesaid costs and the
amount so due shall be filed with the Municipal Tax Assessor or other
custodian of the records of tax items, and a copy thereof shall be
forthwith forwarded to the owner by registered mail.
D. If the total of the credits exceeds such costs, the balance remaining
shall be deposited in the Superior Court by the public officer, shall be
secured in such manner as may be directed by such Court and shall be
disbursed according to the order or judgment of the Court to the
persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or judgment of such
Court; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be
construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the Township of
Dennis to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or
abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise.
A. If an actual and immediate danger to life is posed by the threatened
collapse of any fire-damaged or other structurally unsafe building, the
public officer may, after taking such measures as may be necessary to
24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
25.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art I.
§ 70-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-12
1:109
§ 70-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-9-1984 by Ord. No.
84-11227]
Any and all persons who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter
by maintaining a building unfit for human habitation or occupancy or
otherwise unfit or who shall fail to comply with any order made hereunder
or who shall interfere with or hinder the public officers or other duly
constituted officers and/or employees in the execution or fulfillment of their
duties under this chapter shall severally, for each and every violation, be
subject to the penalties provided by § 1-9 of Chapter 1, General Provisions.
Chapter 72
BUSINESS LICENSES
make such building temporarily safe, seek a judgment in summary
proceedings for the demolition thereof.
B. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit or impair in any way
the power of the Township of Dennis to define and declare nuisances
and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or
otherwise, nor is anything in this section intended to limit the authority
of the Township of Dennis or its Construction Official under Chapter
217 of the Laws of 1975, State Uniform Construction Code Act,26 or any
rules or regulations adopted thereunder.
26.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
27.Editor's Now Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions. Art. I.
§ 70-12 DENNIS CODE § 70-13
1:110
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 72-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a comprehensive, equitable and
reasonable system of licensing for commercial establishments and activities
within the Township of Dennis.
§ 72-2. Legislative intent.
A. The provisions of this chapter are intended to deal with Dennis
Township's status as a large, predominantly rural municipality, much of
whose land is either inappropriate for development or zoned for
residential use. By virtue of its history, geography and ecology, there
are only limited amounts of land in the township available and zoned for
commercial uses.
B. Consequently, there is in Dennis Township an unusually high proportion
of home occupations, commercial establishments in residential zones
and nonconforming commercial uses. Furthermore, commercial uses in
the township tend to be scattered or isolated in location and not
clustered in specific zones as may be the case in more traditionally
zoned and developed municipalities.
C. Accordingly, business licensing in Dennis Township does not only serve
the usual purpose of ascertaining the financial and technical
qualifications of businessmen to do business in the township. Rather,
commercial licensing in Dennis Township is also necessary so that the
township may know where commercial establishments are located, may
properly and efficiently enforce Zoning and Building Code provisions,28
particularly those dealing with home occupations or nonconforming
commercial uses, may appropriately plan its response in cases of fire or
other emergency involving commercial establishments and may
efficiently enforce its garbage, refuse and recycling ordinances.29
D. It is therefore necessary, in the opinion of the township, that all
commercial establishments without exception participate in the Dennis
Township business licensing and registration program.
28.Editor's Note: See Ch. 185, Zoning, and Ch. 80, uniform Construction Codes, respectively.
29.Editor's Note: See Ch. 112, Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse.
§ 72-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-2
1:111

ARTICLE II
Business License and Registration
§ 72-3. License or registration required.
Except in those cases where a different license is required by any provision
of this chapter or other ordinance of Dennis Township, no person shall
transact business or either directly or indirectly conduct a business or
commercial establishment within the Township of Dennis until he has
obtained a business license or registered with the township in accordance
with this chapter.
§ 72-4. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TRANSACTING BUSINESS or CONDUCTING A BUSINESS — The provision
of any goods or any services within the Township of Dennis; selling,
consigning or renting any goods or services or soliciting business or offering
any goods or services for sale or rent within the township. The rental of
single-family homes is not included.
§ 72-5. License fee.
Anyone transacting business in the Township of Dennis or conducting a
business, except those to which other ordinances, licensing or registration
requirements apply, shall pay a yearly license fee of $50.
§ 72-6. Special requirements for home occupations.
A. Any business or commercial enterprise or activity transacting business
that qualifies as a home occupation as defined in the Zoning Ordinance
of the Township of Dennis,30 and that does not regularly sell or offer for
sale any goods or products shall be exempt from the licensing and fee
requirements of this chapter, provided that, in addition to complying
with all the requirements of a home occupation, no more than one
commercial or business-related vehicle, owned by or registered to the
business or one of its principals, is parked or stored at the occupation's
location.
B. In lieu of licensing and fee requirements, each qualified home
occupation shall, on or before January 31 of each year, register with the
Township Clerk. Registration shall be on a form that shall include the
name and address of each home occupation, the type of business
transacted and any other information that the Township Clerk deems
material and shall also include a certification by the registrant that the
business being registered is a home occupation and otherwise qualifies
for this exemption.
30.Editor's Note: See Ch. 185, Zoning.
§ 72-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-6
1:113
§ 72-7. Preemptive regulation.
The township recognizes that certain occupations are licensed and
regulated by the State of New Jersey to a degree that preempts municipal
business licensing. Such occupations shall not be required to obtain a local
mercantile license or pay a local licensing fee; however, such occupations
must comply with the registration requirements of § 72-6, except that they
do not, unless applicable, have to execute the certification referred to
therein.
§ 72-7.1. Exemption for certain agricultural businesses. [Added
5-13-96 by Ord. No. 96-08]
§ 72-8. Exceptions.
The licensing fee requirements of § 72-4 shall be exempted for selling any
collateral held by banking institutions, conducting any sale pursuant to a
court order and any activity whose entire proceeds are given to charity.
§ 72-9. Term of license.
The licensing fee provided for in § 72-5 shall be valid for the year in which it
is issued and shall expire on December 31 of that year. All license fees shall
be payable on or before January 31 of the year of issue.
§ 72-10. Application for license.
The Township Clerk is authorized to issue any such licenses upon payment
of the appropriate license fee and completion by the applicant of an
application in writing on a form approved by the Township Committee and
which, at a minimum, shall require the applicant to specify the nature and
location of the business conducted.
C. No fee shall be charged for this registration.
A. A business that is assessed under the Farmland Assessment Act
(N.J.S.A. 54:4-23.1 et seq.) and 75% of the goods and/or materials sold
are either grown or raised on said property, would be exempt from
obtaining a mercantile license.
B. The township's commitment to the right to farm and the "Right to Farm"
Ordinance, as to those properties which otherwise do not meet the
requirements of the Farmland Assessment Act, no mercantile license
shall be required for the sale of agricultural products grown or raised
on the property.
C. That any business that has paid a 1996 mercantile license fee, and is
assessed pursuant to this amendment, shall be entitled to a refund upon
a written request and verification of exemption.
D. That this section shall take effect immediately upon adoption and final
publication in accordance with the law.
§ 72-6 DENNIS CODE § 72-11
1:114
§ 72-11. Referral to Zoning Officer.
A copy of all applications for license or registration shall be furnished to
the Township Zoning Officer, who shall determine whether the information
set forth is accurate and make an appropriate report of his findings to the
Township Clerk. Issuance of the license or registration shall not be delayed
pending the Zoning Official's review.
§ 72-12. License to be exhibited upon request.
The licensee must exhibit such license whenever called upon to do so by
appropriate township officials.
§ 72-13. Forfeiture of license.
If any person, firm, association, partnership or corporation makes use of
a licensed business as a means to violate any of the ordinances of this
township or the laws of the State of New Jersey, falsifies any information on
his application or operates contrary to the representation on his application,
then the license may be forfeited.
§ 72-14. Food service establishments.
Every person, firm, association, partnership or corporation whose business
is serving food shall, for the convenience of customers and employees, be
equipped with a toilet and running water and have sewer service by being
connected to a septic system, and no license will be granted to any applicant
unless such place is so equipped.
§ 72-15. Effect of other ordinances.
Any business regulated by and having fees established by any other
ordinance of the Township of Dennis is hereby exempt from this chapter,
and the requirements of the specific ordinance shall supersede those of this
chapter.
§ 72-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-15
1:115

ARTICLE III
Contractor's License
§ 72-16. License required.
Any person, firm or other entity who shall undertake any work or service
in the Township of Dennis for a fee, the purpose of which service is to add
or remove rooms, dormers or other structures or to improve, modernize
or modify existing rooms or structures or to install, resurface or improve
driveways or sidewalks or any improvements for which a building permit
is required shall, prior to commencing any such work or service in the
Township of Dennis, make application to and obtain from the Construction
Code Official a local contractor's license.
§ 72-17. Preemptive regulation.
This contractor's licensing requirement shall not apply to any contractor
who is preemptively licensed and regulated by the State of New Jersey
pursuant to statute and regulations promulgated pursuant to statute by
state agencies having control over such services, provided that the
contractor furnishes proof of such licensing to the Township Construction
Code Official.
§ 72-18. Application for license.
All applications for contractor's licenses shall be submitted in writing upon
a form provided by the Township Construction Code Official, containing the
following information:
A. Name.
B. Address.
C. Phone number.
D. Principals, if partnership or corporation.
E. Length of time in business.
F. Name of business.
G. Other municipalities in which licensed.
H. Whether license has been revoked, where and why.
I. Proof of adequate public liability insurance:
(1) Name of insurer.
(2) Term of policy.
J. Proof of workmen's compensation insurance required by law:
(1) Name of underwriter.
§ 72-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-18
1:117
§ 72-19. Term of license.
All construction licenses shall be valid for only the year in which they are
issued and shall expire on December 31 of the year of issue. They shall
be renewable each year, conditioned on continuing proof of insurance and
proof that the licensee remains in good standing in other municipalities
where he is licensed.
§ 72-20. License fees.
The initial and renewal fees for a contractor's license shall be $50, payable
at the time of application.
§ 72-21. Grounds for revocation or denial.
The following shall constitute the sole grounds for which the Construction
Code Official may revoke a license or deny the issuance of an initial license
or the renewal thereof:
§ 72-22. Appeals.
In the event that the Construction Code Official has revoked or denied
a license to an applicant or has refused to renew such license upon
submission of the required fee, the aggrieved contractor may appeal such
(2) Term of policy.
A. Failure to carry appropriate public liability or worker's compensation
insurance.
B. Failure to comply with construction standards required by state laws or
regulations or local ordinances or codes after having been given a
notice to cure such noncompliance and after the contractor has failed to
effect compliance without just cause.
C. Failure to comply with the lawful instructions of the Construction Code
Official or his agents regarding:
(1) Site safety.
(2) Altering plans submitted for the obtaining of the building permit
without first receiving the approval of the Construction Code
Official.
(3) Failure to obtain a building permit where required.
(4) One owner/resident complaint against the contractor for
unworkmanlike or unsafe services, which complaint has been
personally verified by the Construction Code Official or his deputy.
D. Revocation of the licensee's or applicant's local contractor's license by
any municipality in the State of New Jersey for any cause other than
failure to pay licensing fees.
§ 72-18 DENNIS CODE § 72-22
1:118
denial, in writing, to the Township Committee. Upon such appeal, the
following steps shall be taken:
§ 72-23. Duties of Construction Code Official.
In addition to the enforcement of this chapter, the Construction Code
Official shall ensure that the information contained in the application for
a local contractor's license is current and that the applications for local
contractor's licenses are public documents and made available for
inspection and copying by any interested person. He shall notify the owner
of the property on which work is to be done by the contractor if the
contractor does not carry public liability insurance.
A. Upon receipt of the written appeal, the Township Clerk shall set a date
for the Township Committee to hear such appeal. This date may be
adjourned for a reasonable time at the request of the Township
Committee or the contractor.
B. At the time, date and place set for the hearing, the Township Committee
shall conduct an inquiry into the reasons for the denial by the
Construction Code Official and shall hear the contractor as to why such
denial was unreasonable or improper. At the hearing, the contractor
shall be entitled to call witnesses and to be represented by counsel.
C. At the conclusion of the hearing, the contractor and the Construction
Code Official shall be dismissed from the hearing room, and the
Township Committee shall immediately determine whether the denial of
the license was proper under the circumstances, and it shall, in its
discretion, take one of the following actions:
(1) Uphold the denial without further action.
(2) If circumstances warrant, issue the license conditioned upon the
contractor's adherence to steps imposed by the Township
Committee that are designed to reasonably ensure compliance by
the contractor with this chapter.
(3) If circumstances warrant, direct the issuance of the license at such
time as any deficiencies which were the grounds for the denial have
been cured by the contractor. The Township Committee shall set
forth the deficiencies in its ruling.
D. Within 10 business days of the hearing date, the Council shall notify the
Construction Code Official and the contractor, in writing, of its
determination and any conditions which have been placed upon the
issuance of the license by the Township Committee.
§ 72-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-23
1:119

ARTICLE IV
Peddler's, Hawker's and Vendor's Licenses
§ 72-24. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PEDDLER — Any person, whether or not a resident of the township,
traveling by foot, wagon, bicycle, pushcart, automotive vehicle or any other
type of conveyance from place to place, from house to house or from street
to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise,
meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, flowers, food, ice cream, fruit ices, soda
water, garden farm products or provisions of similar items, offering and
exposing the same for sale or making sales and delivering articles to
purchasers. Hawkers, hucksters and vendors are included.
§ 72-25. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a peddler
within the corporate limits of the township without first obtaining a license
in conformity with the provisions of this Article.
§ 72-26. Application for license.
Any person who desires to hawk, peddle or vend within the township shall,
in advance thereof, register with the township and shall complete and sign a
form of application for registration made available by the township, setting
forth the following information:
A. Name and address.
B. Description of the applicant.
C. Places of residence of the applicant for registration for the past five
years immediately preceding the date of application.
D. A description of the nature of the business proposed.
E. A description of the vending unit to be utilized, including the
registration number, license plate number and name and address of
insurance carrier and insurance policy number and coverage.
F. Whether or not the applicant has ever had a license to conduct the
business sought to be registered and whether or not he ever had a
license to conduct said business denied or revoked and, if so, setting
forth the details thereof.
G. The date, place and nature of the conviction of the registrant of any
crime.
H. Two photographs showing the applicant's face, front and profile,
representative of the applicant's appearance at the time of the
§ 72-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-26
1:121
application for registration, of a minimum size of 11/2 inches square,
which photographs shall be affixed to the application for registration.
I. Proof of an insurance policy issued by an insurance company licensed to
do business in the State of New Jersey protecting the registrant and the
township from all claims or damages to property and bodily injury,
including death, which may arise from operations under or in
connection with the vending, hawking or peddling. Such insurance shall
name as an additional insured the township and shall provide that the
policy shall not terminate or be cancelled prior to the expiration date
without 30 days' advance written notice to the township. The amounts
of the insurance to be maintained are: personal injury, $100,000 per
person, $300,000 per occurrence; property damage, $50,000.
J. The State of New Jersey sales tax (identification) number of the
registrant/applicant shall be provided on all applications. [Added
7-13-1992 by Ord. No. 92-232]
K. The Township requires that all prospective peddlers, hawkers and
vendors submit to criminal record history background checks through
the State Bureau of Investigation. [Added 5-22-18 by Ord. No.
2018-05]
1. All such prospective peddlers, hawkers and vendors shall complete
and execute a "Request for Criminal History Record Information"
form SBI 19 or SBI 19A (for a criminal record history background
check by fingerprint analysis), form SBI 212 or SBI 212A (for a
criminal record background check by name search), or any other
form prescribed by the State Bureau of Investigation as requested
by the Clerk and/or Administrator of the Township of Dennis, or his
designee. The applicant shall complete these forms in their entirety
and shall provide all the information required to complete the
check, including the name of the subject, the date of birth of the
subject, the social security number of the subject, and where
required, an impression of the subject's fingerprints. Pursuant to
the Privacy Act of 1974 (P.L. 93-579), the furnishing of social
security numbers is voluntary, and the employee's social security
number may only be used for purposes of processing requests for
criminal history record information.
2. The Clerk and/or Administrator and the Township Solicitor of the
Township of Dennis shall be responsible for implementation and
administration of the provisions of this Article, provided, however,
that the responsibilities contained herein may be delegated in
whole or in part to one or more subordinate officers.
3. The applicant shall bear any costs associated with conducting
criminal record history background check.
§ 72-26 DENNIS CODE § 72-27
1:122
§ 72-27. License fee.
Every applicant for a peddler's license shall, at the time of application, pay
a license fee in the amount of $100.
§ 72-28. Use of streets.
No peddler shall have any exclusive right to any location, nor shall he be
permitted to operate in any congested area where his operations would
unreasonably impede or inconvenience or pose a traffic or safety danger to
the public. A peddler may remain in one specific location in the township
for no more than one calendar day at a time. Once having remained in any
given location for the maximum permissible time or for any lesser period of
time, the peddler shall move to a new location which shall not be within 250
feet of his previous location. No peddler may sell his wares in a location that
is within 250 feet of the location of any other peddler.
§ 72-29. Restrictions.
Each peddler shall have an ownership interest (sole proprietorship, etc.) in
only one vending unit and may operate only said vending unit and no other.
Peddlers' licenses shall not be assignable or transferable.
§ 72-30. Exceptions.
§ 72-31. Inspection of equipment.
The equipment used or employed by peddlers of ice cream, foods,
beverages, confections and other similar commodities shall be maintained
in a clean and sanitary manner and be subject to the inspection of the Board
of Health or its authorized agents. Any violation found and not immediately
corrected shall be grounds for revocation of the license.
A. This Article shall not be construed to include:
(1) The delivery of milk, eggs, bread, newspapers or such other
necessary and perishable articles of food or merchandise of the
type commonly delivered on a house-to-house basis at intervals of
less than one week.
(2) Federal census takers and polls or surveys taken pursuant to
federal, state or local law.
B. Any veteran or volunteer fireman who holds a special license issued
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 shall be exempt from the fee for a license
but shall be required to comply with all other applicable sections of this
chapter.
§ 72-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-31
1:123

ARTICLE V
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 72-32. Violations and penalties.
§ 72-33. Repealer.31
All ordinances that are inconsistent with or duplicative of this chapter are
hereby repealed, and, specifically, Ordinance No. 87-133, Ordinance No.
90-188 and Ordinance No. 79-78 are hereby repealed.
§ 72-34. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect January 1, 1991.
A. Any person, corporation or other entity who shall violate any provision
of this chapter shall, upon trial and conviction, be subject to a fine of not
less than $100 nor more than $1,000, to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 90 days, to a period of community service not exceeding 90
days or to any combination of these penalties. Each day upon which a
violation of this chapter shall continue to exist shall be deemed a
separate offense.
B. Any person who is convicted of violating any provision of this chapter
within one year of the date of the previous violation of this chapter and
who was fined for the previous violation shall be sentenced by the court
to an additional fine as a repeat offender, such fine to be not less than
$100 nor more than $1,000. Said penalty shall be calculated separately
from the fine imposed for the violation of the chapter.
31.Editor's Note: These ordinances comprised former Ch. 72, Business Licenses, adopted
4-13-1987 as Ord. No. 87-133, as amended; and former Ch. 142, Peddling and Soliciting,
Art I. Use of streets, adopted 12-10-1979 as Ord. No. 79-78, respectively.
§ 72-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-34
1:125
Chapter 75
CAMPGROUNDS
§ 72-34 DENNIS CODE § 72-34
1:126
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 3-14-1983 as Ord. No. 83-101]
§ 75-1. Adoption of standards; availability of copies.
Pursuant to the provisions of Laws of 1946, Chapter 21 (N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1),
Chapter XI, Campgrounds, of the New Jersey State Sanitary Code, with
the exceptions hereinafter set forth, is hereby accepted, adopted and
established as a standard in determining whether campground dwellings, as
well as their facilities, located in this municipality are safe, sanitary and fit
for human habitation and rental. A copy of Chapter XI, Campgrounds of the
New Jersey State Sanitary Code is annexed to this Article, and three copies
of the same have been placed on file in the office of the Township Clerk and
are available to all persons desiring to use and examine the same.
§ 75-2. Amendments to state standards.
The following sections are hereby amended as follows:
§ 75-3. Land requirements.
Each campground shall contain a minimum of 40 acres, 50% of which shall
be wooded land.
A. Section 1.3c The statement shall be from the Planning Board.
B. Section 3.2. Add: "Service roads providing access to campsites shall be
a minimum of 30 feet in width."
C. Section 3.4a:
a. No campsite shall be less than 200 feet from a public right-of-way
nor less than 100 feet from a property line nor less than 200 feet
from an existing dwelling house. The above designated setback
shall not be used for any aboveground use of any nature
whatsoever, and no structures or improvements of any type shall be
permitted therein, except for such underground installations as
may be approved by the Township Committee and the Township
Planning Board. The above-designated areas are intended to serve
as buffer zones between a campground and adjoining properties.
D. Section 3.5b:
b. Each campsite shall provide a minimum of 1,200 square feet of
space.
E. Section 5.1b:
b. No privies or pit-type toilets shall be allowed.
F. Section 5.4. Delete the section in its entirety.
§ 75-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-4
1:127
§ 75-4. Administrative authority.
The Township Committee is hereby designated as the administrative
authority to issue campground permits.
§ 75-5. Permit duration; submission procedure; fees; application by
condominium campground.
§ 75-6. Inspections.
The Township Health Officer, the Township Board of Health and the
Township Committee or any of their members are hereby authorized to
make inspections to determine whether the code is being violated and may
enter into any campground to make any inspection.
§ 75-7. Complaints; notice; suspension or revocation.
In the event that a complaint is made to the Township Committee by any
person of an alleged violation of the code or this Article or in the event
that the Township Committee believes that such a violation exists, the
Committee may, after a hearing on not less than five days' notice served
personally on the owner or left in a conspicuous place on the campground,
A. All permits shall be issued for a one-year period, commencing on the
first day of January in each year and terminating on the 31st day of
December. In the event that application is made after January 1 of each
year, the permit shall expire on the 31st day of December nonetheless,
with no reduction in fee.
B. All applications for permits for a calendar year shall be submitted to the
Township Committee together with the requisite fees on or before
February 1 of the calendar year for which the permit is desired. No
permit shall be issued for campgrounds in cases where the necessary
applications and fees have not been presented to the Township
Committee by said date.
C. There shall be an annual charge of $200,plus $2, per campsite for each
site in excess of 100 sites, which fee shall accompany the application.
D. In the case of application by condominium campgrounds for a
campground license, the application, if made by the condominium
association, shall be accompanied by a certification that the
association, as applicant, acts on behalf of each and every individual
owner of property or units in the condominium and that such
application by the campground association is in effect an application by
each and every unit owner for campground privileges. In the absence of
such a certification, application for a campground license by a
condominium campground shall be signed by each and every owner of a
condominium unit in the campground and each owner shall be
considered an applicant for the campground license. [Added
12-10-1990 by Ord. No. 90-207]
§ 75-4 DENNIS CODE § 75-7
1:128
suspend or revoke the permit. It shall be grounds for suspension or
revocation if the code or this Article has been or is being violated or if the
campgrounds are being used for an illegal or immoral purpose.
§ 75-8. Conformance required.
No person shall occupy as owner or occupant or rent to another for
occupancy any camp dwelling, as well as its facilities, for the purpose of
living therein, which does not conform to the provisions of Chapter XI,
Campgrounds, of the New Jersey State Sanitary Code, established hereby as
the standard to be used in determination whether a camp dwelling is safe,
sanitary and fit for human habitation.
§ 75-9. Applicability to new campgrounds.32
All size and setback provisions of this Article shall apply to all applications
for new campgrounds.
§ 75-10. (Reserved).33
32.Editor's Note: Former Section 9, which provided penalties for violations and which
immediately followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I. For current penalty provisions, see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
§ 1-9.
33.Editor's Note: Former § 75-10, Year-round occupancy, added 12-10-1990 by Ord. No.
90-207, was repealed 2-24-1992 by Ord. No. 92-224.
§ 75-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-10
1:129

ARTICLE II
Campground Permits
[Adopted 6-11-1990 as Ord. No. 90-191]
§ 75-11. Maximum number of permits. [Amended 10-11-94 by Ord.
No. 94-271; 12-28-12 by Ord. No. 2012-12]
There shall be a maximum number of 14 campground licenses issued by the
township at any one time for the operation of a campground.
§ 75-12. Effect of revocation on maximum number.
If a campground permit is revoked, the maximum number of permits, as set
forth in the previous section, shall be reduced by one, and no permit shall
be issued in place thereof either to the holder of the revoked permit or to
any other person, firm or corporation.
§ 75-13. Failure to renew; effect on maximum number.
Should the holder of any permit fail to renew that permit for a period of two
calendar years, the permit shall lapse and shall thereafter be nonrenewable.
The number of permits authorized will then be reduced by one for each
remaining inactive for a period of two years and not renewed.
§ 75-14. Minimum number of permits.
Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing sections, the number of
campground permits issued by the township at any one time shall not be
reduced below 10.
§ 75-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-14
1:131
Chapter 76
CATS
§ 76-1. Vaccination and registration required; tags.
§ 76-2. Enforcement.
The New Jersey State Police, Township Code Enforcement Officer and the
Animal Control Officer are hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
§ 76-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this chapter may, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine for the first offense of $25, $50 for the second
offense and $100 for the third and each subsequent offense.
Chapter 78
CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS
A. Any person owning or caring for any cat within the confines of Dennis
Township will be required to have the cat vaccinated for rabies and
shall register such cat with the Township Clerk's office, providing proof
of such vaccination, name, address and phone number of owner,
description of cat and the location of where the cat resides.
B. All such cats shall be required to have the appropriate tag or other form
of identification suitable to indicate or provide information to ensure a
valid rabies vaccination.
§ 75-14 DENNIS CODE § 76-3
1:132
ARTICLE I
Solicitation of Motorists; Coin-Drops
§ 78-1. Solicitation permitted.
A. Upon application to the Township Committee, in writing, and approval
by the same by motion or resolution, nonprofit charitable organizations
are hereby permitted to solicit contributions along the roadways in the
Township of Dennis pursuant to the provisions of R.S. 39:4-60.
[Amended 6-18-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-04]
B. If collections are to occur along a county or state highway, permission
must be obtained from the necessary authority as provided in R.S.
39:4-60 as amended.
C. A certified copy of this section shall be provided to each individual
agency, to the Board of Chosen Freeholders, and the New Jersey
Commissioner of Transportation.
D. This section will take effect upon adoption and publication in
accordance with the law.
§ 78-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-1
1:133
Chapter 80
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
§ 80-1. Establishment of enforcing agency; personnel; chief
administrator.
§ 80-2. Qualifications of agency officials.
Each official position created in § 80-1 hereof shall be filled by a person
qualified for such position pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, as amended,34 and
N.J.A.C. 5:23 provided that, in lieu of any particular subcode official, an
on-site inspection agency may be retained by contract pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:23. More than one such official position may be held by the same person,
provided that such person is qualified pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217,35 and
N.J.A.C. 5:23 to hold each such position.
§ 80-3. Agency office location.
The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency at
one office location, except for emergencies and unforeseen or unavoidable
circumstances.
§ 80-4. Personnel subject to procedures and policies.
All subcode officials, their assistants and staff and all other personnel
working for the Department of Construction Inspection shall be subject
to the procedures and policies of said Agency and shall be primarily
responsible to the Construction Official.
§ 80-5. Fees. [Amended 2-13-89 by Ord. No. 89-162; 10-23-89 by
Ord. No. 89-181; 4-25-94 by Ord. No. 94-262; 9-24-96 by Ord. No.
96-16; 3-4-08 by Ord. No. 2008-03; 3-17-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-01]
A. There is hereby established in the Township of Dennis a State Uniform
Construction Code enforcing agency to be known as the "Department of
Construction Inspection," consisting of a Construction Official, a
Building Subcode Official, a Plumbing Subcode Official, an Electrical
Subcode Official, a Fire Protection Subcode Official and such other
subcode officials for such additional subcodes as the Commissioner of
the Department of Community Affairs, State of New Jersey, shall
hereafter adopt as part of the State Uniform Construction Code.
B. The Construction Official shall be the chief administrator of the
enforcing agency.
A. Fees for plan review, construction permits, occupancy, demolition
permits, moving of building permits, elevator permits (and), sign
34.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
35.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 78-1 DENNIS CODE § 80-5
1:134
permits and alteration permits shall be the sum of the subcode fees
listed and shall be paid prior to the issuance of a permit.
(1) The building subcode fee shall be:
(a) For new construction and additions to one- and two-family
dwellings .0371 per cubic foot of structure volume; provided
that the minimum fee shall be $45. For all other use groups the
fee shall be $.027 per cubic foot of building volume except that
structures for agricultural use shall be $.020 per cubic foot of
volume. There shall be an additional plan review fee of $45 per
hour per subcode plan review for any amendment or change to
a plan that has already been released. The minimum fee shall
be $45 for one- and two-family dwellings all other uses the
minimum fee shall be $50.
(b) For renovations, alterations, repairs, and reconstruction, as
defined in N.J.A.C. 5:23-6, fees are based on the estimated cost
for labor and material for the work. An administrative fee of
$45 for the first $1000, plus $20 per $1000, provided that the
minimum fee shall be $45. There shall be an additional charge
of $45 per hour per subcode plan review for any amendment or
change to a plan that has already been released. As per N.J.A.C
5:23-2.15(a)4, when any labor or material is provided at no
cost, the normal or usual cost shall be included in the
estimated cost.
(c) For combinations of renovations and additions the sum of the
fees computed separately as renovations and additions.
(d) The fee for above ground swimming pools, hot tubs and spas
shall be $75 for pools with the largest dimension of 12 feet and
$100 for pools with the largest dimension over 12 feet. The fee
for in-ground pools shall be $200. The fee for fences associated
with swimming pools shall be $50.
(e) The fee for mechanical inspections of equipment in (use R3 and
R4) one- and two-family dwellings, for replacement or
alterations including the gas, fuel oil or water piping
associated with the mechanical equipment shall be $50.
(f) The fee for re-roofing and residing work done to one- and twofamily
dwellings shall be $50. The fee for similar work on any
other structure shall be $50 per $1000 of estimated cost with a
minimum fee of $100.
(g) All structures for which volume cannot be computed such as
fences over 6 feet shall be and towers shall be charged as in
paragraph (b).
(h) Temporary structures as defined in the uniform construction
code shall be a flat fee of $100.
§ 80-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-5
1:135
(i) The fee for asbestos abatement shall be $125.
(j) The fee for lead hazard abatement shall be $125.
(k) The fee for demolition of one- and two-family dwellings shall be
$150, all other use groups shall be $200 except that detached
garages and sheds associated with one- and two-family
dwellings shall be $50. Partial demolition shall be $50 per
$1000 of estimated cost.
(l) The fee for the construction of a sign shall be $2.50 per square
foot of surface area provided that the minimum fee shall be
$50. In the case of double sided signs the fee shall be based on
one side.
(m) The fee for the construction of a bulkhead or retaining wall
associated with a one- or two-family dwelling shall be $60 for a
wall with a surface area less than 550 square feet, $100 for a
wall with a surface area greater than 550 square feet. For all
other use groups the fee shall be $25 per $1000 of estimated
cost with a minimum fee of $250.
(n) The fee for a tent or membrane structure required to have a
construction permit shall be $300.
(o) The fee for installation or removal underground storage tanks
shall be $100.
(2) The plumbing subcode fee shall be:
(a) The plumbing subcode fee shall be $15 per plumbing fixture,
device and/or vent stack for one- and two-family dwellings, for
all other use groups the fee shall be $15 except for special
devices.
(b) The following special devices (Special devices; grease traps,
water-cooled air conditioners, oil separators, refrigeration
units, water and sewer connections, back flow preventors,
steam boilers, hot water boilers, gas piping, gas service
connections, active solar systems, sewer pumps, interceptors,
fuel oil piping) shall be charged at a rate of $25 per fixture;
urinals, group showers per head, drinking fountains, ice
machines, dental cuspidors, domestic hot water heaters each
device connected to a propane, natural gas or oil piping line,
propane tanks, condensate lines provided that the minimum
fee shall be $50.
(c) The following special devices shall be charged at a rate of $75
per device; grease traps, sand traps oil separators,
refrigeration units, utility service connections, backflow
preventors, steam and hot water boilers associated with home
heating for one- and two-family dwellings, active solar systems
§ 80-5 DENNIS CODE § 80-5
1:136
in one- and two-family dwellings, sewer pumps and
interceptors, lawn sprinkler systems, except that utility service
connections associated with one- and two-family dwellings
shall be $50.
(d) The following special devices shall be charged at a rate of $75
per device; commercial food grinders, commercial
dishwashers, water-cooled air conditioners, steam and hot
water boilers in other than one- and two-family dwellings,
active solar systems in other than one- and two-family
dwellings.
(3) The electric subcode fee shall be:
(a) The fee for electrical fixtures or devices shall be $50 for the
first 50 devices, $10 for each additional 25 fixtures or devices.
For the purpose of computing this fee, fixtures or devices shall
include lighting fixtures, wall switches, fluorescent fixtures,
convenience receptacles, or similar fixtures, sensors, dimmers,
alarm devices, smoke and heat detectors, communications
outlets, light standards 8 feet or less in height, including
luminaries, emergency lights, exit signs, signs or similar
fixtures and devices rated at 20 amperes or less, including
motors or equipment rated at less than one horsepower or one
kilowatt. In each case the minimum fee shall be $50.
(b) For each motor or electrical device greater than one
horsepower and less than or equal to 10 horsepower,
transformers and generators greater than one kilowatt and
less than or equal to 10 kilowatts, each replacement of branch
wiring involving one branch circuit or part thereof, each
storable pool or hydromassage bath tub, each underwater
lighting fixture, household electric cooking equipment rated up
to 16 kilowatts, each fire, security or burglar alarm control
unit, receptacle rated at 30 amperes to 50 amperes, each light
standard greater than 8 feet in height, including luminaries
and for each communication closet, the fee shall be $15. In
each case the minimum fee shall be $50.
(c) For each motor or electrical device rated between 10
horsepower and 50 horsepower or between 10 kilowatts and
50 kilowatts, for each service equipment, service entrance,
subpanel, panel board, switch board, switch gear, motor
control center, or disconnecting means rated less than or equal
to 200 amperes, and for all transformers and generators rated
between 10 kilowatts and 45 kilowatts or between 10 kilo volt
amperes and 45 kilo volt amperes, for each electric sign rated
between 20 amperes and 225 amperes including associated
disconnecting means, for each receptacle rated greater than
50 amperes and for each utility load management device the
fee shall be $50.
§ 80-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-5
1:137
(d) For each motor or electrical device rated between 50
horsepower and 100 horsepower or between 50 kilowatts and
100 kilowatts, for each service panel, service entrance,
subpanel, panel board, switch board, switch gear, motor
control center or disconnecting means rated between 225
amperes and 1000 amperes, and for all transformers and
generators rated between 45 kilowatts and 112.5 kilowatts or
between 45 kilo volt amperes and 112.5 kilo volt amperes the
fee shall be $100.
(e) For each motor or electrical device rated greater than 100
horsepower or 100 kilowatts, for each service panel, service
entrance, subpanel, panel board, switch board, switch gear,
motor control or disconnecting means rated greater than 1000
amperes and for each transformer or generator rated greater
than 112.5 kilowatts or 112.5 kilo volt amperes the fee shall be
$500.
(f) The fee for aboveground pools shall be $50. For in-ground
pools the fee shall be $75. The fee to recertify public swimming
pool grounding shall be $50. The fee for the annual public pool
inspection shall be $75 per pool.
(g) For photovoltaic systems the fee shall be:
For systems rated 1 to 50 kW $100.
For systems rated 51 to 100 kW $150.
For systems rated over 100 kW $500.
(h) In each case the minimum fee shall be $45 for one- and twofamily
dwellings, for all other uses the minimum fee shall be
$50.
(4) The fire subcode shall be as follows:
(a) Fire suppression sprinkler heads:
1-20 $100
Each additional device $2.00
Special systems:
CO/2, Halon, foam, dry or wet chemical - fee
per $1000 of estimated cost
$150
Minimum fee $35
Fire pumps each $200
Standpipes
The fee for each standpipe shall be $250.
Total flooding system, the fee shall be $50.
§ 80-5 DENNIS CODE § 80-5
1:138
Range hood commercial suppression systems: the fee shall
be $100.
(b) Fire detection: The fee for the first 20 heat/smoke detectors
shall be $100. The fee for each additional unit shall be $4 per
unit. The flat fee for single smoke/heat detectors in one- and
two-family dwellings shall be $50. Manual fire alarm systems
shall be at a rate of $100 for 1-4 zones. Each additional zone
shall be $25.
(c) Gas and oil fired appliances, kitchen exhaust hood systems:
The fee shall be $50, for one- and two-family dwellings with a
minimum fee of $50. For all other uses the fee shall be $100.
(d) Portable fire extinguishers each $8.00
With a minimum fee of $45.
(e) Underground storage tanks: The fee for installation or removal
of liquid combustible or flammable storage tanks shall be $100
for one- and two-family dwellings. All other uses the fee shall
be $200.
(f) Crematoriums and incinerators each $500.
(g) The fee for fireplaces, wood burning stoves and solid fuel
burning appliances shall be: for one-and two-family dwellings a
flat fee of $50. All other uses the fee shall be $75.
(h) The fee for smoke removal or smoke control systems shall be
$20 per $1000 of estimated cost for a system up to $50,000.
Over $50,000 the fee shall be an additional $15 per $1000 with
a minimum fee of $250.
(5) The fee to move a building or structure from one lot to another or
on the same lot shall be as required for the applicable subcode
above.
(6) (Reserved)
(7) The fee for the required inspections and the installation of an
elevator shall be as determined by the New Jersey Department of
Community Affairs, which shall be responsible for elevator
inspections in the Township of Dennis. Reports on elevator
inspections shall be furnished to the Construction Official.
(8) The fee for a certificate of occupancy shall be as follows:
(a) Single-family dwellings, farm buildings $60.
(b) Trailers in campgrounds and accessory buildings $50.
(c) All others $100.
§ 80-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-5
1:139
(d) Certificate of continuing occupancy single family $150.
(e) Certificate of continuing occupancy commercial $200.
(f) Fee for multiple certificates of occupancy shall be:
First unit and additional units when not
inspected as multiple inspections at the same
time
$150.
Each additional unit when inspections can be
made at the same time
$50.
The fee for the renewal of a temporary
certificate of occupancy shall be $100. There
shall be no fee for the first temporary
certificate of occupancy provided that the
certificate of occupancy fee is prepaid.
The fee for a certificate of occupancy
pursuant to a change of use
$200.
(9) The fee for plan review shall be 20 percent of the total cost of the
construction permit.
(10) The fee for bulkheads shall be based on the following estimated
costs:
$1000 - $50,000 per $1000. $20.
Over $50,000 per $1000. $10.
Minimum fee $50.
The fee for retaining walls four feet high or a
series of walls that retain four feet or more that
may have an impact on a foundation shall be as
follows:
Associated with:
Class three building- over 550 square feet $100.
Class three building- under 550 square feet $60.
All other uses the fee shall be per $1000. $25.
With a minimum fee of $200.
(11) The fee for pile work shall be $100.
(12) Asbestos removal permit $125.
(13) (Reserved)
(14) Variations
§ 80-5 DENNIS CODE § 80-5
1:140
Class 1 buildings $550.
Class 2 and 3 buildings $100.
The fee for any resubmission for a
variation shall be $50.
(15) Zoning permits shall be:
New Buildings and additions $50.
All others $25.
(16) (Reserved)
(17) State of New Jersey mandated training fees shall be collected as
required by N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.19.
(18) There shall be an additional fee of $45 per hour for review of any
amendment or change to a plan that has already been released.
(19) The fee for the development wide inspections of structures after
the issuance of a certificate of occupancy ordered pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.35 shall be an amount equal to twice the hourly base
salary paid to any licensed code official performing the work or the
hourly fees charged to the municipality by a professional
contracted to provide such services pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.35
subject to the accounting procedures and limits set forth below.
(a) Such charges or fees shall be those that are reasonable and
necessary in order to ascertain whether a violation exists or to
verify that any work performed has abated the violation.
(b) The municipality shall place in escrow all monies paid by the
developer for this purpose. The escrow shall be held in any
account maintained by the municipality in the same manner as
that established for the deposit of escrow funds paid for
professional review services, inspection fees and performance
and maintenance guarantees as provided for at N.J.S.A. 40:55
D-53.1.
(c) The developer shall post an initial deposit in the amount of
$200 per home or an amount determined by the municipality to
be necessary to cover the estimated costs of two months'
inspection activity, whichever is greater. At monthly intervals,
the developer shall increase the amount in the escrow fund so
that it shall be sufficient to pay the costs of the next two
months' inspection activity or the costs of completing the
inspections, whichever is less.
(d) Standards for hourly charges for development wide
inspections for structures after the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy shall be as follows:
§ 80-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-5
1:141
§ 80-5.1. Exemption from fees. [Added 3-20-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-01]
[1] Hourly charges shall be limited only to municipal or
consulting professional charges for inspections, review of
plans and supporting documents and preparation of
reports and documents and shall accurately reflect the
hours engaged in these activities.
[2] The only costs that shall be added to any such charges
shall be actual out-of-pocket expenses of any consulting
engineer or registered architect hired for this purpose,
including normal and typical expenses incurred in
performing inspections and reviewing plans and
supporting documents for the required corrective work.
[3] The developer shall not be billed and no charge shall be
made to any escrow account or deposit for any municipal
clerical or administrative functions, overhead expenses
meeting room charges or and other municipal costs and
expenses except as provided for in this subsection, nor
shall a municipal enforcing agency professional add any
such charge to his expenses.
[4] Where licensed municipal code officials perform these
inspections, the fee shall be 200% of the hourly base salary
of the inspector(s) multiplied by the number of hours spent
on inspections and review of plans and supporting
documents for any necessary corrective work.
(e) Payments shall be charged to the escrow and shall be made by
the Chief Financial Officer of the municipality, and a final
accounting shall be provided, in accordance with the
procedure set forth in paragraphs c and d of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.2. Payments shall be made from any such escrow by
the Chief Financial Officer only upon approval by the
Construction Official.
(f) Appeals of any charges levied by the municipality pursuant to
this subsection shall be made to the Construction Board of
Appeals in accordance with procedures set forth in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.2a and N.J.A.C. 5:23A.
A. As authorized by the laws of the State of New Jersey, no person shall be
charged a construction permit surcharge fee or enforcing agency fee
for any construction, reconstruction, alteration or improvement
designed and undertaken solely to promote accessibility by disabled
persons to an existing public or private structure or any of the facilities
contained therein.
§ 80-5 DENNIS CODE § 80-5.1
1:142
§ 80-6. Filing with state.36
A certified copy of this chapter, together with any amendments hereafter
adopted, shall be forwarded to the New Jersey State Department of
Community Affairs.
Chapter 81
COPERMITTEE APPLICATIONS
§ 81-1. Preamble, incorporated by reference.
The averments of the preamble are incorporated herein by reference.37
§ 81-2. Procedure for application.
The following procedure shall be followed for each copermittee application:
B. A disabled person, or a parent or sibling of a disabled person, shall not
be required to pay any municipal fee or charge in order to secure a
construction permit for any construction, reconstruction, alteration or
improvement which promotes accessibility to his/her own living unit.
C. The township waives all fees under this chapter for all properly
chartered and exempt charitable, philanthropic, fraternal and religious
nonprofit from the payment of any fee charged under this chapter.
A. A developer must make written application to the Township Committee
for copermittee review of his project. This application must be
submitted no later than 10 days after the applicant submits his
application to the state for a New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination Systems (NJPDES) permit.
B. The Township Committee will not consider an application until it is
complete.
36.Editor's Note: Former Section III, which dealt with fire limits and which immediately
preceded this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I.
37.Editor's Note: The preamble to this ordinance provided as follows: "WHEREAS, the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection has adopted regulations requiring
municipalities to be copermittees for certain development projects that require a New
Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination Systems (NJPDES) permit, and WHEREAS, any
decision by the township to serve as a copermittee for a particular project raises the risk
that the township may be financially responsible for damage caused by a malfunction of a
co-permitted development's wastewater treatment or pollution discharge system, and
WHEREAS, it is therefore imperative that the township enact stringent standards and
guidelines that must be met before the township will consider approving copermittee
status, and "WHEREAS, the Township Committee has carefully considered the matter and
has developed certain guidelines and standards which will govern application to the
township for copermittee approval and which it believes will fully protect the township,
"NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Township Committee of the Township of
Dennis as follows."
§ 80-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-2
1:143
C. An application shall not be deemed complete until all the conditions
precedent (which are set forth below) have been satisfied by the
developer.
D. Upon submission, a copy of the application shall be referred to a
township copermittee Review Board, consisting of one member of the
Township Committee and two members of the Township Environmental
Commission.
E. The Review Board shall have a period of time, not more than 120 days,
to conduct a preliminary review of the application, both for
completeness and for an assessment of its merits. This review may
include referring the application to various experts, including the
Township Engineer, for review and report.
F. When preliminary review by the Township Committee and its experts is
complete, the Review Board shall schedule a special meeting or hearing
that shall be advertised in the manner specified by the Open Public
Meetings Act.38
G. At this hearing, the Review Board shall formally consider the
application. The Township Solicitor, Township Engineer and any other
township experts may also attend.
H. The applicant or developer shall pay an application fee that shall
include an amount set aside in escrow to pay the costs of processing the
application, including reimbursement of the Township Engineer, the
experts retained by the township and the Township Solicitor.
I. At the hearing, which shall be recorded, the applicant shall present its
case for copermittee approval. The hearing officers and the experts,
including the Township Engineer, will be permitted to ask any and all
questions of the applicant.
J. The burden of proof with respect to copermittee approval shall at all
times be on the applicant.
K. The applicant shall be required to demonstrate its entitlement to
copermittee approval by clear and convincing evidence.
L. No vote shall be taken at this hearing. After the testimony has closed,
the Review Board shall have a period of time, not more than 45 days, to
make a report and recommendation to the Township Committee.
M. Upon receipt of this report and recommendation, the Township Clerk
shall cause a notice to be published in the official newspaper, stating
that the report and recommendation are on file at the Clerk's office and
may be examined by any member of the public.
38.Editor's Note: see N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 81-2 DENNIS CODE § 81-2
1:144
§ 81-3. Requirements for application.
The following items must be provided by applicants for copermittee
approval. Provision of these items are conditions precedent to approval of
a copermittee application and must be accomplished before an application
will be considered.
N. The report and recommendation will be formally considered by the
Township Committee at a regular Committee meeting held not less than
one month after receipt of the report.
O. The Township Committee will vote at this regular meeting whether to
accept or reject the report and recommendation of the hearing
officer(s). This vote will occur after an opportunity for public comment.
The Committee shall have the option, based on public comment
received, of referring the matter back to the Review Board for further
review or consideration.
P. Should the Committee vote to approve a copermittee arrangement, that
arrangement shall be embodied in an agreement between the township
and the applicant, except as set forth in Subsection Q below. The
agreement shall be drafted by the Township Solicitor and shall include
all conditions and requirements imposed by these rules or by the
Township Committee.
Q. If, at the time the township is to decide the copermittee application, the
state has not determined whether to issue an NJPDES permit, any
township approval shall be limited to a letter of intent, stating the
township's intention to approve a copermittee arrangement on
specified conditions, including issuance by the state of an NJPDES
permit.
R. copermittee approval shall be valid for one year from the date of
execution of the copermittee agreement, and this limitation shall be an
express provision in each agreement.
A. Application fee, including escrow amounts as set forth above.
B. Engineering and environmental details of the proposed wastewater
treatment system, sufficient to allow the township and its experts to
conduct a thorough review of the environmental integrity of the system.
C. The names of all owners of the project, including individual principals
and any corporate or partnership entity involved; documentation of the
financial condition of each, sufficient to allow the township to
determine financial ability.
D. The names of all lessees or proposed lessees of the project so far as they
are known.
E. Insurance.
§ 81-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-3
1:145
(1) Proof of comprehensive pollution liability insurance (third-party
coverage) of a kind acceptable to the township, with minimum
limits of $1,000,000 per occurrence and $3,000,000 annual
aggregate.
(2) Proof of comprehensive pollution clean-up insurance (first-party
coverage) of a kind acceptable to the township, with minimum
limits of $1,000,000 per occurrence and $3,000,000 annual
aggregate.
(3) The township shall determine the appropriate amount of insurance
required for each project based on the particular circumstances
involved. Failure to satisfy this requirement shall result in denial of
the copermittee application.
F. A detailed description of the form of ownership of the project. If it is a
condominium or some other form of shifting ownership, a commitment
from the developer to remain as guarantor of the project, or some other
proof acceptable to the township of the continuing financial viability
and stability of the project or its owners.
G. Market studies or other evidence of the project's financial viability.
H. A performance bond in amounts sufficient to guarantee the proper
design, installation, operation, maintenance, repair and replacement of
the proposed wastewater treatment system.
I. Creation of or commitment to create an interest-bearing fund of an
amount sufficient to provide for the ongoing maintenance, repair and
replacement of the proposed wastewater treatment system.
J. A complete history of the developer's prior development projects so
that the township can evaluate the developer's past performance
record. This requirement applies to each individual and entity involved
in the project.
K. A commitment by the applicant to execute an indemnification
agreement with the township in which the township is held harmless
against any claims arising out of the installation, maintenance,
operation, etc., of the system.
L. Prior Zoning and Planning Board preliminary approvals, as required,
and all other governmental approvals, including county approvals.
M. Proof that application has been made to the state for an NJPDES
permit.
N. Attestation, under penalty of perjury, of the truth, accuracy and
completeness of the information submitted.
§ 81-3 DENNIS CODE § 81-4
1:146
§ 81-4. Substantive requirements.
The following substantive requirements or standards must be met by every
applicant for copermittee approval.
A. The applicant must demonstrate that there is no appreciable risk of
environmental harm from the long-term operation of the wastewater
treatment system it proposes to install. In particular cases, as deemed
necessary by the township, compliance with this requirement may
necessitate adherence by the applicant to standards more stringent
than those promulgated by the State of New Jersey in connection with
issuance of NJPDES permits for wastewater treatment systems. (See
N.J.A.C. 76:14-1.1 et seq.)
B. The applicant and all individuals and entities involved must
demonstrate to the Committee's satisfaction that they are financially
stable and have sufficient financial resources to ensure proper
construction, operation and maintenance of the project.
C. The applicant must demonstrate, to the Committee's satisfaction, the
long-term financial viability of the project.
D. All individual owners and lessees as determined by the Committee must
agree to serve as copermittees. The Committee shall have discretion to
determine which of the project's lessees shall become copermittees,
based on the projected position of the lessee in the operation of the
development, e.g., whether it is an anchor tenant.
E. The applicant must demonstrate to the Committee's satisfaction prior
experience and expertise in this sort of development and a past
performance record that indicates the applicant's financial and
environmental integrity and competence.
F. The applicant may demonstrate and the township may take into
consideration that the project serves a particularized public need
beyond the fact that it generates jobs or tax revenue or complies with
the relevant zoning and planning provisions.
G. The applicant must demonstrate its continuing financial commitment to
the project; in particular, the township should refuse to act as
copermittee for any condominium-type arrangement unless the
applicant commits to remain as a guarantor of the project or furnishes
alternative proof of continuing financial viability and stability.
H. The applicant must agree to limit the nature of discharges to the system
as the township requires or to any other relevant condition approved by
the township.
I. The developer/owner must commit to annual proof of satisfactory
insurance coverage and annual proof of financial stability of both the
project and the principals, as well as any copermittees.
§ 81-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-5
1:147
§ 81-5. Specific provisions.
Every copermittee agreement between the township and an applicant must
contain, at a minimum, the following items:
§ 81-6. Fees.
The following fees must be paid in connection with every copermittee
application:
A. Performance bond.
B. Indemnification agreement.
C. Applicant's commitment to be fully responsible for the cost of
installation, maintenance and operation of the system.
D. Easements to the township granting unlimited access for inspection.
E. Developer's commitment to retain a licensed inspector to inspect the
system monthly and forward those inspections to the township.
F. Provision for an annual license fee.
G. Provisions for the escrow agreement.
H. Township's right to investigate and approve any tenants of the facility.
I. Township's right to control the type of discharges into the system.
J. A catch-all provision for any other relevant conditions.
K. Proof of insurance, together with the requirement that the project
annually demonstrate sufficient insurance coverage and financial
integrity.
L. A statement that failure to fulfill any of these conditions shall
immediately terminate the copermittee approval.
A. An applicant for copermittee approval from the township shall, at the
time of filing of his application with the township, pay the following
fees:
(1) A basic application fee for administration of the permit process in
the amount of $1,000.
(2) An escrow fee for retention and payment of professionals to review
technical documents and for additional document review and
execution of the state permit process in the initial amount of
$3,000. The applicant shall be required to make additional
payments in escrow should the township have to spend additional
money for review purposes.
B. Upon approval, an applicant shall be required to pay a fee in the
amount of 2% of the amount of the performance bond for the
§ 81-5 DENNIS CODE § 81-6
1:148
Chapter 83
CURFEW FOR MINORS
§ 83-1. Curfew and hours established.
It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 18 years to loiter,
idle, wander, stroll, play or remain in or upon the public streets, highways,
roads, playgrounds, public buildings, places of amusement, entertainment
or places of business conducted for profit to which the public is invited, and
all public or quasi-public places, either on foot or in any vehicle, within the
township between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following day,
all of these times being prevailing time. The provisions of this section shall
not apply to any such person under the age of 18 years when such person
is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having
custody, care or control of such minor, or as otherwise set forth herein.
§ 83-2. Responsibility of parent or guardian.
It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other adult person having
custody, care or control of such minor under the age of 18 years to
knowingly permit such minor to loiter, idle, wander, stroll, play or remain
in or upon public streets, or other public or quasi-public places within the
township as described in Section 83-1.
§ 83-3. Notification procedure.
If any minor under the age of 18 years shall be found to be in violation of
the provisions of this section, any police officer, upon becoming aware of
the violation, shall advise such minor under the age of 18 years that he/
she is in violation of this section and shall further advise such minor to
immediately remove himself/herself from the premises wherein he/she was
so found and to proceed to his/her residence. If the minor under the age of
18 years refuses to obey the order of the police officer, or if such minor has,
on a prior date, been advised of the terms of this section and is again in
violation of this section, the police officer shall thereupon apprehend such
minor and shall notify the parents, guardian or other person having custody,
care or control of such minor of such arrest and apprehension and make
such further inquiry or take such further action with respect to such minor
as the police officer deems necessary.
wastewater treatment project, to provide funds for the periodic review
of inspection and monitoring reports for the project. The applicant
shall, on or before January 31 of each calendar year, replenish this fund
to its original amount.
§ 81-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-4
1:149
§ 83-4. Exceptions to provisions.
The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to any minor under the
age of 18 years during the time necessarily required for such minor to travel
to his/her residence from the following places:
§ 83-5. Procedures during emergency situations.
Should an emergency arise necessitating a minor under the age of 18 years
to be dispatched upon an errand requiring his or her presence in or upon
a street or automobile, or in any public or quasi-public place, as aforesaid,
during the curfew hours herein established, he or she shall have in his or
her possession a note signed by a parent, guardian or other person having
custody, care or control of such minor under the age of 18 years, stating
the nature of the errand, the necessity therefor, and place to which such
minor is to go, the time such note was issued, and the time required for such
errand.
§ 83-6. Presumptive knowledge; parent or guardian.
If it shall be established that any minor under the age of 18 years remained
idle, loitered, wandered, strolled or remained in or upon any of the public
or quasi-public places within the township, as above mentioned, in violation
of the provisions of this section, then it shall be presumed, in the absence of
proof to the contrary, that the parent, guardian or other person having the
custody, care or control of such minor, knowingly permitted such minor so
to do.
§ 83-7. Responsibility of merchants.
It shall be unlawful for any merchant, businessman or the proprietor of any
commercial establishment, or their agents, servants or employees, to permit
any minor under the age of 18 years to remain on the premises under their
control if that person, in good faith, knows or has reason to know that the
minor is under the age of 18 years and in violation of this section.
A. A place of employment at which such minor is gainfully employed; or
B. A school or place of instruction at which such minor may be in bona fide
attendance; or
C. A place at which a function may be held that shall be, or has been,
sponsored by a religious, school, fraternal or other civic group, which
function will, or has been, supervised by persons 21 years of age or
over; or
D. A place at which a bona fide, supervised social meeting, gathering or
assemblage had taken place.
§ 83-4 DENNIS CODE § 83-8
1:150
§ 83-8. Posting regulation.
Notice of the existence of this section and of the curfew regulations
established by it shall be posted on or at such public or quasi-public places
as may be determined by the township in order that the public may be
constantly informed of the existence of this section and its regulations.
Chapter 88
DOGS
§ 83-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-8
1:151

ARTICLE I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 88-1. Running at large.
No dog shall be permitted to run at large.
§ 88-2. Disturbances.
No person shall keep, harbor or maintain any dog which habitually cries,
barks, howls or otherwise disturbs the peace.
§ 88-3. Damages, nuisances, defecation on public or private
property. [Amended 8-17-04 by Ord. No. 2004-10]
§ 88-3.1. Damages and nuisances. [Added 8-17-04 by Ord. No.
2004-10]
No person owning, keeping or harboring a dog shall permit it or suffer it to
do any damage to any person or property or to create a public nuisance.
§ 88-3.2. Defecation on public or private property; exception.
[Added 8-17-04 by Ord. No. 2004-10]
§ 88-4. License and tag required; fees; renewal and late charge;
exemptions; violations and penalties. [Amended 8-28-1978 by Ord.
A. No person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any dog, shall
cause, suffer or allow such a dog to soil, defile, defecate on or commit
any nuisance on any common thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway,
bypass, bay area, park or any place where people congregate or walk,
or upon any public property whatsoever, or upon any private property
without the permission of the owner of the property.
B. Notwithstanding anything contained in Subsection A to the contrary,
the restrictions as set forth above shall not apply to that portion of the
street lying between the curbline, which shall be used to curb such dog
upon the following conditions:
(1) The person who curbs the dog shall immediately remove feces
deposited by the dog by a sanitary method.
(2) The feces removed from the aforementioned designated area shall
be disposed of by the person owning, harboring, keeping or in
charge of any dog curbed in a sanitary manner.
C. Any person found guilty of any violation of this subsection shall be
subject to a fine not exceeding the sum of $200 for a first offense. For a
second offense or subsequent offense a fine of not less than $200 nor
more than $500. An individual need not be charged as a subsequent
offender in order to be fined as a subsequent offender.
§ 88-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-4
1:153
No. 78-49; 11-27-1978 by Ord. No. 78-53; 6-11-1979 by Ord. No.
79-64]
§ 88-5. Rabies vaccination.
No Municipal Clerk or other official designated by the governing body of
this municipality shall issue a license or metal registration tag for any
dog unless the owner thereof provides evidence that the dog has been
inoculated with a rabies vaccine of the type approved by and administered
in accordance with the recommendation of the State Department of Health.
Such vaccination shall be repeated at intervals as provided by regulations of
the State Department of Health and shall be administered by a duly licensed
veterinarian or such other veterinarian permitted by law to do the same.
§ 88-6. Time limit for license application.
The owner or any newly acquired dog of licensing age or of any dog which
attains licensing age prior to January of the following year shall make
A. All persons who shall own, keep or harbor a dog which has attained the
age of seven months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth shall
apply for and procure from the Clerk of the municipality (or other
official designated by the governing body thereof to license dogs in the
municipality in which he resides) a license and official metal
registration tag for each such dog so owned, kept or harbored and shall
place upon each such dog a collar or harness with the registration tag
securely fastened thereto.
B. Said dog licenses shall be obtained during the month of January of each
year and every year.
C. The fee for licenses for spayed or neutered dogs shall be $10 per annum
and for unspayed or unneutered dogs shall be $12 per annum.
[Amended 2-13-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-02; 3-20-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-02]
D. Licenses must be renewed yearly prior to February 1 of the following
year. There shall be an additional late charge of $5 for each license not
secured by February 1 of each year, provided that said license is
secured by April 1 of each year. For each license not secured by April 1,
there shall be charged the aforesaid fee and the aforesaid late charge,
and the penalty hereinafter set forth in this section shall also apply.
[Amended 3-20-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-02]
E. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.3, Seeing-Eye, hearing-ear and
service dogs shall be exempt from the license fees stated above.39
F. The penalty for violations of this section shall be as provided by N.J.S.A.
4:19-15.19.40
39.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
40.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 88-4 DENNIS CODE § 88-6
1:154
application for a license and registration tag for such dog within 10 days
after such acquisition or age attainment.
§ 88-7. Kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds. [Amended
12-22-1975 by Ord. No. 75-23]
§ 88-8. Leashing required; exception.
No person possessing or owning or harboring any dog shall suffer or permit
it to be in the public highways or any public place in the Township of Dennis
unless such dog is accompanied by a person over the age of 12 years and
is securely confined and controlled by an adequate leash not more than six
feet in length; provided, nevertheless, that any properly licensed hunting
dogs under the control and supervision of their owner may be used for
hunting purposes in the rural or hunting areas within this Township of
Dennis.
§ 88-9. Enforcement.42
The Township Committee of the Township of Dennis shall, at its discretion,
appoint such person as it may deem necessary to enforce and carry out the
provisions of this chapter, and such appointees shall have the power and
authority to seize, maintain, destroy and otherwise offer for adoption dogs
running at large within the Township of Dennis in a manner agreeable to
law and in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.43
§ 88-10. Liability of owner for dog bites.
The owner of any dog which shall bite a person while such person is on or
in a public place or lawfully on or in a private place, including the property
of the owner of the dog, shall be liable for such damages as may be suffered
by the person bitten, regardless of the former viciousness of such dog or the
owner's knowledge of such viciousness.44
A. Any person who keeps or operates or proposes to establish a kennel, a
pet shop, a shelter or a pound shall apply to the Municipal Clerk or
other official designated to license dogs in the municipality for a license
entitling him to keep or operate such establishment.
B. The fee for operating a pet shop shall be $10 per year. The fee for
operating a kennel providing accommodations for 10 or fewer dogs
shall be ten dollars ($10) per year, and for more than 10 dogs it shall be
$25 per year. No fee shall be charged for shelter or pound. Fees shall be
due on the last day of June of each year.41
41.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
42.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
43.Editor's Note: Former Section X, which prohibited and provided penalties for interference
with the enforcement of this legislation and which immediately followed this section, was
deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
44.Editor's Note: Former Section XIII, which provided penalties for violations and which
followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General
§ 88-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-10
1:155
Provisions, Art. I. For current provisions regarding violations and penalties, see § 1-9 of
Ch. 1, General Provisions.
§ 88-10 DENNIS CODE § 88-10
1:156
ARTICLE II
Additional Regulations for Owners, Caretakers, Guardians or
Handlers
[Adopted 8-17-04 as Ord. No. 2004-10; amended in entirety
10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-07]
§ 88-11. Definitions. [Amended 10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-07]
Definitions used throughout this Article II are as follows:
A. BEDDING - Material to provide a bed for a dog.
B. CARETAKER - Any person who takes care of the house or land of an
owner who may be absent and is responsible for the keeping of a dog.
C. DOG — A domesticated carnivorous mammal that typically has a long
snout, an acute sense of smell, and a barking, howling, or whining
voice. It is widely kept as a pet or for work or field sports.
D. DOG OF LICENSING AGE — Any dog which has attained the age of
seven months.
E. DOGHOUSE - A covered and protected domicile for a dog.
F. ENCLOSURE - Any structure used to restrict a dog or dogs to a limited
amount of space, such as a pen, run, cage or compartment.
G. HANDLER - Any person in immediate physical charge of a dog.
H. IMMEDIATE — Shall mean that the pet solid waste is removed at once,
without delay.
I. KENNEL - Any establishment wherein or whereon the business of
boarding or selling dogs or breeding dogs for sale is carried on, except
a pet shop.
J. OWNER - When applied to the proprietorship of a dog, includes every
person having a right of property in such dog and every person who has
such dog in his keeping.
K. PEN — An enclosure for a dog.
L. PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
M. PET — A domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance
animal) kept for amusement or companionship.
N. PET SOLID WASTE - Waste matter expelled from the bowels of the pet;
excrement.
O. PET SHOP - Any place of business that is not part of a kennel wherein
animals, including, but not limited to, dogs, cats, birds, fish, reptiles,
§ 88-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-11
1:157
§ 88-12. Restraint of dogs. [Amended 10-4-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-07]
rabbits, hamsters or gerbils are kept or displayed chiefly for the
purpose of sale to individuals for personal appreciation and
companionship rather than for business or research purposes.
P. POUND - An establishment for the confinement of dogs seized under
the provisions of this Article or otherwise.
Q. PROPER DISPOSAL - Placement in a designated waste receptacle, or
other suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container which is
regularly emptied by the municipality or some other refuse collector; or
disposal into a system designated to convey domestic sewage for proper
treatment and disposal.
R. SHELTER - Any establishment where dogs are received, housed and
distributed without charge.
A. Owners, caretakers, guardians or handlers of dogs will exercise
diligence and reasonable care to prevent said dogs from leaving their
premises regardless of whether their premises is owned, leased or
rented. Restraint exists when the dog is:
(1) Enclosed and properly provided for pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:22-17
within a house, building, properly maintained fence, pen or other
enclosure.
(2) Pens or other enclosures for each dog must be 4 feet in height and
square footage as follows:
1 dog 64 sq. ft.
2 dogs 90 sq. ft.
3 dogs 144 sq. ft.
4 dogs 196 sq. ft.
Over 4 dogs An additional 24 sq. ft. for each
dog.
(3) The pens or other enclosures shall include a soundly constructed,
safely positioned and properly maintained doghouse.
(4) Every doghouse shall contain bedding such as straw or other
absorbent material in sufficient quality to provide adequate
insulation for the dog(s) in the doghouse. Bedding shall be
maintained in a dry condition and renewed or changed as
necessary.
B. Owners, caretakers, guardians or handlers of dogs will exercise
diligence and reasonable care to keep dogs under restraint. In
circumstances in which the dogs are not located on premises owned,
§ 88-11 DENNIS CODE § 88-12
1:158
§ 88-13. Chaining or tethering of dogs. [Amended 10-4-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-07]
Dogs must be able to move freely when chained or tethered and should be
confined for a period no greater than nine hours within a twenty-four-hour
period. The size of the tether or chain must be a minimum of 15 linear feet
and shall remain tangle free. Dogs must be equipped with properly fitted
harness or buckle type collars. Choke collars or prong type collars are not
permitted. The tether or chain shall be constructed of lightweight cable. A
doghouse shall be accessible to dogs that are chained or tethered.
§ 88-14. Prohibited activities and treatment. [Amended 10-4-2016
by Ord. No. 2016-07]
leased or rented by the caretakers, guardians or handlers, dogs must
be handled in a humane manner pursuant N.J.S.A. 4:22-17.
C. Owners, caretakers, guardians or handlers of dogs may attempt to
prevent said dogs from leaving the premises by installing an Invisible
fence®. Owners, caretakers, guardians or handlers of dogs are
responsible for the maintenance of the Invisible fences® and shall
exercise diligence to keep the fence in proper working order.
D. Kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds shall comply with the
provisions of applicable state statues and administrative regulations.
A. No owner, caretaker, guardian or handler shall withhold proper shelter,
protection from weather, veterinary care and immune care to any
animal. No owner, caretaker, guardian or handler shall fail to provide
his or her animal with sufficient food and drinkable water on a daily
basis. Food and water must be in an animal food consumption or water
consumption type container, feeder or waterer.
B. No animal shall be subjected to unnecessary suffering and cruelty such
as subjecting the animal to prolonged fear, injury, pain or physical
abuse. Interaction with humans and other animals shall not be
unreasonably withheld. Any individual, currently licensed by the State
Board of Veterinary Medical Examiners to practice veterinary medicine,
who is acting within his or her scope of practice to deliver acceptable
and medically sound veterinary care to an animal, shall be exempt from
this section.
C. In extreme weather below 32 degrees and above 95 degrees and in
major storms where evacuation is recommended, all outdoor dogs and
indoor/outdoor cats (with the exception of feral cats) must be brought
indoors whether tethered or kenneled, unless the kennel is heated or
air conditioned according to safety code. Indoors will include any area
of the residence which is temperature controlled and garage and
basement unless heated in cold or air conditioned in heat will not be
considered adequate.
§ 88-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-14
1:159
§ 88-15. Duties of citizens. [Amended 10-4-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-07]
§ 88-16. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-4-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-07]
D. Any violations of Sections 88-3.2, 88-12, 88-13, 88-14 or 88-15 in
addition to other methods of enforcement provided by law, may be
enforced by the issuance of a Notice of Violation Citation issued by the
New Jersey State Police, any Animal Control Officer or any other person
who actually observes or witnesses a violation.
A. Any operator of a motor vehicle who accidentally strikes a dog or cat
shall stop and render such assistance to the dog or cat as may be
possible, provided it could be accomplished safely and without danger
to the motorist, pedestrians or other motorists.
B. The operator of a motor vehicle involved in such an accident shall
promptly report such injury or death to the appropriate law
enforcement agency.
A. Enforcement of all sections within Article II shall be commenced by the
filing of a complaint with the Municipal Court of the Township of
Dennis.
B. Any person found guilty of violation of Section 88-3.2 shall be subject to
a fine not to exceed the sum of $200 for a first offense. For a second
offense or subsequent offense a fine of not less than $200 nor more than
$500. An individual need not be charged as a subsequent offender in
order to be fined as a subsequent offender.
C. Any person found guilty of all other sections of this Article II by the
Municipal Court of the Township of Dennis shall be subject to a fine not
exceeding the sum of $500.00 or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days or
both, provided, however, that the Court shall waive or suspend any fines
if the Court determines it is appropriate to do so. Furthermore, the
Court may order restitution be paid to any person or entity that incurs
expenses related to the investigation and prosecution of any offender of
this Article II.
§ 88-14 DENNIS CODE § 88-16
1:160
Chapter 91
DRUGS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
§ 88-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-16
1:161

ARTICLE I
Drug-Free School Zones
[Adopted 9-26-1988 as Ord. No. 88-156]
§ 91-1. Statutory authority; adoption of map.
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of PL. 1988, c. 44 (N.J.S.A.
2C:35-7), the Drug-Free School Zone Map produced on or about August
8, 1988, by Charles Kona, Municipal Engineer, is hereby approved and
adopted as an official finding and record of the location and areas within
the municipality of property which is used for school purposes and which is
owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board
and of the areas on or within 1,000 feet of such school property.
§ 91-2. Map to constitute official finding.
The Drug-Free School Zone Map approved and adopted pursuant to § 91-1
of this Article shall continue to constitute an official finding and record as
to the location and boundaries of areas on or within 1,000 feet of property
owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board
which is used for school purposes until such time, if any, that this Article
shall be amended to reflect any additions or deletions with respect to the
location and boundaries of school property and Drug-Free School Zones.
§ 91-3. Notification of changes.
The school board, or the chief administrative officer in the case of any
private or parochial school, is hereby directed and shall have the continuing
obligation to promptly notify the Municipal Engineer and the Municipal
Attorney of any changes or contemplated changes in the location and
boundaries of any property owned by or leased to any elementary or
secondary school or school board and which is used for school purposes.
§ 91-4. Filing and copies of map and Article.
The Clerk of the municipality is hereby directed to receive and to keep on
file the original of the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 91-1 of this
Article and to provide at a reasonable cost a true copy thereof to any person,
agency or court which may from time to time request such a copy, along
with a certification that such copy is a true copy of the map approved and
adopted herein and kept on file. It is hereby further directed that a true
copy of such map and of this Article shall be provided without cost to the
County Clerk and to the office of the Cape May County Prosecutor.
§ 91-5. Additional determinations.
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
A. It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 91-1
of this Article was prepared and is intended to be used as evidence in
§ 91-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-5
1:163
prosecutions arising under the criminal laws of this state and that,
pursuant to state law, such map shall constitute prima facie evidence of
the following:
(1) The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
municipality.
(2) The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to
such schools or a school board.
(3) That such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes.
(4) The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000
feet of such school property.
B. Except as is otherwise expressly noted on the face of the approved and
adopted map, all of the property depicted on the map approved and
adopted herein as school property was owned by or leased to a school
or school board and was being used for school purposes as of July 9,
1987, that being the effective date of P.L. 1987, c. 101 (N.J.S.A.
2C:35-7).
C. Pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1988, c. 44,45 a prosecutor is not
precluded from introducing or relying upon any other evidence or
testimony to establish a violation of the offense defined in that statute,
including use of a map or diagram other than the one approved and
adopted pursuant to § 91-1 of this Article. The failure of the map
approved herein to depict the location and boundaries of any property
which is, in fact, used for school purposes and which is owned by or
leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board, whether
the absence of such depiction is the result of inadvertent omission or
the result of any changes in the location and boundaries of such
property which have not yet been incorporated into a revised approved
map, shall not be deemed to be an official finding and record that such
property is not owned by or leased to a school or school board or that
such property is not used for school purposes.
D. All of the requirements set forth in P.L. 1988, c. 44,46 concerning the
preparation, approval and adoption of a Drug-Free School Zone Map
have been complied with.
45.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.
46.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.
§ 91-5 DENNIS CODE § 91-5
1:164
Chapter 92
DRUNK DRIVING FREE SCHOOL ZONES
§ 92-1. Adoption of Map.
The Drunk Driving Free School Zones Map produced on or about March
13, 2000 by Walker, Previti, Holmes & Associates, the Township Engineer's
Office is hereby approved and adopted as an official finding and record of
the location and areas within the municipality of property which is used
for school purposes and which is owned by or leased to any elementary or
secondary school on school land and of the areas on or within 1,000 feet of
such school property.
§ 92-2. Map and List to Constitute Official Findings.
The Drunk Driving Free School Zones Map approved and adopted by this
chapter shall continue to constitute an official finding and record as to the
location and boundaries of areas on or within 1,000 feet of property owned
by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board which
is used for school purposes until such time, if any, that this chapter shall be
amended to reflect any additions or deletions with respect to the location
and boundaries of school property and drunk driving free school zones.
§ 92-3. Changes in Locations or Boundaries.
The school board, or the chief administrative officer in the case of any
private or parochial school, is hereby directed and shall have continuing
obligation to promptly notify the office of the Township Engineer and the
Township Attorney of any changes or contemplated changes in the location
and boundaries of any property owned by or leased to any elementary or
secondary school or school board and which is used for school purposes.
§ 92-4. Original Map to be on File: Copies.
The Township Clerk is hereby directed to receive and to keep on file the
original of the map approved and adopted pursuant to this Chapter and
to provide at a reasonable cost a true copy thereof to any person, agency
or court which may from time to time request such a copy, along with a
certification that such copy is a true copy of the map approved and adopted
herein and kept on file. It is hereby further directed that a true copy of such
map and chapter shall be provided without cost to the Cape May County
Clerk and to the office of the Cape May County Prosecutor.
§ 92-5. Map as Evidence.
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to this
chapter was prepared and is intended to be used as evidence in
§ 91-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-5
1:165
prosecutions arising under the criminal and traffic laws of this state and
that, pursuant to state law, such map shall constitute prima facie evidence
of the following:
Chapter 95
EXCAVATIONS
§ 95-1. Word usage; definitions.
§ 95-2. Purpose; construal.
A. The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
municipality.
B. The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to such
schools or a school board.
C. That such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes.
D. The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000 feet
of such school property.
A. Words used in the present tense include the future, and the singular
number includes the plural.
B. For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined
for the purposes herein or hereof as follows:
BUFFER — A buffer is that area along the border of an excavation site
in which no mining activity or disturbance is to take place.
COMMERCIAL PURPOSES — The sale or commercial use of the sand
or other product which is excavated, as distinguished from personal use
of the product by the owner of the ground at the place where the same
is excavated.
EXCAVATION — Includes digging or mining of resource extraction
materials.
RESOURCE EXTRACTION MATERIALS — Sand, gravel, earth, soil or
mineral products of the soil.
RESTORATION — Is the process of restoring areas where excavation
has taken place after the conclusion of all excavation activity.
ROADS or HIGHWAYS — All state, county, township or local roads, but
has no reference to private roads or private rights-of-way.
A. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be for:
(1) The promotion of the public health, morals and general welfare.
§ 92-5 DENNIS CODE § 95-2
1:166
§ 95-3. Permit required.
No excavation, digging or mining of sand, gravel, earth or soil may be done
for commercial purposes in the Township of Dennis without first obtaining
a permit therefor from the Township Committee of the Township of Dennis
in the manner as hereinafter set forth.
§ 95-4. Permit application; fee; survey; condition for issuance.
Applications for permits for excavating, digging or mining as aforesaid shall
be made to the Township Clerk within 30 days of the date of expiration of
the existing permits shall meet the conditions set forth hereunder:
(2) The elimination of dust and noise.
(3) The elimination of danger from deep pits in close proximity to
highways.
(4) The conservation of soil.
(5) The betterment of community.
B. The provisions and requirements of this chapter shall be held
paramount to any corresponding or similar provision of any existing
law, ordinance, rule or regulation.
A. Within 30 days of the receipt of an application, the Planning Board of
the township shall schedule a hearing as to whether the applicant
satisfies the requirements of the chapter. This time restriction shall not
apply to the issuance of the first permits under this chapter, but all
hearings must be concluded by December 31, 1995.
B. Thereafter, the Planning Board shall recommend to Township
Committee whether or not the permit shall be granted and so state their
reasons for approving or denying the application.
C. Within 30 days of receipt of the Planning Board recommendation, the
Township Committee shall approve or deny the permit.
A. A fee in the amount of $500 shall accompany the application for the
purposes of paying the cost of administration of this chapter.
B. A certification from the Township Engineer shall be provided indicating
that the restoration improvements have been completed as required by
the previous permit.
C. Five copies of the site plan documents with the following details and
information required:
(1) Boundaries of the tract.
(2) North arrow.
§ 95-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-4
1:167
(3) The date of plan preparation, graphic scale and the name of the
licensed professional who prepared the plan.
(4) The zoning district in which the site is located.
(5) A topographic map at a maximum scale of one inch equals 400 feet
showing contour lines at two-foot intervals inside the tract and
within 50 feet of the tract's boundaries.
(6) A U.S.G.S. quadrangle map showing the property and an area of at
least 1,000 feet beyond such boundaries in all directions.
(7) The location, size and intended use of all buildings or structures.
(8) The location of all points of ingress and egress.
(9) The location of all streams, wetlands and significant vegetation,
forest associations and wildlife habitats.
(10) The location of all existing and proposed streets and rights-of-way.
(11) A soils map.
(12) A restoration plan which shall include the following:
(a) Method of stockpiling topsoil and over burden.
(b) Proposed grading and final elevations.
(c) Type, quantity and size of plant materials to be used.
(d) Seeding, fertilizer and mulch application methods and rates.
(e) A final grading and planting plan showing planting methods
and schedules.
(f) Maintenance requirement schedule.
(g) An extraction schedule which depicts the anticipated
restoration sequence for the three year license period.
Restoration work, in accordance with the approved plan, shall
be actively on-going at all times.
D. A performance bond or letter of credit of a form satisfactory to the
Township Solicitor in an amount equal to 100% of the Engineer's
Estimate of Cost for Restoration as approved by the Township Engineer.
Said performance bond or letter of credit shall be to the favor of the
Township of Dennis and shall run for a minimum of two years with a
condition that said guaranty shall not be released without resolution
from the township governing body. Upon approval of the Township
Committee, cash funds may be deposited in lieu of providing a bond or
letter of credit or such other form of surety approved by the Township
Committee.
E. A copy of all other federal, state, or county agency approvals.
§ 95-4 DENNIS CODE § 95-4
1:168
§ 95-5. Number of permits limited; effect of revocations; lapses of
renewal.
§ 95-6. Enforcement agency; compliance required; consideration of
application.
§ 95-7. Duration of permit; renewal.
Permits issued under this chapter shall be valid for a period not to exceed
three years from the date of the approving resolution. All renewal
applications must be submitted in complete form to the Township Clerk
prior to September 30, of the expiring year. All renewals shall be for a
three year period. Upon receipt of the application, the application will be
transmitted to the Planning Board. After the initial permits are issued under
this chapter, the permits issued to Matalucci and Earthwork shall expire
F. A certification indicating that the applicant has served notice on all
property owners within 500 feet of the subject property that an
application for a mining license has been filed with the Township Clerk.
The notice of a public hearing shall be served upon the owners within
500 feet of the site at least 14 days prior to the Planning Board Meeting
at which the application will be heard.
A. There will be a maximum number of six permits issued by the township
at any one time for excavation.
B. In each instance of a revocation of a permit to excavate, dig or mine, the
limited number of said permits, as set forth in Subsection A above, shall
be reduced by one and no new permits shall be issued in place thereof
either to the holder of the revoked permit or any other person, firm or
corporation.
C. In the event that any holder of a permit fails to renew the same within
30 days of expiration of a mining permit, the permit shall become
nonrenewable and the previously granted nonconforming use shall
terminate. Upon termination of a use under this subsection, the total
number of mining permits permitted within the township shall be
reduced by one.
D. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, nothing herein
shall be construed to limit the use of any existing license.
A. This chapter shall be administered by the Township Clerk and enforced
by the Municipal Zoning Office in accordance with Chapter 185, Zoning
of this Code as to the site plan requirements.
B. The Township Committee, by resolution, shall have the sole power to
grant a mining excavation permit and no permit shall be granted until
all conditions of this chapter have been satisfied.
C. All applications shall be considered and acted upon at regularly
scheduled meeting of the Township Committee.
§ 95-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-7
1:169
December 31, 1999. Permits issued to Kapp and Heun will expire December
31, 2000. The permits issued to the remaining two shall expire December
31, 2001.47
§ 95-8. General regulations for resource extraction.
A. General regulations.
(1) There shall be a limit of one office building, one storage building,
and one garage per operation. Except existing buildings may be
maintained.
(2) All equipment stored on the property shall be that utilized
specifically for the removal and hauling of resource extraction
material(s) removed from the site only.
(3) No recycling operations of material non-native to the site are
permitted without express approval of Planning Board.
(4) At least the first 150 feet adjacent to any street line shall not be
used for mining or grading operations and shall be landscaped with
evergreen shrubbery, planted at an initial height of not less than
five feet, at the density of one tree for every 10 square feet.
Operations with existing wooded areas in the buffer shall be
reviewed by the Planning Board for determination if additional
plant materials are required to comply with this item.
(5) Lighting. All operations having onsite office hours past sunset shall
have onsite lighting of the office parking area and building timed to
go off one hour past scheduled office hours. Security lighting as
designated on the site plan and approved by the Planning Board,
may remain on throughout the night.
(6) Hours of operation. Resource extraction operations abutting any
residential zoning districts shall not begin before 6:00 a.m.,
Monday through Saturday and shall end no later than 6:00 p.m.,
Monday through Saturday. No extraction operations shall be
permitted on Sundays. The Township Committee, or its designee,
shall have the right to grant temporary relief from the restriction
on hours of operation so as to accommodate the following
conditions:
(a) Any declared state of emergency which would require a mining
operation within the township to provide sand, gravel, or other
material in response to any emergency created by any storm,
flood, or similar catastrophe.
(b) To permit local mining operation to compete for any federal or
state contract which would require the providing of materials
47.Editor's Note: A list of permit holders at the time of the introduction of Ordinance 94-263,
codified herein, is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 95-7 DENNIS CODE § 95-8
1:170
on Sundays, holidays or on a 24 hour basis around the clock
provided that such exemption is for a limited period of time,
generally not to exceed 30 days, and provided further that
such exemption is necessary in order for the mining operations
within the township to remain competitive with other mining
operations in other communities or areas of this state. When
such exemption is granted by the Township Committee, it shall
specify the time period for which such exemption is granted.
(c) Upon application to Planning Board for extended hours which
application shall be subject to the notice provisions contained
within this chapter and shall be selected at the next Planning
Board meeting. The zoning official shall be permitted to allow
extended hours upon showing of proper cause until the matter
is heard by the Planning Board. In determining cause the
zoning official shall take into consideration the nature of the
request, the need therefor and the effect on neighboring
properties.
(7) Fences.
(a) Permanent fencing will be required when necessary to protect
public health, welfare and safety. Fencing, when necessary,
shall consist of a metal chain link design. It is the purpose of
this section to require fencing in all areas where residences
exist.
(b) Permanent fencing shall be provided along the entire street
frontage of any resource extraction property fronting on a
municipal, county, or state highway, unless a 500 foot buffer
from the road right-of-way to the limits of mining disturbance
can be maintained by the mining operator.
(c) Permanent fencing shall be an integral part of the restoration
process and shall be a part of all restoration plans.
(d) Permanent fencing shall not have to be constructed at all if it
can be proven that, because of environmental restrictions, the
adjoining lot abutting the resource extraction property can not
be developed, or can not have a structure erected within 1,000
feet of the property line of the resource extraction operation
and the area between the structure and the resource
extraction operation is deemed wetlands (not buffer or
transition areas) by the N.J.D.E.P.E.
(8) Buffering. The following minimum setbacks shall be applicable to
both active mining and restorative procedures.
(a) There shall be no excavating, digging or mining within 150 feet
of a public highway, which shall include state, county, township
or other local roads or property line, or within 300 feet of any
church, school or other public building, private dwelling or
§ 95-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-8
1:171
place of business or any residence or business area or
development or within 50 feet of a property line; provided,
however, that if any such highway, church, school or other
such building or development was constructed or took place
subsequent to the time that any licensed premises were
originally licensed, then this limitation shall apply only to such
highway, church, school or other such building or development
as the same existed at the time that such premises was
originally licensed.
(b) No person, firm, association or corporation to which a license
is issued under this chapter shall excavate, dig or mine to a
depth in excess of 65 feet below water table. Every such
person, firm or corporation shall maintain such excavation in a
level condition throughout the area being worked and shall
arrange for the prevention and control of water deposits within
said excavated areas, where possible.
(9) Access. Each resource extraction operation shall have access solely
to a state or county highway, if possible. Access to an existing
municipal roadway shall be at a point closest to the nearest state or
county highway. Each access shall be paved with a minimum of four
inches of asphalt over a four inch gravel base for a distance of 150
feet from the roadway access at a width of not less than 24 feet.
The access road shall have adequate curbing at the radius points.
Said curbing shall be at a minimum radius of 25 feet or as required
by the state or county highway agency. All accesses shall have
gates at the road right of way which shall be locked and closed
except during actual operations.
(10) Signage.
(a) Each resource extraction operation shall be permitted one sign
not exceeding 32 square feet on each side which may be placed
within 50 feet of the access road not less than 20 feet from the
road right of way. The sign must be lit only by exterior lighting
and from the top of the sign down towards the ground. Lighting
creating a glare to the traveling public shall not be permitted.
Sign construction shall be of wood only and designed to blend
in with the adjoining area along the roadway.
(b) Adjacent to all areas of actual extraction operations there shall
be additional signage provided every 100 feet stating
"DANGER" or "DO NOT ENTER UNSAFE CONDITIONS."
(c) Signage shall also be in pictorial form depicting "no swimming"
at the edge of an area of wet excavation. The form of the sign
shall be approved by the Township Engineer. [Added
10-11-94 by Ord. No. 94-270]
§ 95-8 DENNIS CODE § 95-8
1:172
(11) Restoration. Restoration of disturbed areas shall occur at the
completion of the resource extraction operation or as dictated by
the Planning Board as part of their approval process. Restoration
shall be in accordance with the following requirements:
(a) Restoration shall be a continuous process and each portion of
the parcel shall be restored within one year after resource
extraction is completed for that portion of the site.
(b) Restoration shall proceed in the same sequence and time
frame set out in the extraction schedule indicated on the site
plans.
(c) All restored areas shall be graded so as to conform to the
natural contours of the parcel; the slope of surface of restored
surfaces shall not exceed one foot vertical to three feet
horizontal except as provided for in paragraph (f) below.
(d) Topsoil shall be restored in approximately the same quality as
existed at the time the resource extraction operation was
initiated; however, additional topsoil may be required to be
placed by the Planning Board where onsite conditions prohibit
satisfactory planting growth.
(e) Drainage runoff, including direction and volume, shall be
restored to the maximum extent possible to those flow patterns
existing at the time the resource extraction operation was
initiated.
(f) Any body of water created by the resource extraction operation
shall have a shoreline of not less than three feet above and
three feet below the projected average water table elevation.
The shoreline both above and below the surface water
elevation shall have a slope of not less than five feet horizontal
to one foot vertical. An additional graded slope of three feet
horizontal to one foot vertical shall extend 10 feet beyond the
waterward end of the 5:1 slope. This requirement shall apply to
any water body or portion of a water body created after the
effective date of these regulations. For any water body or
portion of a water body created prior to the effective date of
these regulations, this requirement shall apply to the extent
that it does not require grading of areas which have not been
disturbed by mining activities. Where grading would require
such disturbance, a reduction in the distance of the graded
shoreline above and below the average water table elevation
shall be permitted. Slopes beyond a water body's shoreline
shall be permitted at the natural angle of repose to the bottom
of the pond. [Amended 10-11-94 by Ord. No. 94-270]
(g) All equipment, machinery, and structures, except for
structures that are usable for recreational purposes or any
§ 95-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-8
1:173
§ 95-9. Permit revocation; reinstatement fees.
other use authorized by the Planning Board in this zone, shall
be re-moved within six months after the resource extraction
operation is terminated. Whenever restoration has commenced
and is thereafter suspended and where such suspension of
restoration activities occur for a continuous period of 180 days
as determined by the Municipal Zoning Officer, such shall
constitute a basis for default under the performance guaranty,
entitling the municipality to take appropriate action against
the surety, requiring the removal of all equipment from the site
and the suspension of all mining and excavation activities. The
Township Committee may, in its sole discretion, after the notice
required pursuant to this section, take possession of the site
and proceed with the rehabilitation of the premises as provided
in this section.
(h) Restoration shall, to the maximum extent practical, result in
the reestablishment of the vegetation association which shall
include a combination of the following as set by the Planning
Board:
[1] Planting of a minimum of 1,000 one year old pitch pine
seedlings per acre.
[2] Stabilization of exposed areas by establishing ground
cover vegetation of switchgrass, panicgrass, redtop and
crownvetch.
[3] Cluster planting of characteristic Pinelands Oak Species,
such as blackjack oak, bur oak, chestnut oak, and black
oak and shrubs, such as black huckleberry, sheep laurel,
and mountain laurel. All plantings shall be at a sufficient
spacing to ensure establishment of the species.
B. Timing.
(1) Restoration shall commence immediately and be current with
mining operations and shall be in accordance with the operation
plan and proper land reclamation and forestry practices.
(2) Restoration of a permit area shall be completed in accordance with
the approved reclamation plan, within six months of the expiration
date of the permit.
A. Should it be determined by the Municipal Zoning Officer that an
applicant has not complied with the conditions of the site plan approval
which provides the basis of approval for the mining excavation permit,
the Township Committee shall have the right to revoke the mining
permit for such time until the permit holder complies with said
conditions of approval. Such revocation shall be by resolution which
shall state the items of violation on which the revocation was based and
§ 95-8 DENNIS CODE § 95-9
1:174
§ 95-10. Violations and penalties.
A firm, person, association or corporation violating any section of this
chapter shall, upon conviction before the Municipal Court of the Township
of Dennis or any other court having jurisdiction, be subjected to a fine of
not less than $250 nor more than $500 for a first offense. For any second
or subsequent offense, there shall be a fine in the amount of $1,000 and/or
incarceration for the operator of the gravel pit for not more than 90 days.
Any repetition of a violation of this chapter shall be deemed a new offense.
For the purpose of this chapter, one need not be charged as a second or
subsequent offender to be punished as a second or subsequent offender.
§ 95-11. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect January 1, 1995.
§ 95-12. Repealer.
All ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are repealed. Specifically
Ordinance No. 88-150 codified as former Section 95-1 through 95-12 of the
Code of Dennis Township.
Chapter 98
the time granted to the permit holder in which to resolve said
violations. Should the permit holder fail to comply with the conditions
of the revocation resolution, the permit holder shall be declared in
default of the conditions of the permit by resolution of the Township
Committee. Such resolution shall be forwarded to the guarantors of
the performance guaranties and the guaranties shall be utilized to
perform compliance with the outstanding conditions of the permit.
The Township Committee shall have the right to utilize the municipal
officials as necessary to assure compliance with the permit conditions
and the cost of same shall be applied against the guaranties.
B. After reasonable notice and an opportunity to be heard before the
Township Committee, the license of any firm, person, associations or
corporation may be revoked or suspended for such period as the
Township Committee may determine for any violation of the terms
hereof or the terms and conditions of any approved plan and permit
granted hereunder.
Should, after revocation, the permit holder comply with the conditions
of the revocation resolution, the permit shall, by resolution, be reissued
for the remaining term of the original permit. Prior to the reissuance
of a revoked permit, the Township Committee shall have received
verification from the Township Engineer that all items have been
completed. Additionally, the permit holder shall deposit with the
Township Clerk a fee of $250 and shall deposit with Township Clerk an
escrow amount for inspection.
§ 95-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-12
1:175
FEES
§ 95-12 DENNIS CODE § 95-12
1:176
ARTICLE I
Capital Improvement Fund for Recreation Facilities
[Adopted 12-9-1985 as Ord. No. 85-121]
§ 98-1. Incorporation of preamble statements.
The statements of the preamble are incorporated herein by this reference
thereto.48
§ 98-2. Assessment against new subdivision lots; purpose.
[Amended 4-25-1988 by Ord. No. 88-148]
Every newly created lot in a subdivision in the Township of Dennis shall be
assessed the sum of $500 per lot at the time of subdivision, said funds to be
deposited in a dedicated recreation account administered by the Township
Committee, utilized and administered solely for a capital improvement
program to increase and improve recreational facilities of the Township of
Dennis. The term "subdivision" shall be applied as defined by the Municipal
Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.) and as applied in the land use
ordinances of the Township of Dennis.49
§ 98-3. Basis of program.
This program is based upon existing information in the possession of the
municipality and its various subordinate agencies and considers and takes
into account the needs of the municipality as shown in the Master Plan and
as permitted by the Municipal Land Use Law.50
§ 98-4. Administration of funds.
Said funds, when collected, shall be administered in accordance with the
Local Budget Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:4-1 et seq.)
48.Editor's Note: The preamble of this ordinance provided as follows: Whereas, the Township
of Dennis has a need for improved and increased recreation facilities; Whereas, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-29 et seq. provides for preparation of a capital improvement program and provides
for implementation of charges therefor; and Whereas, the Planning Board of Dennis has
recommended a certain program; Now therefore be it ordained by the Township
Committee of the Township of Dennis, County of Cape May, State of New Jersey, as follows:
49.Editor's Note: See Ch. 165, Subdivision of Land, and Ch. 185, Zoning.
50.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 98-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-4
1:177

ARTICLE II
Applications to Zoning Board of Adjustment and Planning Board
[Adopted 4-25-1988 as Ord. No. 88-147]
§ 98-5. Land Use Board Fee Schedule. [Amended 9-10-1990 by Ord.
No. 90-197; 12-10-1990 by Ord. No. 90-204; 4-14-1997 by Ord. No.
97-03; 9-10-01 by Ord. No. 2001-06; 2-14-07 by Ord. No. 2008-02;
7-23-19 by Ord. No. 2019-09]
The following fee schedule shall be applied to all applications before the
consolidated Land Use Board of the Township of Dennis:
Type Application Fee Escrow Fee
Informal review $150 $300
Minor Subdivision $250 $1,000
Major Subdivision
Sketch plat $200 $200
Preliminary $600 $2,500
Final $200 $1,000
Tax Map Revision $125 per lot
Minor Site Plan
Single residential $150 $750
Nonresidential $300 $1,000
Major Site Plan
Residential (2 to 5 units)
Preliminary $400 $3,000
Final $100 $1,000
Residential (6 or more units)
Preliminary $700 $3,000
Final $100 $1,000
Nonresidential (1 to 4 units)
Preliminary $400 $2,500
Final $100 $1,000
Nonresidential (5 or more
units)
Preliminary $700 $3,000
Final $150 $1,000
Amended site plan $200 $1,000
Excavation Permit $500 $2,000
§ 98-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-5
1:179
Type Application Fee Escrow Fee
Site Plan Waiver $250 $1,000
Variances
Appeals $100 $1,500
Interpretation $100 $1,500
Bulk variances
Residential $250 $1,000
Nonresidential $300 $1,500
Use and other
Residential $250 $1,500
Nonresidential $500 $1,500
Extension $150 $500
Special Meetings $600 $1,500
Property owners list $10
§ 98-6. Escrow funds.
All escrow funds referred to in this Article shall be deposited by the
applicant with the Municipal Treasurer, who shall, in turn, deposit them
in a separate escrow account and carry them under the municipality's
trust fund section of accounts on the books of the municipality as an
inspection and consulting fee escrow fund. Said escrow fund shall be used
to pay the fees or professional personnel employed to inspect and approve
construction and to consult. Fees shall be billed through the municipality's
voucher system and approved for payment by the Planning Board. Any
excess of funds remaining in the escrow account at the time when all
required improvements have been finally accepted and all professional work
completed shall be returned to the applicant. If at any time it becomes
evident that the escrow account is or will be insufficient to cover said fees,
the developer shall increase the fund as required by the municipal agency
having jurisdiction.
§ 98-7. Payment of fees required for consideration.
No application shall be considered by the Planning Board or the Zoning
Board of Adjustment of the Township of Dennis unless said application fee
and escrow funds have in fact been paid.
§ 98-8. Time for submission. [Added 3-13-1989 by Ord. No. 89-164]
All applications submitted to the Planning Board and Zoning Board of the
Township of Dennis shall be submitted not before the first nor after the 15th
day of the month prior to the month of the scheduled hearing.
§ 98-5 DENNIS CODE § 98-8
1:180
ARTICLE III
Construction by Township
[Adopted 3-27-1989 as Ord. No. 89-167]
§ 98-9. Waiver.
This governing body herewith exempts and waives enforcing agency fees for
construction contracted for or conducted by the Township of Dennis within
the Township of Dennis.
§ 98-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-9
1:181

ARTICLE IV
Reimbursement Schedule for Hazardous Materials Response
[Adopted 3-26-01 as Ord. No. 2001-02]
§ 98-10. Reimbursement of fees.
Any person or company responsible for any fire, motor vehicle incident,
leak or spill involving a hazardous material or environmental emergency
requiring a response from a public safety agency of the Township of Dennis
must provide reimbursement to the township in accordance with the
schedule below for services rendered or materials expended.
Schedule of Reimbursement Fees
A. Expendable Materials.
(1) Expendable materials shall be reimbursed at the prevailing rate of
expendable equipment, materials and supplies.
B. Vehicle and personnel charges.
(1) Use of Fire Department vehicles $75 per hr.
(2) Use of EMS vehicles $75 per hr.
(3) Use of Department of Public Works vehicles or
other township vehicles
$75 per hr.
(4) Use of Township paid personnel at their
current rate per hour
(5) Use of Emergency Management personnel per
person
$25 per hr.
(6) Mitigation service $75 flat fee
C. Processing reimbursement.
(1) Upon completion of an incident, the Chief Officer of the responding
company or department shall submit copies of response reports to
the Township Clerk's Office for processing for reimbursement.
(2) Response reports must identify the responsible party - name and
address, nature of the incident, personnel and vehicles responding,
and amount of expendable equipment, materials and supplies used.
(3) Upon completion of the required paperwork, a request for
reimbursement will be forwarded to the responsible party.
This schedule of fees may be amended in the future by resolution
of the Mayor and Committee of the Township of Dennis without the
necessity of ordinance passage procedures.
§ 98-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-10
1:183

ARTICLE V
Fees for Vital Statistics Records
[Adopted 8-21-12 by Ord. No. 2012-08]
§ 98-11. Vital Statistics Fees.
The following fees are established for production of certain documents and/
or copies thereof:
A. Certified copies of documents evidencing birth, death, civil union,
marriage or domestic partnership: $10 each.
B. Burial, removal or transfer permits: $5 each, or as set forth in N.J.S.A.
26:6-17.
C. Original marriage/civil union or domestic partnership license: $28 or as
set forth in N.J.S.A. 37:1-12 and 37:1-12.1.
D. Certification of vital records: $10 each.
§ 98-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-11
1:185
Chapter 102
FIRE PREVENTION
§ 102-1. Local enforcement of state standards.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-202, the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code51 shall
be enforced locally in the Township of Dennis.
§ 102-2. Designation of local enforcing agency. [Amended
12-11-1989 by Ord. No. 89-184]
The local enforcing agency shall be the Bureau of Fire Safety and
Prevention, which is hereby created herein.
§ 102-3. Duties of local enforcing agency.
The local enforcing agency shall:
§ 102-4. Organization of Bureau of Fire Safety and Prevention.
The Bureau of Fire Safety and Prevention established by § 102-2 of this
chapter shall:
§ 102-5. Appointment and qualifications of personnel; legal
counsel; removal from office.
A. Enforce the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code in all buildings, structures
and premises within the established boundaries of the township, other
than owner-occupied buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes
and containing fewer than three dwelling units, or buildings, structures
and premises owned by the state, interstate agencies or the federal
government.
B. Faithfully comply with all the requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety
Act and the Uniform Fire Code.52
A. Be a part of the Code Compliance Department. [Amended 12-11-1989
by Ord. No. 89-184]
B. Be under the direct supervision and control of the Fire Official, who
shall report to the Construction Official.
C. Have at least one paid inspector.
D. Be known as the "Bureau of Fire Safety and Prevention of Dennis
Township."
51.Editor's Note: See N.J.A.C. 5:18-1 et seq.
52.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A 52:27-192 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 5:18-1 et seq.
§ 98-11 DENNIS CODE § 102-5
1:186
§ 102-6. Inspection of life-hazard uses.
The Bureau of Fire Safety and Prevention established by § 102-2 of this
chapter shall carry out the periodic inspections of life-hazard uses required
by the Uniform Fire Code on behalf of the Commissioner of the Department
of Community Affairs.
§ 102-7. Inspection of non-life-hazard uses; fees.
A. Appointment, qualifications and term of office of Fire Official. The Fire
Official shall be certified by the state and shall be appointed by the
governing body. The Fire Official shall serve for a term of four years.
Any vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term.
B. Appointments and qualifications of inspectors and other employees.
Inspectors and other employees of the enforcing agency shall be
appointed by the governing body upon the recommendation of the Fire
Official. All life-hazard use inspectors shall be certified by the state.
C. Appointment of legal counsel. The governing body shall specifically
appoint legal counsel to assist the agency in enforcing the Uniform Fire
Code.
D. Removal from office. The Fire Official, inspectors and other employees
of the agency shall be subject to removal by the governing body for just
cause. Before removal from office, all persons shall be afforded an
opportunity to be heard by the governing body or a hearing officer
designated by the same. (NOTE: Civil service jurisdictions must comply
with applicable laws.)
A. In addition to the registrations required by the Uniform Fire Code, the
following non-life-hazard uses shall register with the Bureau of Fire
Safety and Prevention. These uses shall be inspected once per year and
shall pay an annual fee as set forth below.
Use Group Annual Fee
Business
B-1: under 2,500 square feet $25
B-2: 2,500 to 4,900 square feet $35
B-3: 5,000 to 9,999 square feet $50
B-4: 10,000 or more square feet $100.0
Factory
F-1: under 5,000 square feet $75
F-2: 5,000 or more square feet $100
Mercantile
M-1: under 6,000 square feet $25
§ 102-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-7
1:187
§ 102-8. Periodic inspections.
All uses, as listed, shall be inspected for compliance with the provisions of
this chapter periodically but not less than every 12 months.
§ 102-9. Permit fees.
In accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:18-2.8(c), the fees for the permits listed in
N.J.A.C. 5:18-2.7(b) shall be as follows:
Use Group Annual Fee
M-2: 2,500 square feet $50
Storage
S-1: under 2,500 square feet $25
S-2: over 2,500 square feet $50
Residential
R-A: Non-owner-occupied, 1 and 2 units $25
R-B: 3 to 6 units $35
R-C: 7 to 12 units $50
R-D: 13 to 20 units $175
R-E: over 20 units $350
Utilities
U-1: under 2,500 square feet $25
U-2: over 2,500 square feet $50
B. R-A uses shall only be inspected upon sale or change of tenant.
C. Uses not classified above will be classified as business uses.
D. Uses required to be registered with the state as life-hazard uses shall
not be required to register under this section.
E. In the discretion of the Fire Official, vacant buildings will be charged
and inspected according to the previous use of the building.
F. All residential uses, except R-A uses, shall be inspected in common
areas only.
G. Registrations for all uses in this category shall expire December 31 of
each year. [Added 12-11-1989 by Ord. No. 89-184]
H. All fees and penalties shall be collected as per N.J.S.A. 2A:58-1 et seq.
[Added 12-11-1989 by Ord. No. 89-184]
§ 102-7 DENNIS CODE § 102-9
1:188
Type Fee
Type 1 $25
Type 2 $100
Type 3 $200
Type 4 $300
Type 5 $1,000
§ 102-10. Technical amendments.
(Reserved)
§ 102-11. Appeals.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-206, any person aggrieved by any action of
the local enforcing agency shall have the right to appeal to the Local
Construction Board of Appeals. If no such body exists, appeals shall be
made to the County Board of Appeals.
§ 102-12. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
Enforcement, violations and penalties shall be in conformity with the
Uniform Fire Safety Act and the Uniform Fire Code.53
Chapter 105
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Amended in entirety 8-22-17 by Ord. No. 2017-05; prior history
includes Ord. No. 87-139
§ 105-1. Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose and
objectives.
§ 105-1.1. Statutory Authorization.
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1, et
seq., delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote public health, safety, and general welfare
of its citizenry. Therefore, the Township Committee of the Township of
Dennis of Cape May County, New Jersey does ordain as follows:
§ 105-1.2. Findings of Fact.
a) The flood hazard areas of the Township of Dennis are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
53.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27-192 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 5:18-1 et seq.
§ 102-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-1.2
1:189
§ 105-1.3. Statement of Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
§ 105-1.4. Methods of Reducing Flood Losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
b) These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and
velocities, and when inadequately anchored, causes damage in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
a) Protect human life and health;
b) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
c) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
d) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
e) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, bridges located in
areas of special flood hazard;
f) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
g) Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
h) Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
a) Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
b) Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
c) Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood
waters;
§ 105-1.2 DENNIS CODE § 105-1.4
1:190
§ 105-2. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
AO ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by 1-percent-annual-chance
shallow flooding (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain) where average
depths are between one and three feet.
AH ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by 1-percent-annual-chance
shallow flooding (usually areas of ponding) where average depths are
between one and three feet. Base Flood Elevations (BFEs) derived from
detailed hydraulic analyses are shown in this zone.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Construction Official's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO or AH zone on a
community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with a one percent
annual or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding
is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — Land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year. It is shown on the FIRM as Zone V, VE, V1-30, A, AO, A1 A30,
AE, A99, or AH.
BASE FLOOD — A flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The flood elevation shown on a
published Flood Insurance Study (FIS) including the Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM). For zones AE, AH, AO, and A1-30 the elevation represents
the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a 1-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. For zones
VE and V1-30 the elevation represents the stillwater elevation (SWEL) plus
wave effect (BFE = SWEL + wave effect) resulting from a flood that has a
1-percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
d) Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and,
e) Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 105-1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-2
1:191
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
COASTAL A ZONE — The portion of the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA)
starting from a Velocity (V) Zone and extending up to the landward Limit
of the Moderate Wave Action delineation. Where no V Zone is mapped the
Coastal A Zone is the portion between the open coast and the landward
Limit of the Moderate Wave Action delineation. Coastal A Zones may be
subject to wave effects, velocity flows, erosion, scour, or a combination of
these forces. Construction and development in Coastal A Zones is to be
regulated the same as V Zones/Coastal High Hazard Areas.
COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA — An area of special flood hazard
extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along
an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from
storms or seismic sources.
CUMULATIVE SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure that equals or
exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure at the time of the
improvement or repair when counted cumulatively for 10 years.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood
hazard.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM) — The official map on
which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A non-basement building (i) built, in the case of a
building in an Area of Special Flood Hazard, to have the top of the elevated
floor or, in the case of a building in a Coastal High-Hazard Area or Coastal
A Zone, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of
the elevated floor, elevated above the base flood elevation plus freeboard
by means of piling, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to
the flow of the water, and (ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the
structural integrity of the building during a flood up to the magnitude of
the base flood. In an Area of Special Flood Hazard "elevated building" also
includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter
walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood
waters. In Areas of Coastal High Hazard and Coastal A Zones "elevated
buildings" also includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of
"elevated building" even though the lower area is enclosed by means of
breakaway walls.
EROSION — The process of gradual wearing away of land masses.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
§ 105-2 DENNIS CODE § 105-2
1:192
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
FLOOD OR FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report in which the
Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the
Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion
control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term
describes such State or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which
provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood
level for purposes of flood plain management. "Freeboard" tends to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood
conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological
effect of urbanization of the watershed.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed or existing walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
a) The overflow of inland or tidal waters and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
b)
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
a)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
b)
§ 105-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-2
1:193
LIMIT OF MODERATE WAVE ACTION (LIMWA) — Inland limit of the area
affected by waves greater than 1.5 feet during the Base Flood. Base Flood
conditions between the V Zone and the LiMWA will be similar to, but less
severe than those in the V Zone.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area [including
basement]. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, useable solely for
the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than
a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor provided that such
enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable non-elevation design requirements of 44 CFR Section 60.3.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle."
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME
SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two
or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation adopted
by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
PRIMARY FRONTAL DUNE — A continuous or nearly continuous mound
or ridge of sand with relatively steep seaward and landward slopes
immediately landward and adjacent to the beach and subject to erosion and
overtopping from high tides and waves from coastal storms. The inland limit
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
Individually listed on a State inventory of historic places in States
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
c)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in States without approved
programs.
(2)
d)
§ 105-2 DENNIS CODE § 105-2
1:194
of the primary frontal dune occurs at the point where there is a distinct
change from the relatively steep slope to a relatively mild slope.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is [i] built on a single chassis;
[ii] 400 square feet or less when measured at the longest horizontal
projections; [iii] designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by
a light duty truck; and [iv] designed primarily not for use as a permanent
dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel,
or seasonal use.
SAND DUNES — Naturally occurring or man-made accumulations of sand
in ridges or mounds landward of the beach.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L.
No. 97-348) includes substantial improvements and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site such as
the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of pilings, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings or piers,
or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a
gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred. Substantial Damage also means flood-related damages
sustained by a structure on two or more separate occasions during a
10-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood
event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market valve of
the structure before the damages occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure during a 10-year period the
cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure
before the "start of construction" of the improvement. Substantial
improvement also means "cumulative substantial improvement." This term
includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless
§ 105-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-2
1:195
of the actual repair work performed or "repetitive loss". The term does not,
however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter that
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter. A new or substantially improved structure or
other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or
other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR § 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10),
(e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
§ 105-3. General provisions.
§ 105-3.1. Lands to Which This Chapter Applies.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the Township of Dennis, Cape May County, New Jersey.
§ 105-3.2. Basis For Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard.
The areas of special flood hazard for the Township of Dennis, Community
No. 340552, are identified and defined on the following documents
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
a) A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study, Cape May
County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)" dated 10/05/2017.
b) "Flood Insurance Rate Map for Cape May County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions)" as shown on Index and panel(s)
34009C0037F, 34009C0039F, 34009C0017F,
34009C0019F, 34009C0038F, 34009C0036F,
34009C0108F, 34009C0106F, 34009C0107F,
34009C0109F, 34009C0116F, 34009C0117F,
34009C0136F, 34009C0137F, 34009C0139F,
34009C0128F, 34009C0126F, 34009C0127F,
34009C0129F, 34009C0133F, 34009C0131F,
34009C0132F, 34009C0134F, 34009C0143F,
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of State or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
a)
Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure."
b)
§ 105-2 DENNIS CODE § 105-3.2
1:196
34009C0141F, 34009C0142F, 34009C0144F,
34009C0251F, 34009C0252F, 34009C0153F,
34009C0154F, 34009C0163F, 34009C0161F,
34009C0162F, 34009C0164F,
whose effective date is 10/05/2017.
The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of this
chapter. The Flood Insurance Study, maps and advisory documents are on
file at 571 Petersburg Road, Dennisville, New Jersey.
§ 105-3.3. Penalties For Noncompliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, re-located to, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined
not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both,
for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved
in the case. Each day that the violation persists shall be deemed a separate
offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Township of Dennis,
from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy
any violation.
§ 105-3.4. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 105-3.5. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
§ 105-3.6. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
a) Considered as minimum requirements;
b) Liberally construed in favor of the Governing Body; and,
c) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
State statutes.
§ 105-3.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-3.6
1:197
This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special flood
hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages.
This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Township of Dennis,
any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance Administration,
for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 105-4. Administration.
§ 105-4.1. Establishment of Development Permit.
A Development Permit shall be obtained before construction or
development begins, including placement of manufactured homes, within
any area of special flood hazard established in subsection 105-3.2.
Application for a Development Permit shall be made on forms furnished
by the Construction Official and may include, but not be limited to; plans
in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and
elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill,
storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing.
Specifically, the following information is required:
§ 105-4.2. Designation of the Local Administrator.
The Construction Official is hereby appointed to administer and implement
this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in
accordance with its provisions.
§ 105-4.3. Duties and Responsibilities of the Administrator.
Duties of the Construction Official shall include, but not be limited to:
§ 105-4.3-1. Permit Review.
a) Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures;
b) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been
floodproofed.
c) Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in subsection 105-5.2-2; and,
d) Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
a) Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
§ 105-3.6 DENNIS CODE § 105-4.3-1
1:198
§ 105-4.3-2. Use of Other Base Flood Data.
When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with
subsection 105-3.2, Basis For Establishing the Areas of Special Flood
Hazard, the Construction Official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize
any base flood elevation data available from a Federal, State or other
source, in order to administer subsections 105-5.2-1, Specific Standards,
Residential Construction, and 105-5.2-2, Specific Standards, Nonresidential
Construction.
§ 105-4.3-3. Information to Be Obtained and Maintained.
§ 105-4.3-4. Alteration Of Watercourses.
b) Review all development permits to determine that all necessary permits
have been obtained from those Federal, State or local governmental
agencies from which prior approval is required.
c) Review all development permits in the coastal high hazard and Coastal
A Zone area of the area of special flood hazard to determine if the
proposed development alters sand dunes or other natural coastal
protections so as to increase potential flood damage.
d) Review plans for walls to be used to enclose space below the base flood
level in accordance with subsection 105-5.3-2 d).
a) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of
the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially
improved structures, and whether or not the structure contains a
basement.
b) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
i. verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
ii. maintain the floodproofing certifications required in subsection
105-4.1 c).
c) In coastal high hazard and Coastal A Zone areas, certification shall be
obtained from a registered professional engineer or architect that the
provisions of subsections 105-5.3-2 a) and 105-5.3-2 b) i. and ii. are met.
d) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of
this chapter.
a) Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Bureau of Flood Control and the Land Use
Regulation Program prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal
Insurance Administration.
§ 105-4.3-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-4.3-4
1:199
§ 105-4.3-5. Substantial Damage Review.
§ 105-4.3-6. Interpretation of Firm Boundaries.
Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in
subsection 105-4.4.
§ 105-4.4. Variance procedure.
§ 105-4.4-1. Appeal Board.
b) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse so the flood carrying capacity is not
diminished.
a) After an event resulting in building damages, assess the damage to
structures due to flood and non-flood causes.
b) Record and maintain the flood and non-flood damage of substantial
damage structures and provide a letter of Substantial Damage
Determination to the owner and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control Section.
c) Ensure substantial improvements meet the requirements of subsections
105-5.2-1, Specific Standards, Residential Construction, 105-5.2-2,
Specific Standards, Nonresidential Construction, and 105-5.2-3,
Specific Standards, Manufactured Homes.
a) The Township Committee shall hear and decide appeals and requests
for variances from the requirements of this chapter.
b) The Township Committee shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination
made by the Construction Official in the enforcement or administration
of this chapter.
c) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Township Committee, or any
taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the New Jersey Supreme Court,
as provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq and any other related statues.
d) In passing upon such applications, the Township Committee, shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
i. the danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
ii. the danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
§ 105-4.3-4 DENNIS CODE § 105-4.4-1
1:200
§ 105-4.4-2. Conditions For Variances.
iii. the susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
iv. the importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
v. the necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
vi. the availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
vii. the compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
viii. the relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program of that area;
ix. the safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
x. the expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and,
xi. the costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and
streets and bridges.
e) Upon consideration of the factors of subsection 105-4.4-1 d) and the
purposes of this chapter, the Township Committee may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further
the purposes of this chapter.
f) The Construction Official shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions, including technical information, and report any variances to
the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
a) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, providing items i.-xi. in
subsection 105-4.4-1 d) have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required
for issuing the variance increases.
b) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as
§ 105-4.4-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-4.4-2
1:201
§ 105-5. Provisions for flood hazard reduction.
§ 105-5.1. General Standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards, compliance with the applicable
requirements of the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23) and the
following standards, whichever is more restrictive, are required:
§ 105-5.1-1. Anchoring.
§ 105-5.1-2. Construction Materials And Methods.
a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
c) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
d) Variances shall only be issued upon:
i. A showing of good and sufficient cause;
ii. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and,
iii. A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public as identified in subsection 105-4.4- 1 d),
or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
e) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from
the reduced lowest floor elevation.
a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored
to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure.
b) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved shall be
anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of
anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top
or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to
applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind
forces.
a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
b) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
§ 105-4.4-2 DENNIS CODE § 105-5.1-3
1:202
§ 105-5.1-3. Utilities.
§ 105-5.1-4. Subdivision Proposals.
§ 105-5.1-5. Enclosure Openings.
All new construction and substantial improvements having fully enclosed
areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles,
building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are
subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed
the following minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings in at least two
exterior walls of each enclosed area, having a total net area of not less than
one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one
foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
covering or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters.
a) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;
b) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and
discharge from the systems into flood waters;
c) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding; and
d) For all new construction and substantial improvements the electrical,
heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning equipment and
other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding.
a) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development shall be
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
b) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development shall
have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and
water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage;
c) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development shall
have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage;
and,
d) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals
and other proposed new development which contain at least 50 lots or
five acres (whichever is less).
§ 105-5.1-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-5.2
1:203
§ 105-5.2. Specific Standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in subsection 105-3.2, Basis For Establishing the
Areas of Special Flood Hazard or in subsection 105-4.3-2, Use Of Other Base
Flood Data, the following standards are required:
§ 105-5.2-1. Residential Construction.
§ 105-5.2-2. Nonresidential Construction.
In an Area of Special Flood Hazard, all new construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential
structure located in an A or AE zone (for Coastal A Zone construction
see section 5.3 COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA AND COASTAL A ZONE)
shall have the lowest floor, including basement together with the attendant
utilities and sanitary facilities as well as all electrical, heating, ventilating,
air-conditioning and other service equipment:
either
a) For Coastal A Zone construction see subsection 105-5.3 Coastal High
Hazard Area and Coastal A Zone.
b) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure located in an A or AE zone shall have the lowest floor,
including basement together with the attendant utilities (including all
electrical, heating, ventilating, air-conditioning and other service
equipment) and sanitary facilities, elevated at or above the base flood
elevation plus two feet or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1,
whichever is more restrictive;
c) Require within any AO or AH zone on the municipality's DFIRM that all
new construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement together with
the attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, elevated above the depth
number specified in feet plus two feet, above the highest adjacent grade
(at least three feet if no depth number is specified). And, require
adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
a) Elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus two feet or as
required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1, whichever is more restrictive;
and
b) Require within any AO or AH zone on the municipality's DFIRM to
elevate above the depth number specified in feet plus two feet, above
the highest adjacent grade (at least three feet if no depth number is
specified). And, require adequate drainage paths around structures on
slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures;
or
§ 105-5.2 DENNIS CODE § 105-5.2-2
1:204
§ 105-5.2-3. Manufactured Homes.
§ 105-5.3. Coastal High Hazard Area And Coastal A Zone.
Coastal high hazard areas (V or VE Zones) and coastal A Zones are located
within the areas of special flood hazard established in subsection 3.2. These
areas have special flood hazards associated with high velocity waters from
tidal surges and hurricane wave wash; therefore, the following provisions
shall apply:
§ 105-5.3-1. Location Of Structures.
c) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level plus two feet or as
required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 6-1, whichever is more restrictive,
the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water;
d) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and,
e) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted
standards of practice for meeting the applicable provisions of this
subsection. Such certification shall be provided to the official as set
forth in subsection 4.3-3 b) ii.
a) Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with subsection
5.1-1 b).
b) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within
an area of special flood hazard shall:
i. Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage,
ii. Be constructed to minimize flood damage,
iii. Have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage;
iv. Be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the top of the
lowest floor is at or above the base flood elevation plus two feet or
as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1, whichever is more
restrictive.
v. The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or
other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are
no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
floatation, collapse, and lateral movement.
a) All buildings or structures shall be located landward of the reach of the
mean high tide.
§ 105-5.2-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-5.3-1
1:205
§ 105-5.3-2. Construction Methods.
b) The placement of manufactured homes shall be prohibited, except in an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision.
a) Elevation.
All new construction and substantial improvements shall be elevated on
piling or columns so that:
i. The bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the
lowest floor (excluding the piling or columns) is elevated to or
above the base flood elevation plus two feet, or as required by
ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 4-1, whichever is more restrictive,
ii. All electrical, heating, ventilating, air-conditioning, mechanical
equipment and other equipment servicing the building is elevated
two foot above the base flood elevation.
iii. With all space below the lowest floor's supporting member open so
as not to impede the flow of water, except for breakaway walls as
provided or in subsection 105-5.3-2 d).
b) Structural Support.
i. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
securely anchored on piling or columns.
ii. The pile or column foundation and structure attached thereto shall
be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement due to
the effects of wind and water loading values each of which shall
have a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year (100-year mean recurrence interval).
iii. Prohibit the use of fill for structural support of buildings within
Zones V1-30, VE, V, and Coastal A on the community's FIRM.
c) Certification.
A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop or review
the structural design specifications and plans for the construction and
shall certify that the design and methods of construction to be used are
in accordance with accepted standards of practice for compliance with
the provisions of subsections 105-5.3-2 a) and 105-5.3-2 b) i. and ii.
d) Space Below The Lowest Floor.
i. Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a
structure started after the enactment of this chapter shall not
enclose the space below the lowest floor unless breakaway walls,
open wood lattice-work or insect screening are used as provided for
in this section.
§ 105-5.3-1 DENNIS CODE § 105-5.3-2
1:206
§ 105-5.3-3. Sand Dunes.
Prohibit man-made alteration of sand dunes within Coastal A Zones, VE and
V Zones on the community's DFIRM which would increase potential flood
damage.
§ 105-6. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of the chapter, which shall remain in
full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this chapter are
hereby declared to be severable.
§ 105-7. Enactment.
ii. Breakaway walls, open wood lattice-work or insect screening shall
be allowed below the base flood elevation provided that they are
intended to collapse under wind and water loads without causing
collapse, displacement or other structural damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
Breakaway walls shall be designed for a safe loading resistance of
not less than 10 and no more than 20 pounds per square foot. Use
of breakaway walls which exceed a design safe loading of 20
pounds per square foot (either by design or when so required by
local or State codes) may be permitted only if a registered
professional engineer or architect certifies that the designs
proposed meet the following conditions.
(i) breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less
than that which would occur during the base flood and,
(ii) the elevated portion of the building and supporting foundation
system shall not be subject to collapse, displacement or other
structural damage due to the effects of wind and water load
acting simultaneously on all building components (structural
and non-structural). Water loading values used shall be those
associated with the base flood. Wind loading values used shall
be those required by applicable State or local building
standards.
iii. If breakaway walls are utilized, such enclosed space shall be used
solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage and not
for human habitation.
iv. Prior to construction, plans for any breakaway wall must be
submitted to the Construction Code Official or Building Sub-Code
Official for approval.
§ 105-5.3-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-7.01
1:207
§ 105-7.01. Adoption.
This chapter shall be effective on September 12, 2017 and shall remain in
force until modified, amended or rescinded by the Township of Dennis, Cape
May County, New Jersey.
Chapter 109
GAMES OF CHANCE
§ 109-1. Regulatory acts and commission.
All games of chance held, operated or conducted within the township shall
be regulated pursuant to the acts of the Legislature of the State of New
Jersey known as the "Bingo Licensing Law" and the "Raffles Licensing
Law"54 and in accordance with the rules and regulations issued or to be
promulgated by the Legalized Games of Chance Control Commission of
the State of New Jersey. All applications, licenses and proceedings in
connection therewith shall be subject to the provisions of the state acts and
rules and regulations and any laws, rules and regulations and ordinances
hereafter enacted or adopted.
§ 109-2. Issuing authority. [Added 6-12-18 by Ord. No. 2018-07]
The Municipal Clerk is hereby delegated the authority to act as the "issuing
authority" to approve the granting of bingo and raffle licenses in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 13:47-1.1 et seq. All organizations seeking a bingo and raffle
license shall file an application with the Office of the Municipal Clerk on
forms provided.
Chapter 110
AMUSEMENT GAMES
§ 110-1. Determination; areas of licensing.
The voters of the township authorized the licensing of amusement games
by referendum at the 1959 General Election. This township has various
campgrounds and is a resort area generally considered to be a place of
entertainment and amusement according to customary understanding of
such terms. It is determined, declared and recognized that the area which
permits amusement games consists of all areas presently licensed as
campgrounds, as defined in the Code of the Township of Dennis as
supplemented and amended.
54.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 5:8-24 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 5:8-50 et seq.
§ 105-7.01 DENNIS CODE § 110-2
1:208
§ 110-2. License fees; compliance with regulations.
The annual license fee for each specific kind of game authorized to be
held, operated and conducted on the licensed premises by the licensee
is hereby fixed at the sum of $250 per year regardless of the number of
units of the same specific kind of game or games to be held, operated
and conducted at each licensed premises. The annual fee is not subject to
proration and shall cover the annual term beginning January 1 to December
31 in the year within which the license is to be operative and any license
shall be operative on the annual basis provided, however, any and every
license shall not be operative upon any day, part of the day or days when
otherwise prohibited by law or by any rule or regulation promulgated by
authority of the government of the State of New Jersey or any appropriate
and authorized agency thereof.
§ 110-3. Term of license.
The license fee shall accompany the license application which must be filed
and paid to the Township Clerk and if granted, shall expire at midnight
on December 31 next thereafter regardless of the dates applied for or
obtained.
§ 110-4. Hours of operation.
Unless otherwise prohibited by law or ordinance, or by any rule or
regulation promulgated under authority of the State of New Jersey, as
aforesaid, the holder of each and every license may hold, operate and
conduct the kind of game licensed on the licensed premises, each day,
between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight.
§ 110-5. Statutory regulations.
The amusement games to be licensed and regulated pursuant hereto are
those recognized by the provisions of the Amusement Games Control Law,
Chapter 108 of the Laws of New Jersey, 1959, and the Amusement Games
Licensing Law, Chapter 109 of the Laws of New Jersey, 1959; and any
amendments, revision or supplements thereto which may since have been
enacted or which may at any future time be enacted, and all licenses issued
hereunder are subject to authority of any such laws, together with any and
all rules or regulations now or which may hereafter be promulgated by the
State Commissioner of Amusement Games Control, or those of any other
department, board, commissioner, person or agency properly authorized to
promulgate any such rule or regulation.
§ 110-6. Compliance with hours of operation.
The holding, operating and conducting of any amusement game or games at
any time or times prohibited herein is hereby declared unlawful.
§ 110-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-7
1:209
§ 110-7. Liability insurance required.
Any person engaged in the ownership and/or operation of mechanical
amusement or recreational devices, golf courses or other games,
trampolines and similar devices which are operated for commercial or
amusement purposes intended for the use and enjoyment of the public
will be required to carry sufficient public liability insurance to adequately
protect the general public and those persons using such devices and games.
§ 110-8. Amounts of coverage.
For the purposes of this chapter, insurance coverage will be deemed to be
adequate if the same is in amounts of no less than $100,000 per person,
$300,000 per accident and $50,000 property damage.
§ 110-9. Proof of coverage required at time of licensing.
Any person affected by this chapter will be required to submit proof of
the coverage to the Township Clerk in conjunction with his/her annual
application for municipal licensing, which proof shall be in the form of an
up-to-date insurance certificate covering the period for which the license is
sought.
§ 110-10. Effect of failure to produce coverage when demanded.
It shall be the obligation of any person covered by this chapter, on demand
of the Township Clerk, to produce competent evidence in the form of a
certificate of insurance of the required insurance coverage. In the event
that the firm or person covered by insurance fails to produce the coverage
within a reasonable period of time when demanded, not to be an excess of
seven days, the Township Clerk shall have the right to revoke the license
which shall not be returned nor the business covered thereby operated until
the necessary proof of insurance is deposited with the Township Clerk.
§ 110-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, association, partnership or corporation violating any
subsection of this chapter shall be liable, upon conviction, to the penalty
stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-9. Any repetition of any violation of this
chapter shall be deemed a new offense, and each day any violation is
permitted to continue shall be deemed a new offense.
Chapter 112
GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE
§ 110-7 DENNIS CODE § 110-11
1:210
ARTICLE I
Residential Collection
[Adopted 7-23-1984 as Ord. No. 84-113]
§ 112-1. Provision for collection; scope.
The Township of Dennis shall provide residential garbage collection for
properties located within the Township of Dennis.
§ 112-2. Designation of authority.
§ 112-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-10-1990 by Ord. No.
90-204]
Any person or persons, firms or corporations that violate any of the terms of
this Article or the regulations, rules and procedures established hereunder
shall, upon conviction in the Municipal Court in the Township of Dennis, pay
a fine of not less than $50, nor more than $200 for the first offense. For a
second or subsequent offense, there shall be a penalty of not less than $200
nor more than $500.
A. The Township Committee of the Township of Dennis hereby designates
the Township Commiteeperson in charge of the Public Works
Department as the authority to establish a schedule for residential
trash pickup.
B. The Township Committee of the Township of Dennis hereby authorizes
and designates the Township Committee person in charge of the Public
Works Department as the authority to set rules, regulations and
procedures for the residential garbage collection.
§ 112-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-3
1:211

ARTICLE II
Dumping
[Adopted 2-22-1988 as Ord. No. 88-144]
§ 112-4. Dumping prohibited. [Amended 5-13-1991 by Ord. No.
91-209]
§ 112-5. Closing of township landfills.
The landfills of the Township of Dennis which were previously operated by
the township shall officially be closed, and no rubbish, trash, refuse, debris,
salvage, garbage or any other type of waste shall be deposited therein by
any person, firm, corporation or municipal corporation.
§ 112-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-13-1990 by Ord. No.
90-195; 5-13-1991 by Ord. No. 91-209]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or municipal
corporation to dump, deposit or dispose of any trash, refuse, rubbish,
debris, salvage, garbage or any other type of waste in the Township of
Dennis in any place or location.
B. No person, corporation or other entity shall, regardless of intent,
engage or be permitted to engage in the collection or disposal of solid
waste in excess of one hundred forty-eight thousandths (0.148) cubic
yard of solids or 30 United States gallons of liquids, whether for profit
or otherwise, except at a disposal site or any other place which has
authorization from the Department of Environmental Protection or the
Board of Public Utilities to accept solid waste.
C. No person, corporation or other entity shall, regardless of intent,
transport or cause or permit to be transported any solid waste in excess
of one hundred forty-eight thousandths (0.148) cubic yard of solids or
30 United States gallons of liquids, whether for profit or otherwise, to a
disposal site or any other place which does not have authorization from
the Department of Environmental Protection or the Board of Public
Utilities to accept solid waste.
A. Any person, corporation or other entity who shall violate Section
112-4A of the Code shall, upon conviction be subject to a fine of not less
than $500 nor more than $1,000, to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 90 days, to a period of community service not exceeding 90
days or to any combination of these penalties. Each day upon which a
violation of this chapter shall continue to exist shall be deemed a
separate offense. Additionally, each and every separate item, article or
piece of material dumped shall be deemed a separate and distinct
offense. [Amended 3-22-99 by Ord. No. 99-05]
B. Any person who is convicted of violating Section 112-4A of this Code
within one year of the date of a previous violation of this Code and who
was fined for a previous violation shall be sentenced by the Court to an
§ 112-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-6
1:213
additional fine as a repeat offender, such fine to be not less than $100
nor more than $1,000. Said penalty shall be calculated separately from
the fine imposed for the violation of the Code.
C. Any person, corporation or other entity who is convicted of a violation
of Section 112-4B or C is subject to a fine of not less than $2,500 for a
first offense, not more than $5,000 for a second offense and not more
than $10,000 for a third and every subsequent offense. Each day during
which the violation continues constitutes an additional, separate and
distinct offense. Additionally, each and every separate item, article or
piece of material dumped shall be deemed a separate and distinct
offense. If a person is convicted of a violation of § 112-4B or C, the Court
shall, in addition to the penalties provided above, require the person to
perform community service for a term of not more than 90 days and
shall sentence the person convicted to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 90 days.
D. It is the affirmative intention of this chapter that any person,
corporation or other entity who shall be convicted of a violation of any
provision of this Article shall be sentenced to the maximum monetary
penalty allowed hereunder and, in addition, shall serve a term of
imprisonment of not less than seven days in the Cape May County jail.
The trier of fact in each case is urged, within his discretion, to
implement the penalties provided hereunder according to this
expressed intention.
E. In addition to any penalty imposed under this section of the Code, any
person, corporation or other entity who shall violate any provision of
this Article shall be ordered to remove any material dumped, deposited
or disposed of in the township or to pay the cost of cleaning up the
dumped material.
§ 112-6 DENNIS CODE § 112-6
1:214
ARTICLE III
Mandatory Recycling Program
[Adopted 8-22-1988 as Ord. No. 88-154; amended 7-22-96 by Ord.
No. 96-14; amended in its entirety 12-18-07 by Ord. No. 2007-15]
§ 112-7. Short title.
This Article shall be known and may be cited as the "Dennis Township
Recycling Program Ordinance."
§ 112-8. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Article, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
COMMINGLED — A combining of nonputrescible source-separated
recyclable materials for the purpose of recycling.
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials designated
within the Cape May County Solid Waste Management Plan to be source
separated for the purpose of recycling by residential, commercial,
institutional and industrial sectors. These materials can not be deposited in
the landfill and include:
Materials to be set out at curbside — Category 1:
PAPER PRODUCTS — Newspaper with inserts, magazines, office
paper, junk mail including shredded paper, telephone and
paperback books, corrugated cardboard, brown paper grocery
bags;
(a)
GLASS, FOOD AND BEVERAGE CONTAINERS — Clear, green and
brown food and beverage bottles and jars, excluding however, blue
and flat glass commonly known as "window glass;"
(b)
METAL FOOD AND BEVERAGE CONTAINERS — Aluminum,
bimetal and steel food and beverage containers two and one-half
(2 1/2) gallons or less in size, including empty aerosol cans;
(c)
PLASTIC BOTTLES AND JUGS — Plastic containers imprinted with
a (PETE) or (HDPE) on the bottom including food, beverage, health,
beauty and cleaning products, bottles two and one-half (2 1/2)
gallons or less in size. Automotive fluid containers and other bottles
which contained hazardous products are not included; NO motor
oil bottles, NO pesticide containers.
(d)
(1)
§ 112-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-8
1:215
PETE
HDPE
CHRISTMAS TREES — Free of decorations, tree stands and plastic
bags;
(e)
LEAVES — Comprised mainly of tree and plant leaves and not
contaminated with brush or other material; and
(f)
Materials to be recycled by the individual generator — Category 2:
TREE BRANCHES AND STUMPS — All parts of vegetative growth
from trees, and vegetative materials generated during land
clearing;
(a)
(b) GRASS — Lawn grass clippings.
FERROUS AND NON-FERROUS SCRAP — Metals, such as copper,
iron, sheet metal, aluminum, radiators, structural steel, metal pipe
and "white goods" including, but not limited to, appliances
containing "CFC's" or Freon;
(c)
ELECTRONIC WASTE — A computer central processing unit and
associated hardware including keyboards, modems, printers,
scanners and fax machines, cathode ray tubes, cathode ray tube
devices, flat panel displays or similar video display devices with a
screen that is greater than four inches measured diagonally and
that contains one or more circuit boards including, but not limited
to, televisions and cell phones. Also includes VCRs, radios and
landline telephones;
(d)
MOTOR OIL/KEROSENE/#2 HEATING OIL — Crank-case oil and
similar oils, kerosene fuel and #2 home heating oil which are used
to fuel heating equipment;
(e)
WOOD PALLETS AND CRATES — Clean untreated, unpainted
pallets and crates only;
(f)
BATTERIES — LEAD ACID BATTERIES — Used SLA (sealed lead
acid) batteries generated from motor vehicles, aviation and marine
equipment;
(g)
(2)
§ 112-8 DENNIS CODE § 112-8
1:216
MUNICIPAL RECYCLING COORDINATOR — The person or persons
appointed by the municipal governing body and who shall be authorized to
enforce the provisions of this Article, and any rules and regulations which
may be promulgated hereunder. This appointee shall also be responsible to
assure that all materials recycled in the municipality are properly reported
and recorded;
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE (MSW) STREAM — All solid waste generated
at residential, commercial and institutional establishments within the
boundaries of the municipality of Dennis Township;
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Those materials which would otherwise
become solid waste, and which may be collected, separated, or processed
and returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or
products;
SOURCE SEPARATION — The process by which recyclable materials are
separated at the point of generation by the generator thereof from solid
waste for the purposes of recycling;
SOURCE SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Recyclable materials
which are separated at the point of generation by the generator thereof
from solid waste for the purposes of recycling.
(h) PROPANE TANKS — Empty 20 to 30 lb. BBQ type tanks;
CONTAMINATED SOIL — If classified as ID27, all fuel
contaminated soil, dewatered soil, and stone from septic beds and
similar materials which are allowed to be recycled in accordance
with the regulations of the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection;
(i)
COMMERCIAL COOKING GREASE — Grease and oil generated
from food preparation by commercial sources only;
(j)
ASPHALT AND CONCRETE — Asphalt and concrete materials from
construction and demolition projects;
(k)
AUTO AND TRUCK BODIES — All junk automobiles and trucks and
parts thereof,
(l)
(m) TIRES — Worn truck and passenger car tires;
USED OIL FILTERS — Used filters that are generated from
changing crankcase oil in automobiles, trucks and other vehicles;
(n)
ANTI-FREEZE — Used antifreeze generated from automobiles,
trucks and other vehicles/sources; and
(o)
CONSUMER RECHARGEABLE NICAD (NICKEL-CADMIUM) AND
SMALL SEALED LEAD ACID BATTERIES — Small sealed batteries
generated from use of electronic equipment.
(p)
§ 112-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-9
1:217
§ 112-9. Applicability of mandatory source separation and recycling
requirements.
§ 112-10. Collection of recyclable materials.
The collection of source separated recyclable materials shall be in the
manner prescribed as follows:
A. Mandatory source separation. It shall be mandatory for all persons who
are owners, lessees, tenants or occupants of residential and
nonresidential premises, including but not limited to retail and
commercial locations, government, schools and other institutional
locations within the municipality of Dennis Township, to separate
designated recyclable materials from all solid waste.
(1) Category 1 Designated recyclable materials shall be placed
separately at the curb in a manner and on such days and times as
may be hereinafter established by the Township of Dennis.
(2) When municipal curbside collection is not provided for designated
recyclable materials, as is the case for those recyclables included in
Category 2, it shall be the obligation of the generator to deliver or
arrange for the delivery of such materials to the Cape May County
Municipal Utilities Authority (CMCMUA) recycling facilities located
at the sanitary landfill and/or transfer station as applicable, or to a
private sector market for recycling.
A. It is the responsibility of the property owner to provide adequate size
and number of containers for the separate placement of recyclables for
curbside collection as follows: Paper products may be commingled in
one container or may be placed in brown paper bags, however, plastic
bags shall not be used for curbside collection of paper products; glass,
food and beverage containers, metal food and beverage containers, and
plastic bottles and jugs may be commingled in one container. All
containers (plastic or metal, must not exceed 35 lbs. and must have
external handles and drainage holes) and brown paper bags containing
source separated recyclable materials shall be placed, prior to
collection, between the curb and the sidewalk, or in the absence of curb
and sidewalk, as near to the street as not to constitute a danger, where
such receptacles shall be readily accessible to the collector without
providing obstruction to pedestrians. The owner or occupant of the
premises shall keep all receptacles clean and in safe handling
condition. Receptacles or other items to be recycled shall be placed as
noted above anytime after 5:00 p.m. of the day immediately preceding
the day of collection, but no later than 6:00 a.m. of the day of collection.
After collection, any containers shall be removed from the curbside by
no later than 7:00 p.m. of the day of collection.
B. All receptacles or dumpsters shall be maintained in a clean and safe
manner.
§ 112-9 DENNIS CODE § 112-10
1:218
C. The following materials must be source separated and recycled through
the municipal recycling program in the following manner:
(1) Leaves — The Department of Public Works will conduct one
curbside pickup in the fall and one curbside pickup in the spring.
(2) Christmas trees — The Department of Public Works will conduct a
curbside pickup during the month of January, (schedule varies from
year to year).
(3) Brush and tree branches — The Department of Public Works will
conduct one monthly curbside pickup during the months of March,
April, May, September and October.
(4) White goods — The Department of Public Works will conduct one
monthly curbside pickup.
(5) Ferrous and nonferrous scrap — The Department of Public Works
will conduct one monthly curbside pickup.
(6) Electronics — The generator must drop off at the Department of
Public Works.
(7) Batteries — The generator must drop off at the Department of
Public Works.
(8) Used motor oil — The generator must drop off at the Department of
Public Works.
(9) Consumer rechargeable NiCad and small sealed lead acid batteries
— The generator may drop off at the Department of Public Works or
an approved private entity.
D. The following materials must be source separated and recycled by the
generator at authorized CMCMUA recycling facilities or any NJDEP
approved recycling center:
(1) Grass and tree stumps — The generator must deliver to the Cape
May County Municipal Landfill.
(2) Wood pallets and crates — The generator must deliver to the Cape
May County Landfill.
(3) Propane tanks — The generator must deliver to the Cape May
County Landfill.
(4) Tires — The generator must deliver to the Cape May County
Landfill.
(5) Antifreeze — The generator must deliver to the Cape May County
Landfill.
(6) Kerosene/ #2 Heating Oil — The generator must deliver to the
Cape May County Landfill.
§ 112-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-10
1:219
§ 112-10.1. Residential dwelling compliance requirements.
The owner of each property shall be responsible for compliance with this
Article. For multifamily units, including but not limited to condominium
complexes and seasonal hotel/motels and guest houses, the management or
owner is responsible for setting up and maintaining the recycling system,
including collection of source separated recyclable materials, except for
those designated recyclable materials for which municipal collection service
is provided to multifamily units. Violations and penalty notices will be
directed to the owner or management, in those instances where the violator
is not easily identifiable. The owner or management shall issue notification
and collection rules regarding recycling requirements to all new tenants
when they arrive and with a reminder a minimum of every six months during
their occupancy.
§ 112-10.2. Commercial establishment compliance requirements.
(7) Asphalt and concrete — The generator must deliver to an approved
private entity.
(8) Auto and truck bodies — The generator must deliver to an
approved private entity.
(9) Contaminated soil — The generator must deliver to the Cape May
County Landfill.
(10) Cooking grease — The generator must deliver to an approved
private entity.
A. All commercial, business or industrial facilities shall be required to
comply with the provisions of this Article.
B. The arrangement for collection of all categories of designated
mandatory recyclables hereunder shall be the responsibility of the
commercial, institutional or industrial property owner or their
designee, except for those specific designated recyclable materials that
are collected by the municipality from that property. All commercial,
institutional or industrial properties at which litter is generated by
employees, or the public shall provide litter and recycling receptacles.
These properties shall provide for separate recycling collection services
for the contents of the recycling receptacles.
C. Every business, institution or industrial facility shall report on a
quarterly basis to the Municipal Recycling coordinator, on such forms
as may be prescribed, regarding recycling activities at their premises,
including the amount and type of recycled material not placed curbside
for municipal collection. If material is removed from the premises by a
hauler, recycler or paper shredder, the quantity and final disposition of
the material is to be reported on the form.
D. All food service establishments, as defined in the Health Code, shall, in
addition to compliance with all other recycling requirements, be
§ 112-10 DENNIS CODE § 112-10.2
1:220
§ 112-10.3. New developments of multifamily residential units or
commercial, institutional or industrial properties.
§ 112-11. Prohibition of the collection of waste mixed with
recyclable materials.
required to recycle grease and/or cooking oil created in the processing
of food or food products, and maintain such records as may be
prescribed, for inspection by any code enforcement officer.
A. Any application to the Planning Board of the municipality of Dennis
Township, for subdivision or site plan approval for the construction of
multifamily dwellings of three or more units, single family
developments of three or more units or any commercial, institutional or
industrial development of 1,000 square feet or more, must include a
recycling plan. This plan shall contain, at a minimum, the following:
(1) A detailed analysis of the expected composition and amounts of
solid waste and recyclables generated at the proposed
development; and
(2) Locations documented on the application's site plan that provide
for convenient recycling opportunities for all owners, tenants, and
occupants. The recycling area shall be of sufficient size, convenient
location and contain other attributes (signage, lighting, fencing,
etc.) as may be determined by the Municipal Recycling
Coordinator.
B. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the municipality of
Dennis Township, the owner of any new multi-family housing or
commercial, institutional or industrial development must supply a copy
of a duly executed contract with a hauling company for the purposes of
collection and recycling of source separated designated recyclable
materials for those locations or properties where the municipality does
not otherwise provide this service.
A. It shall be unlawful for solid waste collectors to collect solid waste that
is mixed with, or contains visible signs of, designated recyclable
materials. It is also unlawful for solid waste collectors to remove for
disposal those bags or containers of solid waste which visibly display a
warning notice sticker or some other device indicating that the load of
solid waste contains designated recyclable materials.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or occupant to properly
segregate the uncollected waste for proper disposal and/or recycling.
Allowing such unseparated solid waste and recyclables to accumulate
at the curbside beyond 7:00 p.m. on the day of collection will be
considered a violation of this Article and the local sanitary code.
C. Once placed in the location identified by this Article, or any rules or
regulations promulgated pursuant to this Article, no person, other than
§ 112-10.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-11
1:221
§ 112-12. Construction, renovation and demolition debris recovery
plan.
For all activities that require municipal approval such as construction,
demolition or public event permits, a designated recyclable materials plan
shall be filed along with all other required permit conditions. The plan shall
include provisions for the recovery of all designated recyclable materials
generated during construction, renovation and demolition activities, as well
as, public events.
§ 112-12.1. Compliance with diversion requirement.
The Municipal Recycling Coordinator shall review the information
submitted pursuant to this section of the Article and determine, prior
to the issuance of the municipal approval or permit, whether the plan
submitted by the owner of the entity carrying out the covered activity will
comply or fail to comply with the recycling requirements set forth herein.
The determination regarding compliance will be provided to the Municipal
Public Works Director/Supervisor and the owner of the entity carrying out
the covered project in writing. When such plan is deemed not compliant,
the Municipal Recycling Coordinator shall include specific conditions to
be implemented by the permit holder to achieve compliance. It shall be a
violation of this Article for any owner or permit holder to fail to comply with
the recycling requirements set forth herein.
§ 112-13. Enforcement.
The Municipal Recycling Coordinator, Director of Public Works, Assistant
Supervisor of Public Works, and the Code Enforcement Officer are hereby
individually and severally empowered to enforce the provisions of this
Article. The enforcers of the Article may conduct an inspection at the site
of the generator, which consists of sorting through containers and opening
of solid waste bags to detect, by sound or sight, the presence of any
designated recyclable material.
Additionally, the Cape May County Health Department (CMCHD) shall be
empowered to enforce the provisions of this Article. The municipality shall
retain primary enforcement responsibility with the CMCHD serving in a
secondary enforcement role which includes inspection of commercial
establishments with proof of prior law enforcement actions.
any personnel authorized by the municipality or the owner or occupant
responsible for placement of the designated recyclable materials for
collection, shall tamper with, collect, remove, or otherwise handle
designated recyclable materials. Upon placement of such designated
recyclable material, it shall become property of the municipality or its
authorized agent. It shall be a violation of this Article for any person not
duly authorized to collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked
up any recyclable materials that are the property of the municipality as
provided for above.
§ 112-11 DENNIS CODE § 112-14
1:222
§ 112-14. Severability and effective date.
If any section, paragraph, subsection, clause or provision of this Article
shall be adjudged by a Court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such
adjudication shall apply only to the section, paragraph, subsection, clause
or provision so adjudged, and the remainder of this Article shall be deemed
valid and effective.
This Article shall take effect immediately upon enactment by the governing
body of the municipality.
§ 112-15. Rules and regulations.
The governing body is hereby authorized to promulgate, from time to
time, additional rules and regulations relating to the source separation,
preparation, placement and collection of recyclable materials pursuant to
the provisions of this program and subchapter; provided, however, that such
rules and regulations shall not be inconsistent with terms and provisions of
this subchapter and shall be approved by the governing body. Such rules
and regulations shall be duly promulgated subsequent to publication so that
the public has had notice thereof.
§ 112-16. Penalty.
Any person or entity violating, or failing to comply with, any of the
provisions provided in this Article shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punishable by a fine of not less than $50 and not more than $500 or by
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment, in the discretion of the Municipal Judge. The continuation of
any violation for each successive day shall constitute a separate offense, and
the person, persons, or entity allowing or permitting the continuation of the
violation may be punished as provided above for each separate offense. Any
violation may be afforded one warning at the discretion of the enforcement
designees before the issuance of any fines.
§ 112-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-16
1:223

ARTICLE IV
Refuse Containers in Nonresidential Areas
[Adopted 7-21-09 as Ord. No. 2009-03]
§ 112-17. Purpose.
The purpose of this Article is to require dumpsters and other refuse
containers that are outdoors or exposed to stormwater to be covered at all
times and prohibits the spilling, dumping, leaking, or otherwise discharge of
liquids, semi-liquids or solids from the containers to the municipal separate
storm sewer system(s) operated by the Township of Dennis and/or the
waters of the state so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to
prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 112-18. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this Article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Township of Dennis or other public
body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
REFUSE CONTAINER — Any waste container that a person controls
whether owned, leased, or operated, including dumpsters, trash cans,
garbage pails, and plastic trash bags.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface or groundwater, whether natural or artificial, within
the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction.
§ 112-19. Prohibited conduct.
Any person who controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster is
§ 112-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-19
1:225
covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out or
overflowing.
Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container or
dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does not leak or
otherwise discharge liquids, semi-liquids or solids to the municipal separate
storm sewer system(s) operated by the Township of Dennis.
§ 112-20. Exceptions to prohibition.
§ 112-21. Enforcement.
This Article shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer of the
Township of Dennis.
§ 112-22. Penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this Article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $200.
A. Permitted temporary demolition containers
B. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers)
C. Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers
D. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid NJPDES permit
E. Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, white
goods placed curbside for pickup)
§ 112-19 DENNIS CODE § 112-22
1:226
Chapter 118
HOUSING STANDARDS
§ 118-1. Designation of officers.55
The Health Inspector appointed by the Board of Health of the Township
of Dennis and the Code Enforcement Officer are hereby designated as the
officers to exercise the powers prescribed by this chapter, and they shall
serve in such capacity without any additional salary.
§ 118-2. Adoption of state standards.
Pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1946, c. 21 (N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1), the New
Jersey State Housing Code (1980 Revision), as approved by the Department
of Community Affairs and filed in the Secretary of State's office, is hereby
accepted, adopted and established as a standard to be used as a guide in
determining whether dwellings in this municipality are safe, sanitary and fit
for human habitation and rental. A copy of the New Jersey Sanitary Housing
Code (1980 Revision) is annexed to this chapter, and three copies of the
same have been placed on file in the office of the Township Clerk and are
available to all persons desiring to use and examine the same.
§ 118-3. Inspections; right of entry; search warrant.
A. The Health Inspector is hereby authorized and directed to make
inspections to determine the condition of dwellings, dwelling units,
rooming units and premises located within the Township of Dennis in
order that he may perform his duty of safeguarding the health and
safety of the occupants of dwellings and of the general public.
B. For the purpose of making such inspections, the Health Inspector is
hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey at all reasonable times
all dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and premises, provided that
the Health Inspector shall have first obtained, in writing, the consent of
the owner or occupant of the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit and
premises, according to the practice of the court, upon the information
and belief of the Health Inspector or any other person with knowledge
of the facts that there is in existence in any such: dwelling, dwelling
unit, rooming unit or premises a condition which constitutes a violation
of this chapter or any rule, regulation or order adopted pursuant
hereto.
C. The owner or occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit and rooming
unit or the person in charge thereof who has given written consent, as
aforesaid, shall give the Health Inspector free access to such dwelling,
dwelling unit or rooming unit and its premises at all reasonable times
for the purpose of such inspection, examination and survey.
55.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 112-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 118-3
1:227
§ 118-4. Notice of violation.
§ 118-5. Hearings.
D. A search warrant shall be directed to the Health Inspector or any police
officer of the Township of Dennis, and the owner or occupant of every
dwelling, dwelling unit and rooming unit or the person in charge
thereof who has not given written consent, as aforesaid, and in
connection with which a search warrant has been issued shall give the
Health Inspector and any accompanying police officer of the Township
of Dennis free access to such dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit
and its premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of such
inspection, examination and survey to the extent authorized by said
search warrant.
E. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit, whether said dwelling
has been inspected by consent or by virtue of the authority of a warrant
to search, shall give the owner thereof or his agent or employee access
to any part of such dwelling or dwelling unit or its premises at all
reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations
as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter
or the provisions of any regulation adopted or any lawful order issued
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
A. Whenever the Health Inspector determines that there are reasonable
grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of
this chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, he
shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person or persons
responsible therefor as hereinafter provided.
B. Such notice shall be put in writing, include a statement of the reasons
why it is being issued; allow a reasonable time for the performance of
any act it requires; and be served upon the owner or his agent or the
occupant, as the case may require; provided that such notice shall be
deemed to be properly served upon such owner or agent or upon such
occupant if a copy thereof is served upon him personally or if a copy
thereof is sent by registered mail to his last known address or if a copy
thereof is posted in a conspicuous place on or about the dwelling
affected by the notice or if he is served with such notice by any other
method authorized or required under the laws of this state. Such notice
may contain an outline of remedial action that, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and with rules and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
A. Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection
with the enforcement of any provision of this chapter or of any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant thereto may request and shall be granted
a hearing on the matter before the Board of Health, provided that such
person shall file in the office of the Township Clerk a written petition
§ 118-3 DENNIS CODE § 118-5
1:228
§ 118-6. Action on notices not petitioned; procedure; appeal.
Any notice served pursuant to this chapter shall automatically become an
order if a written petition for a hearing is not filed in the office of the
Township Clerk within 10 days after such notice is served. The proceedings
at such hearing, including the findings and decision of the Board of Health,
shall be summarized, reduced to writing and entered as a matter of public
record in the office of the Township Clerk. Such record shall also include
a copy of every notice or order issued in connection with the matter. Any
person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Health may seek relief
therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction as provided by the laws of
the state.
§ 118-7. Emergencies.
requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the
grounds therefor within 10 days after the day the notice was served.
B. Upon receipt of such petition, the Board of Health shall set a time and
place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice
thereof.
C. At such hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard
and to show why such notice should be modified or withdrawn.
D. The hearing shall be commenced not later than 10 days after the day on
which the petition was filed, provided that, upon application of the
petitioner, the Board of Health may postpone the date of the hearing for
a reasonable time beyond such ten-day period if, in its judgment, the
petitioner has submitted a good and sufficient reason for such
postponement.
E. After such hearing, the Board of Health shall sustain, modify or
withdraw the notice, depending upon its findings as to whether the
provisions of this chapter and of the rules and regulations adopted
pursuant thereto have been complied with. If the Board of Health
sustains or modifies such notice, it shall be deemed to be an order.
A. Whenever the Health Inspector finds that an emergency exists which
requires immediate action to protect the public health or safety, he may,
without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such
an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he deems
necessary to meet the emergency.
B. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this chapter, such order shall
be effective immediately.
C. Any person to whom such order is directed shall comply therewith
immediately but, upon petition to the Board of Health, shall be afforded
a hearing as soon as possible. After such hearing, depending upon its
findings as to whether the provisions of this chapter and of the rules
and regulations adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with, the
§ 118-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 118-7
1:229
§ 118-8. Rules and regulations.
The Health Inspector is hereby authorized and empowered to make and
adopt such written rules and regulations as he may deem necessary for the
proper enforcement of the provisions of this chapter; provided, however,
that such rules and regulations shall not be in conflict with the provisions of
this chapter nor in any way alter, amend or supersede any of the provisions
thereof. The Health Inspector shall file a certified copy of all rules and
regulations which he may adopt in his office and in the office of the Clerk of
the Township of Dennis.
§ 118-9. Compliance with state standards required.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or rent to another for occupancy
any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein which does
not conform to the provisions of the New Jersey State Housing Code (1980
Revision) established hereby as the standard to be used in determining
whether a dwelling is safe, sanitary and fit for human habitation.56
Chapter 126
LITTERING
§ 126-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LITTER — Any used or unconsumed substance or waste material which
has been discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber,
paper or other natural or synthetic material or any combination thereof,
including but not limited to any bottle, jar or can or any top, cap or
detachable tab of any bottle, jar or can, any unlighted cigarette, cigar,
match or any flaming or glowing material or any garbage, trash, refuse,
debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspaper,
magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or other packaging
or construction material, but does not include the waste of the primary
processes of mining or other extraction processes, logging, sawmilling,
farming or manufacturing.
LITTER RECEPTACLE — A container suitable for the deposit of litter.
Board of Health shall continue such order in effect or modify it or
revoke it.
56.Editor's Note: Former Section VII, which provided penalties for violations of this chapter
and which immediately followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code; see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. For current provisions regarding violations and penalties,
see § 1-9 of Ch. 1, General Provisions.
§ 118-7 DENNIS CODE § 126-2
1:230
§ 126-2. Littering prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, discard or otherwise place
litter of any nature upon any public or private property, other than a litter
receptacle.
§ 126-3. Dumping prohibited; exception.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discard or dump along any street or
road, on or off any right-of-way, any household or commercial solid waste,
rubbish, refuse, junk, vehicle or vehicle parts, rubber tires, appliances,
furniture or private property, except by written consent of the owner of said
property, in any place not specifically designated for the purpose of solid
waste storage or disposal.
§ 126-4. Receptacles required at certain places; responsibility for
provision and servicing.
A. Litter receptacles and their servicing are required at the following
public places which exist in the municipality, including:
(1) Sidewalks used by pedestrians in active retail commercially zoned
areas, such that, at a minimum, there shall be no single linear
quarter-mile without a receptacle.
(2) Buildings held out for use by the public, including schools,
government buildings and railroad and bus stations.
(3) Parks.
(4) Drive-in restaurants.
(5) All street vendor locations.
(6) Self service refreshment areas.
(7) Construction sites.
(8) Gasoline service station islands.
(9) Shopping centers.
(10) Parking lots.
(11) Campgrounds and trailer parks.
(12) Marinas, boat moorage and fueling stations and boat launching
areas.
(13) Public and private piers operated for public use.
(14) Beaches and bathing areas.
(15) Special events to which the public is invited, including sporting
events, parades, carnivals, circuses and festivals.
§ 126-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-4
1:231
§ 126-5. Disposal of accumulated litter; maintenance of sidewalks;
containerization.
§ 126-6. Overflow of disposal bins prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any residential or commercial property owner to
permit open or overflowing waste disposal bins on his or her property.
§ 126-7. Litter from vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be driven, moved, stopped or parked
on any public roadway unless such a vehicle is constructed, covered or
loaded to prevent any of its load from dropping, sifting, leading or otherwise
escaping therefrom. Any person operating a vehicle from which any
materials which constitute litter have fallen or escaped or which could
cause an obstruction, damage a vehicle or otherwise endanger travelers or
public property shall immediately cause the public property to be cleaned
of all such materials and shall pay the costs therefor.
§ 126-8. Construction sites.
It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent or contractor in charge of a
construction or demolition site to permit the accumulation of litter before,
during or immediately following completion of any construction or
demolition project. It shall be the duty of the owner, agent or contractor
in charge of a construction site to furnish containers adequate to
accommodate flyable or nonflyable debris or trash at areas convenient to
construction areas and to maintain and empty the receptacles in such a
manner and with such a frequency as to prevent spillage of refuse.
§ 126-9. Duties of property owners and occupants.
It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or person in
charge of any structure to keep and cause to be kept the sidewalk and
curb abutting the building or structure free from obstruction or nuisances
of every kind and to keep sidewalks, areaways, backyards, courts and alleys
free from litter.
B. The proprietors of these places or the sponsors of these events shall be
responsible for providing and servicing the receptacles such that
adequate containerization is available.
A. No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, catch basin
or other public place any accumulation of litter from any public or
private sidewalk or driveway.
B. Every person who owns or occupies property shall keep the sidewalk in
front of his or her premises free of litter.
C. All litter sweepings shall be collected and properly containerized for
disposal.
§ 126-4 DENNIS CODE § 126-10
1:232
§ 126-10. Distribution of handbills.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, to cause to be placed or hire
another person to place any advertisement, handbill or unsolicited material
of any kind in or on any street, sidewalk, building or vehicle within the
community in such a manner that it may be removed by natural forces.
§ 126-11. Abatement of violations by township; costs to become
lien.
In the event that the owner or possessor of private property or lands shall
refuse or neglect to abate or remedy the condition which constitutes a
violation of this chapter, the municipality may cause the condition to be
abated and remedied. Upon the removal of any materials prohibited to be
stored or abandoned on lands by this chapter by or under the direction of
an appointed officer or officers of this jurisdiction, in cases where the owner
or tenant shall have refused or neglected to remove the materials within
five days of receiving a notice of violation, such officer shall certify the cost
thereof to the municipality, which shall examine the certificate and, if found
correct, shall cause the cost as shown thereon to be charged against said
lands and be added to and become and form part of the taxes next to be
assessed and levied upon said lands. The fines shall bear interest at the
same rate as taxes and shall be collected and enforced by the same officers
and in the same manner as taxes.57
§ 126-12. Violations and penalties. [Added 3-22-99 by Ord. No.
99-05]
Any person, corporation or other entity who shall violate Chapter 126 of this
Code shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor
more than $1,000, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, to a
period of community service not exceeding 90 days or to any combination
of these penalties.
Chapter 128
LOITERING
§ 128-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter.
LOITERING — Remaining idle or walking aimlessly about in essentially one
location.
PARENT or GUARDIAN — Any adult person having care or custody of a
minor, whether by reason of blood relationship, the order of any court or
otherwise.
57.Editor's Note: Former Section X, Penalties, which immediately followed this section, was
deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. For current
penalty provisions, see Section 1-9 of Ch. 1, General Provisions.
§ 126-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 128-1
1:233
PUBLIC PLACE — A place to which the public has access and shall include
any public building and grounds, street, boardwalk or sidewalk. It shall also
include the front or neighborhood of a store, shop, restaurant, tavern or
other place of business, and public grounds, areas, parks and marinas, as
well as parking lots or other vacant private property not owned by or under
the control of the person charged with violating this section or in the case
of a minor, not owned or under the control of his parent or guardian.
§ 128-2. Certain Types of Loitering Prohibited.
No person shall loiter in a public place in such a manner as to:
§ 128-3. Violation.
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be ordered to move
on by a police officer, constable or other law enforcement officer and failing
which shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter.
§ 128-4. Loitering by minors; notice; presumption.
The parent or guardian of a minor under the age of 18 years shall knowingly
permit that minor to loiter in violation of this chapter. Whenever any minor
under the age of 18 years is charged with a violation of this chapter, his
parent or guardian shall be notified of this fact. If at any time within 30 days
following the giving of notice, the minor to whom such notice relates again
violates this chapter, it shall be presumed in the absence of evidence to the
contrary that the minor did so with the knowledge and permission of his
parent or guardian.
§ 128-5. Penalty.
Any person violating the terms or provisions of this chapter for a first
offense shall be liable for a fine of up to $500, incarceration in the Cape
May County Jail for a period not to exceed 30 days and ordered to perform
community service for a period of time not to exceed 100 hours.
§ 128-6. Observance of lawful orders and posted traffic regulations.
No person shall disobey or fail to follow the order, direction or other signal
of any police officer, sheriffs deputy, New Jersey State Trooper, constable
or other properly authorized law enforcement official within the township;
nor shall any persons disobey or fail to follow the traffic instructions on any
properly posted traffic control device or traffic signal within the township.
A. Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles.
B. Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in a public place.
This section shall include the making of unsolicited remarks of an
offensive, disgusting or insulting nature or which are calculated to
annoy or disturb the person to, or in whose hearing, they are made.
§ 128-1 DENNIS CODE § 128-6
1:234
Chapter 130
MOTOR-DRIVEN VEHICLES
§ 128-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 128-6
1:235

ARTICLE I
Vehicles Not Capable of Registration
§ 130-1. Definitions.
The following definition(s) shall have the meaning hereinafter set forth with
respect to this chapter:
MOTOR-DRIVEN VEHICLES — Includes, but is not limited to, mini-bikes,
motorscooters, go-carts, swampbuggies and snowmobiles and any other
motor-driven vehicles not capable of being registered pursuant to N.J.S.A.
39:1-1, Motor Vehicles and Traffic Regulations of New Jersey Statutes,
as amended, except such vehicles which are expressly exempt from
registration.
§ 130-2. Unlawful acts. [Amended 9-1-09 by Ord. No. 2009-05]
No person shall operate or permit and suffer to be operated, a motordriven
vehicle, as defined herein, within the Township of Dennis under the
following circumstances:
§ 130-3. Liability of parents or guardians for minors.
It shall be rebuttably presumed that any person under the age of 18 years
who operates a motor-driven vehicle in violation of the provisions of this
chapter, and who resides with his parent, guardian or other person having
custody of such person, his operating the motor-driven vehicle with the
sufferance and permission of such parent, guardian or other person, and
each of these shall be subject to prosecution the same as the minor who
actually operates the motor-driven vehicle in violation of the provisions of
this chapter.
A. On private property of another without the express prior written
consent of the owner and occupant of the property. Where such express
written consent has been obtained, the operator shall keep it on his
person, available for immediate display, during the period of operation.
B. On any public or quasi-public grounds or private property, inclusive of
sidewalks and parking lots.
C. In such manner as to create loud, unnecessary or unusual noises, so as
to disturb or interfere with the peace and quiet of other persons. To this
end, no person shall operate such a motor-driven vehicle before the
hour of 9:00 a.m. and after the hour of 9:00 p.m., prevailing time, or
sunset, whichever shall first occur.
D. In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger, or be
likely to endanger, the safety or property of any person.
E. On or upon all streets, highways, lanes, alleys and public places in the
Township.
§ 130-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-4
1:237
§ 130-4. Proceeding against minors.
Any person under the age of 18 years who shall violate any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be deemed to be a juvenile delinquent and shall be
proceeded against as such.
§ 130-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000 or
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or both. In addition to
the foregoing penalties, the court imposing sentence may impose an
appropriate period of community service.
§ 130-4 DENNIS CODE § 130-5
1:238
ARTICLE II
All-Terrain Vehicles
[Adopted 9-4-12 by Ord. No. 2012-09]
§ 130-6. Purpose.
The purpose of this Article is to control and regulate all-terrain vehicles, as
defined in N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et seq. and 39:3C-1 et seq., upon public roadways
or public property and certain private property, in order to preserve the
public peace and order and protect the health, safety and welfare of the
general public of the Township of Dennis. This Article shall be in addition to
and supplementary of all other applicable ordinances.
§ 130-7. Definitions.
§ 130-8. Operation and use restrictions.
A. Whenever any words and phrases are used in this Article, the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 shall be deemed to
apply to such words and phrases used herein.
B. As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE — A motor vehicle, designed to travel over any
terrain, of a type possessing between three and six rubber tires and
powered by a gasoline engine not exceeding 700 cubic centimeters, but
shall not include golf carts.
PUBLIC HIGHWAY — The entire width between the boundary lines of
every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use
of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
PUBLIC LANDS — Any and all real property that is owned or controlled
by a governmental entity.
A. Public lands. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit to
or suffer to be operated an all-terrain vehicle, as defined herein, on any
public grounds or property, including playgrounds and recreational
areas, except as limited in accordance with law on public streets or
highways as defined in N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 and public parking areas.
B. Limited access highways. No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle
upon limited access highways or within the right-of-way limits thereof.
C. Public streets or highways. No person shall operate an all-terrain
vehicle upon the main traveled portion of any public street or highway
or within the right-of-way limits thereof except as follows:
(1) Properly registered all-terrain vehicles may cross, as directly as
possible, public streets or highways, except limited access
highways, provided that such crossing can be made in safety and
that it does not interfere with the free movement of vehicular traffic
§ 130-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-8
1:239
approaching from either direction of such public street or highway.
Prior to making any such crossing, the operator shall bring the allterrain
vehicle to a complete stop. It shall be the responsibility of
the operator of the all-terrain vehicle to yield the right-of-way to all
vehicular traffic upon any public street or highway before crossing
the same.
(2) Wherever it is impracticable to gain immediate access to an area
adjacent to a public highway where an all-terrain vehicle is to be
operated, it may be operated adjacent and parallel to such public
highway for the purpose of gaining access to the area of operation.
This subsection shall apply to the operation of an all-terrain vehicle
from the point where it is unloaded from a motorized conveyance to
the area where it is to be operated or from the area where operated
to a motorized conveyance when such loading or unloading cannot
be effected in the immediate vicinity to the area of operation
without causing a hazard to vehicular traffic approaching from
either direction on said public highway. Such loading or unloading
must be accomplished with due regard to safety, at the nearest
possible point to the area of operation.
D. Consent required on certain public and private property.
(1) No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle on any public
property or the property of another without receiving the consent
of the owner of the property or the person who has a contractual
right to the use of such property. This provision shall not apply to
non-owner family members of the owner. Such operators shall
provide to any law enforcement member the name, address and
telephone number of such owner who has granted consent and
shall be allowed to engage in further operation upon any such
property only after such consent has been confirmed by such law
enforcement member.
(2) No person shall continue to operate an all-terrain vehicle on public
property or the property of another after consent has been denied
or withdrawn.
E. Careless, reckless or negligent operation. It shall be unlawful for any
person to operate or permit or suffer to be operated an all-terrain
vehicle in a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger or
be likely to endanger the safety or property of any person.
F. Protective helmets. Any person operating such vehicles upon any public
roadway or property shall wear a protective helmet approved by the
Commissioner of the Motor Vehicle Commission in the Department of
Law and Public Safety of the State of New Jersey. Any such helmet shall
be of a type acceptable for use as provided in N.J.S.A. 39:3-76.7 through
39:3-76.10.
G. Headlights, taillights, brakes and mufflers. It shall be unlawful for any
person to operate or permit or suffer to be operated an all-terrain
§ 130-8 DENNIS CODE § 130-8
1:240
§ 130-9. Violations and penalties.
vehicle upon the public roadways or public lands that is not equipped
with working headlights, taillights, brakes and proper mufflers as
supplied by the motor manufacturer or subsequently installed for the
particular model without modifications.
H. Rules and regulations. The Township Committee may, from time to time,
adopt certain rules and regulations applicable to the use of such
vehicles upon public property, which shall not be contrary to the
contents of this Article. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any
provision of this Article or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to
this Article.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Article or any rule or
regulation promulgated pursuant to this Article shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $1,000 for the first offense and not more than
$2,000 for any subsequent offense, in the discretion of the Court.
B. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
C. Any person under the age of 18 years who shall violate any of the
provisions of this Article shall be subject to process as a juvenile and
referred to the New Jersey Superior Court for adjudication.
§ 130-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-9
1:241
Chapter 139
PARKS AND RECREATION
§ 130-9 DENNIS CODE § 130-9
1:242
ARTICLE I
Park and Recreation Area Regulations
[Adopted 11-28-1988 as Ord. No. 88-159]
§ 139-1. Prohibited acts.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person in a public park or recreation area
to:
(1) Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or
remove any buildings, tables, benches, railings, pavings or
appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards, whether
temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts or other
boundary markers or other structures or equipment, facilities or
park property, either real or personal.
(2) Failure to cooperate in maintaining rest rooms and washrooms in a
neat and sanitary condition.
(3) Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant or
injure the bark or pick flowers or seed of any tree or plant, dig in or
otherwise disturb grassed areas or in any other way injure the
natural beauty or usefulness of any area.
(4) Hunt, molest, kill, wound, trap, abuse, shoot, pursue, throw
missiles at, remove or have in his possession any animal, reptile or
bird found within a township park or disturb its habitat within a
township park or knowingly buy, receive, have in his possession,
sell or give away any such animal, reptile, bird or eggs so taken,
except as may be specifically provided for and being in accordance
with state/federal fish and game laws.
(5) Have brought in or dump in, deposit or leave any bottles, broken
glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste or refuse or
other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in
the park or left anywhere on the grounds thereof, but it shall be
placed in the proper receptacles where these are provided. Where
receptacles are not provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be
carried away from the park by the person responsible for its
presence and properly disposed of elsewhere.
(6) Use of any portion of the picnic area or any of the buildings or
structures therein for the purposes of holding picnics to the
exclusion of other persons or use such areas and facilities for an
unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded unless issued an
authorized permit by the Recreation Department. [Amended
4-14-1997 by Ord. No. 97-06]
(7) Set up tents, shacks or any other temporary shelters for the
purpose of overnight camping or leave in a park after closing hours
any movable structure or special vehicle to be used or that could be
§ 139-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 139-1
1:243
used for such purpose, such as a house trailer, camp trailer, camp
wagon or the like, except in those areas designated by the
Recreation Department for those purposes. [Amended
12-10-1990 by Ord. No. 90-204]
(8) Leave a picnic area before all trash is placed in the disposal
receptacles where provided. If such trash receptacles are not
available, then trash shall be carried away from the park area by
the picnicker to be properly disposed of elsewhere. [Added
4-14-1997 by Ord. No. 97-06]
(9) Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind,
whether permanent or temporary, or run or string any public
service utility into, upon, or across such lands, except on special
written permit issued hereunder. [Added 4-14-1997 by Ord. No.
97-06]
(10) Climb any tree, or walk, stand or sit upon monuments, vases,
planters, fountains, railings, fences or upon any other property not
designated or customarily used for such purposes. [Added
4-14-1997 by Ord. No. 97-06]
(11) Leave a bicycle in a place other than a bicycle rack, where other
persons may trip or be injured by it, when such is provided and
there is space available. [Added 4-14-1997 by Ord. No. 97-06]
(12) Swim, bathe, or wade in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to
a park. [Added 4-14-1997 by Ord. No. 97-06]
(13) Carry or possess firearms of any description, or air-rifles, springguns,
bow-and-arrows, slings, knives or any other forms of weapons
potentially harmful to wildlife and dangerous to human safety, or
any instrument that can be loaded with and fire blank cartridges, or
any kind of trapping device. Shooting into park areas from beyond
park boundaries is forbidden. [Added 4-14-1997 by Ord. No.
97-06]
(14) Carry or use any golf club to hit golf balls except in a designated
area. [Added 4-14-1997 by Ord. No. 97-06]
(15) Fail to follow rules or directions of recreation staff. [Added
4-14-1997 by Ord. No. 97-06]
(16) Smoke cigarettes, cigars, or other tobacco products within 50 feet
of the main entrance of the Recreation Building. [Added
4-14-1997 by Ord. No. 97-06]
B. While in a public park or recreation area, all persons shall conduct
themselves in a proper and orderly manner, and, in particular, no
person shall:
(1) Bring alcoholic beverages [or drink the same at any time] or be
under the influence of intoxicating liquor in a park. All persons,
§ 139-1 DENNIS CODE § 139-1
1:244
who are of the legal drinking age, are permitted to consume
alcoholic beverages in a public park or in a recreation area when
said consumption is being done so in conjunction with a special
event that has been preapproved by the Township Committee and
the State of New Jersey Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
No person shall be permitted to possess, consume or distribute
any alcoholic beverage in a public park or in a recreation area
at any time that has not been preapproved in accordance with
the approvals set forth above. [Amended 9-24-19 by Ord. No.
2019-10]
(2) Have in his possession or set or otherwise cause to explode or
discharge or burn any firecrackers, torpedo rockets or other
fireworks, firecrackers or explosives of flammable material or
discharge them or throw them into any such areas from lands or
highways adjacent thereto. This prohibition includes any
substance, compound, mixture or article that, in conjunction with
any other substance or compound, would be dangerous from any of
the foregoing standpoints. At the discretion of the Recreation
Department, permits may be given for conducting properly
supervised fireworks in designated park areas. [Amended
12-10-1990 by Ord. No. 90-204]
(3) Be responsible for the entry of a dog or other domestic animal into
areas clearly marked by the Recreation Department by signs
bearing the words "Domestic Animals Prohibited in this Area."
Nothing herein shall be construed as permitting the running of
dogs at large. All dogs in those areas where such animals are
permitted shall be restrained at all times on adequate leashes not
greater than six feet in length. [Amended 12-10-1990 by Ord.
No. 90-204]
(4) Enter an area posted as "Closed to the Public," or use or abet in the
use of any area in violation of posted notices.
(5) Upon request, fail to produce and exhibit any permit from the
Recreation Department he claims to have to any authorized person
who shall desire to inspect the same for the purpose of enforcing
compliance with any ordinance or rule. [Amended 12-10-1990 by
Ord. No. 90-204]
(6) Disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or party
occupying any area or participating in any activity under the
authority of a permit.
(7) Expose or offer for sale any article or thing or station or place any
stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of any
such article or thing. Exception is here made as to any regularly
licensed concessionaire acting by and under the authority and
regulation of the Recreation Department. [Amended 12-10-1990
by Ord. No. 90-204]
§ 139-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 139-1
1:245
§ 139-2. Hours of operation. [Amended 12-10-1990 by Ord. No.
90-204; 4-14-1997 by Ord. No. 97-06]
Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, parks shall be open to
the public every day of the year during designated hours. The opening and
closing hours for each individual park shall be posted therein for public
information and shall be determined from time to time by the Township
Committee.
All parks shall be closed from 10:00 p.m. to sunrise except for township
sponsored activities.
(8) Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement
or inscription whatever, erect or cause to be erected any sign
whatever on any park lands or highways or roads in any park.
(9) It shall be unlawful for any person to enter any public facility
during those posted times when it is not open for public use.
[Added 4-14-1997 by Ord. No. 97-06]
(10)No school age children will be permitted at township recreation
facilities or at the Recreation Center during the hours in which
school is in session. [Added 4-14-1997 by Ord. No. 97-06]
C. While in a public park, public place or recreation area, all persons
using, owning or operating a motor vehicle, motorcycle, dirt bike, or
other similar mechanical vehicle shall abide by all Laws of the State of
New Jersey as it relates to the ownership, use and operation of a motor
vehicle as set forth in Title 39 of the Revised Code of the State of New
Jersey. It shall be unlawful for any person in a public park or recreation
park to: [Added 4-14-1997 by Ord. No. 97-06]
(1) Operate any vehicle in any portion of a park except the paved,
stoned, or graveled roadways or parking areas where vehicles are
permitted.
(2) Park any vehicle, except upon a designated parking area, and
except in accordance with the posted directions and/or instructions
of any park attendant who may be present.
(3) Except that, the operation of vehicles shall be prohibited except
for:
(a) Authorized vehicles of the township and/or recreation
department.
(b) Vehicles using the designated driveways and approaches to the
recreation buildings to park momentarily and unload and pick
up handicapped persons.
(c) Commercial vehicles using the designated driveways and
approaches to the recreation buildings, while unloading
supplies and conducting business.
§ 139-1 DENNIS CODE § 139-2
1:246
Any section or part of any park may be declared closed to the public at any
time and for any interval of time, either temporary or at regular or stated
intervals (daily or otherwise) for certain scheduled uses of the Recreation
Department.
§ 139-3. Discrimination.
§ 139-4. Permits for special events. [Amended 12-10-1990 by Ord.
No. 90-204; 4-14-1997 by Ord. No. 97-06]
Permits for special events in parks shall be obtained by application to the
Recreation Department in accordance with procedures set forth by the
Township Committee.
§ 139-5. Enforcement.
§ 139-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-10-1990 by Ord. No.
90-204; 4-14-1997 by Ord. No. 97-06]
A. No person shall, on the grounds of race, color, national origin, religion,
age, sex or handicap, be excluded from participation in, be denied the
benefits of or be otherwise subjected to discrimination in any park
facility, program or activity.
B. Discrimination on the basis of residence, including preferential
reservation, membership or annual permit systems, is prohibited except
to the extent that reasonable differences in admission and other fees
may be maintained in any park on the basis of residence.
A. The Recreation Department and park attendants shall, in connection
with their duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of
this Article. [Amended 12-10-1990 by Ord. No. 90-204]
B. The Recreation Department and any park attendant shall have the
authority to eject, or impose suspensions from the park or its facilities,
any person or persons acting in violation of this Article. [Amended
12-10-1990 by Ord. No. 90-204; 4-14-1997 by Ord. No. 97-06]
C. This Article shall also be enforced by the New Jersey State Police
Department which services the township.
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article shall, upon
conviction in the Municipal Court of the Township of Dennis, be subject
to a fine for a first offense of not more than $500.
B. For a second or subsequent offense, any person convicted, of a violation
of this Article shall pay a fine of not less than $500 or more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.). One need not be charged as a second
offender to be prosecuted as a second offender.
C. Any minor under the age of 18 who is apprehended and charged and
subsequently found to be in violation of this Article shall also be prima
§ 139-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 139-6
1:247
facie evidence of a violation of this Article on the part of the parent or
legal guardian having custody or care of said minor. In such case, the
parent or legal guardian having custody and care of said minor shall be
subject to the penalty of being required to reimburse the Township of
Dennis the cost of repairing and/or remedying the damage to the park,
playground, recreation area and/or recreation equipment upon being
so charged and after a finding of liability by the Township of Dennis
Municipal Court following a hearing on issue of liability and the amount
of repair costs.
§ 139-6 DENNIS CODE § 139-6
1:248
ARTICLE II
Recognition of Recreation Organizations
[Adopted 2-10-1992 as Ord. No. 92-223]
§ 139-7. Application for recognition.
§ 139-8. Standards for review.
The standards of review to be applied by the Recreation Leader shall be as
follows:
§ 139-9. Submission of application to Township Committee.
A. The Recreation Leader shall provide an application form to any
township organization desiring to assist the township in promoting
recreation activities with township support. See appendix for form of
application.58
B. Upon receipt of a completed application the Recreation Leader shall
review the same within 30 days and render a written report of
recommendations to the Township Committee.
A. Review bylaws.
(1) Nondiscrimination. Any bylaws which contain discriminatory or
unfair provisions or discriminate in membership shall be rejected.
(2) Equipment. Bylaws must contain provisions that any equipment
purchased and to be used in the activity of the organization is to be
donated to the Township Recreation Department for use by that
organization.
(3) Minutes and financial records. Bylaws are to provide that written
minutes be maintained of all meetings of the organization and that
said minutes shall be available during normal business hours for
review by the public at a location within the township. The bylaws
shall provide that all financial records and statements of the
organization be maintained and housed within the township and
shall be available during normal business hours for review by the
public.
B. Need for organization. The Recreation Leader shall conduct a review to
determine the need by the township for the assistance offered by the
organization.
C. Membership. Membership in the organization shall be comprised of at
least 60% township residents.
58.Editor's Note: The application form is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 139-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 139-9
1:249
§ 139-10. Supervision of organization. [Amended 6-4-07 by Ord. No.
2007-08]
§ 139-11. Annual reapplication. [Amended 6-4-07 by Ord. No.
2007-08]
All recognized organizations shall, on an annual basis, reapply for
recognition by the township. Said organization shall submit an application
at least 30 days prior to the expiration of one year recognition. The Director,
Parks and Recreation shall review the application in the same manner as
noted above with the Township Committee to review as noted above.
A. Upon completion of said application and application procedure, the
Recreation Leader shall submit the application and his/her
recommendation to the Township Committee.
B. The Township Committee shall review the application, consider the
recommendations of the Recreation Leader and public comment. The
Township Committee shall render a decision by resolution on whether
to recognize the applicant organization.
A. Any recognized organization shall be under the control, supervision and
direction of the Director, Parks and Recreation.
B. Any recognized organization shall have the responsibility of reporting
to the Director, Parks and Recreation, who shall have the final decision
making authority.
§ 139-9 DENNIS CODE § 139-11
1:250
ARTICLE III
Fees for Use of Recreational Facilities
[Adopted 3-11-1996 by Ord. No. 96-04]
§ 139-12. Purpose.
The Township of Dennis has constructed various recreational facilities, and
created a recreation department to oversee the operation of these facilities.
In order to properly maintain the recreational facilities, insure a safe
playing environment, and to help offset the daily operational expenses it is
necessary to establish certain fees.
Those fees will be collected by the recreation department in accordance
with the schedule established in this Article by the Township Committee.
§ 139-13. Fee schedule. [Amended 11-15-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-08;
4-9-19 by Ord. No. 2019-0459]
The following schedule of fees shall be established:
A. The facilities of the Dennis Township Parks & Recreation Department
are available for use by members of the public. There is no charge for
individuals to use the facilities as long as it is not an organized or
scheduled event and as such use does not interfere with an approved
Township event, program or activity. Programs, leagues, activities and
events operated or sponsored by the Dennis Township Parks &
Recreation Department and Dennis Township Athletic Associations
have priority use of all facilities. Providing that there are no games,
practices or maintenance scheduled and adequate staff is available, the
facilities listed below can be utilized by groups and organizations
through the issuance of a permit by the Township Recreation
Department.
Township Committee, has the authority, at its discretion and on a case
by case basis, to waive a portion and/or all of the requirements set
forth under paragraph A should a Public Service Organization or its
members, seek to use of a Township recreational facility.
B. In order to be considered for a permit the applicant must complete and
submit the official "Dennis Township Facility Use Application."
Applicant will be required to execute an indemnity and hold harmless
agreement and provide insurance coverage to the Township at the
amount and type recommended by the Township's risk management
consultant. All necessary paperwork must be submitted at least 30 days
before the requested use date. If approval is granted, fees must be paid
in full seven days before the event. Following the use of the Township
facility, the building/field/court must be left in the same condition as it
59.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes Ordinance Nos. 96-07, 97-05, 97-06, 99-02,
2002-02, 2003-03, 2004-06, 2005-04, 2006-05, 2007-05, 2007-08, 2008-07. Ordinance No.
2016-08 amended Section 139-13 in entirety.
§ 139-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 139-13
1:251
was prior to the event. Rental times must include time needed for set
up and clean up. The following facilities can be utilized with a permit
from the Recreation Department at the cost listed:
Baseball Field $75 per hour, per field
(no lights)
2 hr. minimum
Baseball Field C-3 $125 per hour (w/use
of lights)
2 hr. minimum
Baseball Field C-5 $150 per hour (w/use
of lights)
2 hr. minimum
Football Game Field $150 per hour 2 hr. minimum
Football Practice
Field
$125 per hour 2 hr. minimum
Outdoor Basketball
Courts
$75 per hour (no
lights)
2 hr. minimum
Outdoor Basketball
Courts
$100 per hour (w/use
of lights)
2 hr. minimum
Tennis Court $50 per hour 2 hr. minimum
Gymnasium $200 per hour 2 hr. minimum
Hockey Rink $75 per hour 2 hr. minimum
Hockey Rink $100 per hour (w/use
of lights)
2 hr. minimum
Micro Soccer Field $100 per hour 2 hr. minimum
Mid- Size Soccer Field $125 per hour 2 hr. minimum
Regulation Soccer
Field
$150 per hour 2 hr. minimum
Skate Night $2.00 admission $1.50 skate rental
A staff member or designee of the Dennis Township Recreation
Department is required at all events to open and close the facility,
to ensure that Township property and equipment are protected and
to provide additional oversight as needed. If the Recreation Director
determines that the size and scope of the activity requires additional
staff, the applicant will be charged an additional fee of $30 per hour
per staff member.
Township Committee, has the authority, at its discretion and on a case
by case basis, to waive a portion and/or all of the requirements set
forth under paragraph B should a Public Service Organization or its
members, seek to use of a Township recreational facility.
C. For all Township civic, charitable, fraternal, philanthropic and religious
not-for-profit organizations, holding a tax exempt status under the
Federal Internal Revenue Code, and which have their offices or
§ 139-13 DENNIS CODE § 139-13
1:252
principal place of business in the Township of Dennis the fees will be
reduced 25%.
D. Insurance requirements. Upon the issuance of the permit, unless
exempt, the applicant must provide a Certificate of Insurance, naming
the Township of Dennis as an additional insured and provide the
minimum liability limits:
(1) Minimum general liability limit of $500,000 per occurrence.
(2) If the insurance policy contains an aggregate limit, such aggregate
shall equal double the occurrence limit.
(3) All leagues and/or teams as well as any commercial (for profit)
group, which are not under the direction of the Township
associations or the Recreation Department must provide general
liability insurance with a minimum limit of one million ($1,000,000)
per occurrence.
(4) If the gymnasium is being used for the display of artwork, antiques,
or other collectibles that are the property of others, an aggregate
value must be provided of the items to be displayed, along with the
required certificate of insurance.
(5) Additional insurance coverage may be required if recommended by
the Township's risk management consultant.
E. Summer CAMP Fees. The Dennis Township Recreation Department
Summer CAMP has a maximum number of 100 camp spaces with
Package A having a limit of 60 spaces. The fees are set as follows and
will be further amended from time to time as needed by resolution:
(1) Package A - $625.00 (Ages 5 to 13) — Tuesday, Wednesday,
Thursday Sessions 9:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.
(2) Package B - $375.00 (Ages 5 to 13) — Tuesday and Thursday
Sessions 9:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.
§ 139-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 139-13
1:253
Chapter 142
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
§ 139-13 DENNIS CODE § 139-13
1:254
ARTICLE I
Use of Streets
[Adopted 12-10-1979 as Ord. No. 79-78]
§ 142-1. Parking on public streets prohibited; applicability.
A. No person shall park a vehicle upon a public right-of-way, roadway,
street or highway within the Township of Dennis for the purpose of or
during the process of soliciting sales or business, displaying goods for
sale or selling or offering to sell, for delivery, goods or merchandise to
buyers, consumers or other persons who are occupants of vehicles
standing or moving on the public rights-of-way, roadways, streets or
highways.
B. The prohibitions contained in Subsection A shall not apply to the usual
actions of hawkers, peddlers, hucksters and venders whereby such
persons travel by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle or any other type of
conveyance from place to place, from house to house or from street to
street carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise,
meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, food, ice cream, fruit ices, soda water,
garden farm products or provisions and offering and exposing the same
for sale or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers.
§ 142-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-1
1:255
Chapter 145
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
§ 145-1. Duties of owners and tenants.
It shall be the duty of the owner, tenant or person in possession of any lands
in the township to:
§ 145-2. Investigation of complaints; notification of owner or
occupant; reinspection.61
After an investigation of a complaint of a resident, officer or employee
of the township relative to a violation of this chapter or upon his own
motion, the Superintendent of Public Works or Supervisor of Roads shall
investigate the complaint. If the reported conditions are found to exist,
the Superintendent of Public Works or Supervisor of Roads shall notify the
owner, tenant or person in possession of the lands complained of, in writing,
either personally or by certified mail to his last known address, to remove
such brush, weeds, ragweed, dead or dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious
growth, filth, garbage, trash or debris within 10 days after notice. The
Superintendent of Public Works or Supervisor of Roads shall reinspect the
lands in question after the ten-day period expires and report, in writing, to
the Township Committee if the condition has not been altered or remedied.
§ 145-3. Abatement by township; costs to become lien.62
If the owner, tenant or person in possession of the lands in question shall
fail to abate the condition complained of within 10 days after notice, the
Superintendent of Public Works or Supervisor of Roads shall cause the
condition complained of to be abated and shall certify the cost to the
Township Committee, which shall examine the certificate and, if it is
correct, cause the cost as shown thereon to be charged against the lands.
A. Keep all brush, hedges or other plant life growing within ten feet (10) of
any roadway and within twenty-five feet (25) of the intersection of two
roads cut to a height of not more than two and one-half (2 1/2) feet
where it shall be necessary and expedient for the preservation of public
safety.60
B. Keep the lands free of brush, weeds, including ragweed, dead and dying
trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash and
debris, where the same are inimical to the preservation of public health,
safety or general welfare of the township or which may constitute a fire
hazard.
C. Remove or destroy all things violating the provisions of this chapter.
60.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
61.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art I.
62.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art I.
§ 142-1 DENNIS CODE § 145-3
1:256
The amount so charged shall become a lien upon the lands and shall be
added to and become a part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied
upon the lands, shall bear interest at the same rate as taxes and shall be
collected and enforced by the same officer and in the same manner as taxes.
Costs shall be in addition to any penalties imposed for any violation of this
chapter.
§ 145-4. Violations and penalties.63
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, or who shall interfere
with or hinder any township officer, agent or employee in the execution of
the fulfillment of his duties under this chapter shall severally be subject to
the penalties provided by § 1-9 of Chapter 1, General Provisions.
Chapter 146
PROPERTY, VACANT, ABANDONED AND NUISANCE
§ 146-1. Definitions. [Added 10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-06]
The following definitions shall be added within this chapter:
DAYS — Consecutive calendar days.
FORECLOSING — The process by which property, placed as security for
a real estate or other loans, is prepared for sale to satisfy the debt if the
borrower is in default under the terms of the loan.
INITIATION OF THE FORECLOSURE PROCESS — Any of the following
actions taken by a lienholder or mortgage holder or mortgagee.
LIENHOLDER or MORTGAGE HOLDER or MORTGAGEE — The creditor,
including but not limited to, service companies, lenders in a mortgage
agreement and any agent, servant or employee of the mortgagee, or any
successor in interest and/or assignee of the mortgagee's rights, interests or
obligations under a mortgage agreement. Collectively herein referred to as
"Creditor".
OWNER — Every person, entity, service company, property manager or real
estate agency, who, alone or severally with others:
A. Taking possession of the property.
Delivering a Creditor's or mortgagee's notice of intention to foreclose
to the borrower.
B.
Commencing a foreclosure action or filing a lis pendens in the Superior
Court of New Jersey.
C.
Has legal or equitable title to any dwelling, dwelling unit, mobile
dwelling unit or parcel of land, vacant or otherwise; or
A.
63.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. I, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 145-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-1
1:257
PUBLIC OFFICER — The Township Clerk or designee(s) of the Township of
Dennis as designated by the Township Clerk.
PROPERTY — Any real estate, residential property, or portion thereof,
located in the Township of Dennis, including buildings or structures situated
on the property. For the purpose of this section only, property does not
include property owned or subject to the control of the Township or any of
its governmental bodies or agencies.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Any property that contains one or more
dwelling units used, intended or designed to be occupied for living
purposes.
SECURING — Taking measures that assist in making the property
inaccessible to unauthorized persons.
VACANT PROPERTY — Any building used or to be used as a residence which
is not legally occupied or at which substantially all lawful construction
operations or residential occupancy has ceased, and which is in such
condition that it cannot legally be reoccupied without repair or
rehabilitation; provided, however, that any property that contains all
building systems in working order and is being actively marketed by its
owner for sale or rental, should not be deemed vacant. Property determined
to be "abandoned property" in accordance with the meaning of such term in
the Abandoned Properties Rehabilitation Act, N.J.S.A. 55:19 — 78, et seq.,
shall also be deemed to be vacant property for the purpose of this chapter.
Second homes, which are occasionally vacant but are periodically occupied
by the owner, shall be excluded from this definition; however, nothing
herein shall exclude such properties from mandatory compliance with all
applicable property maintenance codes.[Amended 8-22-17 by Ord. No.
2017-06]
§ 146-2. Registration of Vacant and/or Foreclosing Properties; Duty
to Provide Written Notice of Vacant, Residential Property and/or
Has care, charge or control of any dwelling, dwelling unit or parcel
of land, vacant or otherwise, in any capacity, including but not limited
to agency, executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee or
guardian, of the estate of the holder of legal title; or
B.
C. Is a Mortgagee in possession of any such property;
Is an agent, trustee or other person appointed by the courts and vested
with possession or control of any such property; or
D.
Is an officer or trustee of the Association of unit owners of the
condominium. Each such person is bound to comply as if he were the
owner or
E.
F. Every person who operates a rooming house; or
Is a trustee who holds, owns or controls mortgage loans for mortgagebacked
securities transactions and has initiated the foreclosure
process.
G.
§ 146-1 DENNIS CODE § 146-2
1:258
Mortgage Foreclosure. [Added 10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-06;
amended 8-22-17 by Ord. No. 2017-06]
A. Effective January 1, 2015, the Owner of any vacant property as defined
herein shall, within 120 days after the building becomes vacant
property or within 60 days after assuming ownership of the vacant
property, whichever is later, shall file a registration statement for each
such vacant property with the Public Officer, on forms provided by the
Township of Dennis for such purposes. The registration shall remain
valid for one year from the date of registration. The owner shall be
required to renew the registration annually as long as the building
remains vacant property and shall pay a registration or renewal fee in
the amount prescribed herein for each vacant property registered.
B. Effective January 1, 2015, a lien-holder mortgage holder or mortgagee
(collectively "Creditor"), serving a summons and complaint in an action
to foreclose on a mortgage on residential property shall, within 10 days
of serving the summons and complaint, notify the Municipal Clerk that
a summons and complaint in an action to foreclose on a mortgage has
been filed against this property. The notice shall contain the name and
contact information for the representative of the Creditor, who is
responsible for receiving complaints of property maintenance and code
violations and shall be provided by mail, or electronic communication at
the discretion of the Municipal Clerk. In the event that the property
being foreclosed on is an affordable unit pursuant to the Fair Housing
Act, then the Creditor shall identify that the property is subject to the
Fair Housing Act. The notice shall also include the street address lot
and block number of the property and the full name and contact
information of an individual located within the State of New Jersey who
is authorized to accept service on behalf of the Creditor. The notice
shall be provided to the Municipal Clerk within 10 days of service of a
summons and complaint in an action to foreclose on a mortgage against
the subject property.
Any Creditor that has initiated a foreclosure proceeding on any
residential property which is pending in Superior Court shall provide
to the Municipal Clerk, a listing of all residential properties in Dennis
Township for which the Creditor has foreclosure action pending by
street address and lot and block number.
C. Any Owner, or Creditor of any building that meets the definition of
vacant property prior to January 1, 2017, shall file a registration
statement for that property on or before January 31, 2017. The
registration statement shall include the information required herein, as
well as any additional information that the Public Officer may
reasonably require.
D. The Owner or Creditor shall notify the Public Officer within 90 days of
any change in the registration information by filing an amended
registration statement on a form provided by the Public Officer for such
purposes.
§ 146-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-2
1:259
§ 146-3. Registration Statement Requirements; Property
Inspection. [Added 10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-06]
After filing a registration statement or a renewal of a registration statement,
the Owner or Creditor of any vacant property shall provide access to the
Township to conduct an exterior and interior inspection of the building to
determine compliance with Municipal Code, following reasonable notice,
during the period covered by the initial registration or any subsequent
renewal.
§ 146-4. Fee Schedule. [Added 10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-06]
The initial registration fee for each building shall be $500. The fee for the
first renewal year shall be $1500. The fee for the second renewal year shall
be $3,000. The fee for the 3rd and subsequent renewal year shall be $5,000.
Such fee shall be payable to the Township of Dennis and submitted to the
Township Clerk.
§ 146-5. Requirements for Owners or Creditors of Vacant Property.
[Added 10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-06; amended 8-22-17 by Ord.
No. 2017-06]
E. The registration statement shall be deemed prima facie proof of the
statements therein contained, and any administrative enforcement
proceeding or court proceeding instituted by the Township against the
Owner or Creditor of the building.
A. The registration statement shall include the name, street address and
telephone number of a natural person 21 years of age or older,
designated by the Owner or Creditor as the authorized agent for
receiving notices of code violations and for receiving process, in any
court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding on behalf
of such parties in connection with the enforcement of any applicable
code. The person must maintain an office in the State of New Jersey, or
reside within the State of New Jersey. The statement shall also include
the name of the person responsible for maintaining and securing the
property.
B. By designating an authorized agent under the provisions of this section,
the Owner or Creditor consents to receive any and all notices of code
violations concerning the registered vacant property, and all process in
any court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding
brought to enforce code provisions concerning the registered building
by service of the notice or process on the authorized agent. Any Owner
or Creditor who has designated an authorized agent under the
provisions of this section shall be deemed to consent to the continuation
of the agent's designation for the purposes of this section until the
Public Officer is notified of a change of authorized agent. The
designation of an authorized agent in no way releases any party from
any requirements of this chapter.
§ 146-2 DENNIS CODE § 146-5
1:260
A. The Owner or Creditor of any building that has become vacant property
and any person maintaining, operating, or collecting rent for any such
building that has become vacant shall, within 90 days:
(1) Enclose and secure the building against unauthorized entry as
provided in the applicable provisions of the Code of Dennis
Township, or as set forth in rules and regulations adopted by the
appropriate authority, including a Redevelopment Entity, to
supplement this Code;
(2) Post a sign affixed to the building indicating the name, address and
telephone number of the Owner or Creditor, the authorized agent
for the purposes of service of process and the person responsible
for day-to-day supervision and management of the building. The
sign shall be of a size and placed in a location so as to be legible
from the nearest public street or sidewalk (i.e. public right of way),
whichever is nearer but shall be no smaller than 18" x 24" and
(3) Secure the building from unauthorized entry and maintain the sign
until the building is again legally occupied or demolished, or until
repair or rehabilitation of the building is complete.
(4) A property shall be exempted from this Section 146-5 if the owner
demonstrates that said property is actively listed for rental with a
Licensed New Jersey Real Estate Broker and the property is fully
code compliant.
B. In the event the Owner of a residential property vacates or abandons
any property on which a foreclosure proceeding has been initiated or if
a residential property becomes vacant at any point subsequent to the
Creditors filing the summons and complaint in an action to foreclose on
a mortgage against the subject property, but prior to vesting of title in
the Creditor or any other third party, and the property is found to be a
nuisance or in violation of any applicable State or local code, the Public
Officer, Municipal Clerk or other authorized municipal official shall
notify the Creditor, which shall have the responsibility to abate the
nuisance or correct the violation in the same manner and to the same
extent as the title owner of the property, to such standard or
specification as may be required by State law or Municipal Code. The
Public Officer or other authorized municipal official shall include a
description of the conditions that gave rise to the violation with the
notice of violation and shall provide a period of not less than 30 days
from the Creditor's receipt of the notice for the Creditor to remedy the
violation. If the Creditor fails to remedy the violation within that time,
the municipality may impose penalties allowed for the violation of
municipal ordinance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49 — 5.
In the event the Township of Dennis expends public funds in order
to abate a nuisance or correct a violation on a residential property
in situations in which the Creditor was given notice pursuant to the
provisions of Subsection B hereinabove, but failed to abate the nuisance
§ 146-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-5
1:261
§ 146-6. Violations and Penalties. [Added 10-4-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-06]
§ 146-7. Appeal to Governing Body. [Added 8-22-17 by Ord. No.
2017-06]
Any Owner or Creditor may, within 30 days of the issuance of a notice of
violation under this chapter, appeal by letter to the Governing Body, with
a request to be heard, in order to request relief from the provisions of
this chapter due to compelling circumstances. Said letter shall outline the
unique circumstances for the relief sought. The Governing Body may elect
to grant the appellant an opportunity to be heard at a regular meeting of
the Governing Body and, subsequently decide to grant the relief requested,
or may reasonably deny either or both in its discretion.
§ 146-8. Valid Building Permit Exemption. [Added 8-22-17 by Ord.
No. 2017-06]
Properties which have a valid building permit and are actively performing
work in compliance with same shall be exempt from the provisions of this
chapter.
Chapter 152
RENTAL UNITS
or correct the violation as directed, the Township of Dennis shall have
the same recourse against the Creditor as it would have against the
title owner of the property, including but not limited to the recourse
provided under N.J.S.A. 55:19 — 100.
A. Any Owner or Creditor who is not in full compliance with this chapter,
or who otherwise violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to a fine of not less than $500 and not more than $1000 for each
offense. Every day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense. Fines assessed under this chapter shall be
recoverable from the Owner or Creditor, as the case may be, and shall
be a lien on the property.
B. For purposes of this section, failure to file a registration statement in
time, failure to provide correct information on the registration
statement, failure to comply with the provisions of any portion of this
chapter, shall be deemed to be violations of this chapter.
C. Nothing in this chapter is intended, nor shall be read to conflict or
prevent Dennis Township from taking action against buildings found to
be unfit for human habitation or unsafe structures as provided in the
applicable provisions of the Code of the Township of Dennis.
§ 146-5 DENNIS CODE § 146-8
1:262
ARTICLE I
Conduct of Tenants in Rental Units
[Adopted 11-13-18 by Ord. No. 2018-10]
§ 152-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGENT OR MANAGING AGENT — An individual or entity designated by the
owner and authorized to perform any duty imposed upon the owner by this
article. Such term may include a licensed real estate broker or salesman of
the State of New Jersey if such person is designated by the owner as such
an agent.
HEARING OFFICER — The Township Manager or qualified designee of the
Committee.
LANDLORD or OWNER — The person, persons or entity which owns or
purports to own a rental unit. In the case of a mobile home park, "landlord...
shall mean the owner of an individual dwelling unit within the mobile home
park.
QUALITY OF LIFE VIOLATIONS — Any conduct which is otherwise
prohibited by state statute, or the Township Code, or to knowingly allow
or permit in, upon or in proximity to any rental unit, any conduct which
substantially impairs the public safety, health or welfare, including, but
not limited to, loud and abusive noise; loud gatherings; boisterous activity;
loud, unruly and profane language; consumption or possession of alcoholic
beverages by persons under the legal age; overcrowding upon or in
proximity to the rental unit; use of fireworks; public urination; excessive
noise of such a character, intensity or duration as to be detrimental to
the life, health and welfare or which unreasonably endangers the comfort,
peace and repose of neighboring resident. The placement or disposal of
bottles, cups, containers, or other debris on or about the exterior of the
rental unit or any other property in the vicinity and the failure to remove
same by 9:00 a.m. of following day. The occurrence of any other disorderly
acts which unreasonably disturb the peace and good order of the
neighborhood and community.
RENTAL UNIT — Any home, apartment, dwelling, building or dwelling unit
of any kind which is rented or offered for rent as housing space for living or
dwelling purposes under either a written or oral lease.
SUBSTANTIATED COMPLAINT — A complaint for violations of this article
or any provision Title 2C of the New Jersey Statutes or any Township
ordinance governing disorderly conduct, upon or in proximity to any rental
unit, and attributable to the acts or incitements of any of the tenants of
those premises which has been substantiated by prosecution and conviction
in any court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 152-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-2
1:263
§ 152-2. Quality of Life Violations.
On each occasion when the Township is notified of a tenant in a rental
unit or such tenant's guest, visitor or invitee committing a quality of life
violation, a notice of such violation shall be sent by certified and regular
mail to the owner and, if applicable, agent.
It is the obligation of the landlord and the landlord's agent to take all
reasonable and appropriate action to abate further quality of life violations
at the rental unit and to make a good faith effort to abate the conditions
or circumstances giving rise to such quality of life violations. In the event
that the landlord or the landlord's agent fails to take such reasonable and
appropriate action to abate further quality of life violations or to make a
good faith effort to abate the conditions or circumstances giving rise to
such quality of life violations, the landlord and the landlord's agent shall be
subject to the fines and penalties set forth below.
Enhanced penalties will be imposed for repeated violations as set forth
below.
§ 152-3. Fines and Penalties.
A. Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be subject to the following fines and penalties. Such fines and penalties
shall be in addition to any charges issued by the police or signed by
private citizens.
(1) For a first offense, a fine of not less than $100;
(2) For a second offense, occurring within twelve months of a prior
offense $500;
(3) For a third offense, occurring within twelve months of two separate
prior offenses, a minimum fine of $1,000 and not more than $2,000
for each violation.
(4) Each separate act or conduct constituting a quality of life violation
is a separate violation, and, if the act or conduct is continuing, each
day shall be a separate violation.
B. In addition to the fines set forth above, the Court may impose a
sentence of imprisonment in the County Jail for any term not exceeding
90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days.
§ 152-2 DENNIS CODE § 152-3
1:264
Chapter 155
(RESERVED)
Editor's Note: Former Art. I, Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
Copermittee Agreements, of Ch. 155, Sewers, adopted 9-11-1989 as
Ord. No. 89-178, was repealed 1-22-1990 by Ord. No. 90-185.
Chapter 157
SENIOR CITIZEN CENTER
§ 157-1. Preamble.
The Township of Dennis has constructed a Senior Citizen Center utilizing
funding from the New Jersey Small Cities Community Development Block
Grant Program and the township's municipal budget; and
The township is responsible for maintenance and utility costs associated
with the operation of the Senior Citizen Center.
The township provides senior activities and programs which are supported
by funds within the municipal budget.
The township provides a full-time paid Senior Citizen Center Director.
Said activities and/or events are organized by the Director of the Senior
Citizen Center with the approval of the Township Committee member in
charge of that Department.
The Township desires to establish a policy of issuing membership and
identification cards for all the senior citizens who attend the Center.
§ 157-2. Membership and identification cards.
Chapter 158
SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY RESTRICTION
A. The Director of the Senior Citizen Center shall be the issuing agent for
all Senior Citizen Center membership and identification cards.
B. Said cards are available at a fee of $10 per year. [Amended 12-1-09 by
Ord. No. 2009-09]
C. Any person wishing to be a member of the Dennis Township Senior
Citizen Center must be at least 50 years of age.
D. All senior citizens, regardless of residence, are welcome to become a
member of the Dennis Township Senior Citizen Center and are eligible
to join in any and all activities, programs and events provided there.
§ 152-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-1
1:265
§ 158-1. Sex offender residency prohibition: 2,500 feet. [Amended
8-8-06 by Ord. No. 2006-13]
This act shall apply to all persons over the age of 18 who have been
convicted of a violation of any crime against a minor as listed in N.J.S.A.
2C:7-2, and who as a result of said conviction is required to register with
the proper authorities pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:7-1 et seq. "Registration and
Notification of Release of Certain Offenders" and said persons shall not be
permitted to reside or live within 2,500 feet of any school, park, playground
(defined as any public lands and/or area where recreational activities take
place) or day care center in the township.
§ 158-2. Time for compliance.
A person who resides or lives within 2,500 feet of any school, park,
playground or day care center in the township shall have 60 days from
receipt of written notice of the prohibition set forth herein to move. Failure
to move to a location, which is in compliance with this chapter within that
time period, shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
§ 158-3. Exemptions.
This chapter shall not apply to a person who has established a residence
prior to August 16, 2005.
§ 158-4. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of this chapter shall be punishable by one or more of the
penalties contained herein: a fine of not less than $200, nor more than $500;
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 180 days; a period of community
service not exceeding 60 days. Each 24 hour period shall constitute a
separate offense and a person need not be charged with each separate
offense to be punished for the same.
§ 158-5. Map adopted. [Added 9-19-06 by Reso. 2006-175]
The Township Committee does hereby approve and adopt the Sex Offender
Residency Map prepared by Andrew Previti, PE of Walker Previti Holmes &
Associates (known as project #8874)
Chapter 160
SOIL REMOVAL
§ 160-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
§ 158-1 DENNIS CODE § 160-1
1:266
DREDGE SOIL — Soil materials and wet excavation materials from
meadowland areas and saltwater marshes containing any one or more of the
following:
UPLAND AREAS — All lands situate above a five-foot elevation, based upon
mean sea level, including all gravel pits.
§ 160-2. Dumping of dredge soil restricted.
No dredge, soil shall be dumped, deposited, landfilled and/or disposed of
in any upland area of the Township of Dennis or in any other area of the
township to a grade above a five-foot elevation based upon mean sea level.
§ 160-3. Permit required for hauling and dumping dredge soil.
§ 160-4. Application for permit.
Upon proper application, the Township Committee shall determine whether
a permit to haul and/or dump dredge soil in the Township of Dennis shall be
granted the applicant, and the applicant shall submit a written application
on a form to be provided by the office of the Township Clerk. Additionally,
the applicant shall provide to the Township Committee an environmental
impact statement prepared by a licensed professional engineer or
environmentalist of the State of New Jersey which shall set forth, inter alia,
the following:
A. Highly organic matter.
B. Peat.
C. Sulfate (SO4) in excess of 250 parts per million.
D. Chloride (Cl) in excess of 250 parts per million.
E. Iron in excess of 0.3 part per million.
A. No person, corporation or other legal entity shall haul or transport
dredge soil within the confines of the Township of Dennis without
having first obtained a permit therefor from the Township Committee of
the Township of Dennis.
B. No person, corporation or other legal entity shall dump, deposit, landfill
and/or dispose of any dredge soil in any area of the Township of Dennis
below a five-foot elevation based upon mean sea level without having
first obtained a permit therefor from the Township Committee of the
Township of Dennis.
A. The impact upon the area from which the dredge soil is to be removed if
the same is situate within the Township of Dennis.
B. The impact upon the area upon which the dredge soil is to be dumped,
deposited, landfilled or otherwise disposed of if the same lies within the
confines of the Township of Dennis.
§ 160-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-5
1:267
§ 160-5. Notice to property owners.
The applicant shall provide notice to all property owners within 500 feet of
the premises from which the dredge soil is to be removed or to all persons
within 500 feet of the area upon which the dredge soil is to be deposited,
or both, if applicable, not less than 10 days prior to consideration of the
application by the Township Committee.
§ 160-6. Hearing on application; decision of Township Committee.
§ 160-7. Additional restrictions or conditions of permit.
The Township Committee may, in its discretion, impose additional
conditions or restrictions upon any permit issued pursuant hereto, including
but not limited to those governing the following areas of concern:
§ 160-8. Inspections. [Amended 3-4-08 by Ord. No. 2008-04]
Any person, corporation or other legal entity applying for a permit pursuant
to this chapter shall execute and file with the Township Clerk, in a form
satisfactory to the Township of Dennis, a consent authorizing the
appropriate officials and representatives of the township to enter upon
and inspect any vehicles used in the transportation of such material and
upon any lands or premises onto which such material is being deposited
for the purpose of ensuring that there is full compliance with this chapter,
as amended and supplemented, and to ensure strict compliance with the
A. Upon receipt of proof of adequate notice to the surrounding property
owners and upon receipt of proper application and an environmental
impact statement as required hereunder, the Township Committee will
hold a hearing with regard to the proposed application.
B. The Township Committee shall determine whether the proposed
hauling and/or dumping of dredge soil shall have a detrimental effect
upon the health, safety and welfare of the people of the Township of
Dennis or any of them.
C. In the event that the Township Committee shall determine that the
proposed hauling and/or dumping of dredge soil shall have a
deleterious effect upon the health, safety and/or welfare of the people of
Dennis Township or any of them, it shall deny the permit.
D. In the event that the Township Committee shall make a finding that the
proposed hauling and/or dumping will not have a deleterious effect
upon the health, safety and/or welfare of the people of Dennis Township
or any of them, it may, in its sole discretion, grant the proposed permit.
A. The hours, dates and months of operation.
B. The route to the proposed fill site.
C. The duration of the permit.
§ 160-5 DENNIS CODE § 160-8
1:268
environmental impact study filed pursuant hereto and to ensure no
environmental hazard or threat which would be contrary to the public
health, safety or welfare. There shall be no limitation on the number of such
inspections which may be carried out during the term of the permit. The
applicant, upon application for a permit shall deposit with the Chief Finance
Officer of the Township of Dennis and amount of money estimated by the
Township necessary for all costs associated with inspections and reviews
under this section.
§ 160-9. Permit fee.
Upon the granting of a permit by the Township Committee, the applicant
shall pay to the Township Clerk a fee for each permit which he is granted
pursuant to the following schedule: $2 per cubic yard.64
§ 160-10. Waiver of requirements.
The Township Committee may, in its sole discretion, waive any requirement
contained herein.
Chapter 162
SOLID WASTE
64.Editor's Note: Former Section VII, Penalty, which immediately followed this section, was
deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. 1. For current
penalty provision, see § 1-9 of Ch. 1, General Provisions.
§ 160-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-10
1:269

ARTICLE I
Degradable Packaging
[Adopted 1-22-1990 as Ord. No. 90-187]
§ 162-1. Purpose.
This Article seeks, to the maximum extent practicable, to eliminate the use
of nondegradable packaging originating in retail establishments within the
Township of Dennis to protect the air, land and waters of the township
against environmental contamination and degradation.
§ 162-2. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DEGRADABLE PACKAGING — Packaging made of cellulose-based or other
substances that are capable of being readily attacked, decomposed,
assimilated and otherwise completely oxidized or broken down by bacteria
or other natural or biological organisms into carbonaceous soil material or
water and carbon dioxide.
PACKAGING — All food-related wrappings, adhesives, cords, bindings, bags,
boxes and containers and disposable or nonreusable plates, cups or
drinking utensils intended for use within the Township of Dennis.
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — All sales outlets, stores, shops or other
places of business located in the Township of Dennis which sell or convey
foods directly to the ultimate consumer, which foods are predominately
contained, wrapped or held in or on packaging, and shall include but shall
not be limited to any place where food is prepared, cooked, packaged,
handled, stored, manufactured or sold or offered for sale.
§ 162-3. Prohibited acts.
§ 162-4. Township purchases.
A. No retail food establishment located or doing business within the
Township of Dennis shall sell or convey food directly to ultimate
consumers within the township unless such food is placed, wrapped or
packed in biodegradable packaging prior to the removal of such food
from the premises of such retail food establishment.
B. No retail food establishment located and doing business within the
Township of Dennis shall provide eating utensils or food containers to
any consumers within the township if those utensils or food containers
are composed of polystyrene or polyvinyl chloride.
A. The Township of Dennis shall not purchase any food packaging which
contains polystyrene or polyvinyl chloride, nor shall it sponsor any
event which utilizes such packaging. All food packaging shall be
biodegradable and/or photodegradable.
§ 162-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-4
1:271
§ 162-5. Exemptions.
Section 162-3 of this Article does not apply to the following items:
§ 162-6. Enforcement.
The Code Official of the Township of Dennis is hereby empowered to enforce
the provisions of this Article and to issue summonses for any violation
thereof in accordance with the rules governing the courts of the State of
New Jersey.
§ 162-7. Penalties.
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this Article shall be
punished by a fine of not less than $100 and not more than $1,000. Each
violation and each day a violation is committed or permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate violation and shall be punishable as such.
B. The township shall exclusively advertise for receipt of bids for
degradable plastic bags for use by the township.
A. Any flexible transparent covering for uncooked or raw meat or poultry,
raw fish, hard cheese, cold cuts, fruit and vegetable produce, baked
goods or bread.
B. Any food packaging used at hospitals or nursing homes.
C. Any paper or other cellulose-based packaging that is coated with
polyethylene plastic on only one side.
D. Any plastic covers, covering material, food containers, lids, eating
utensils or straws that are not made out of polystyrene or polyvinyl
chloride.
§ 162-4 DENNIS CODE § 162-7
1:272
Chapter 162A
STORM DRAINS
§ 162A-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this Article is to require the retrofitting of existing storm
drain inlets which are in direct contact with repaving, repairing,
reconstruction, or resurfacing or alterations of facilities on private property,
to prevent the discharge of solids and floatables (such as plastic bottles,
cans, food wrappers and other litter) to the municipal separate storm sewer
system(s) operated by the Township of Dennis so as to protect public health,
safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 162A-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this Article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Township of Dennis or other public
body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to collect
stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curbopening
inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface or ground-water, whether natural or artificial, within
the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction.
§ 162A-3. Prohibited conduct.
No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with one
single-family house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the
repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip
sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing
or altering any surface that is in direct contact with an existing storm drain
inlet on that property unless the storm drain inlet either:
§ 162-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162A-3
1:273
§ 162A-4. Design standard.
Storm drain inlets identified in Section 162A-3 above shall comply with
the following standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials
through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this paragraph, "solid and
floatable materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating,
suspended, or settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard see Section
162A-4C below.
A. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid
and floatable materials; or
B. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in Section 162A-4 below
prior to the completion of the project.
A. Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever they
use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water body
under that grate:
(1) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicycle
safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle
Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design
Guidelines (April 1996); or
(2) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate has an
area of no more than seven (7.0) square inches, or is no greater
than 0.5 inches across the smallest dimension.
Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate
inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination
inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates,
and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground
surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open
channels, and stormwater basin floors.
B. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in
that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening
has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than seven
(7.0) square inches, or be no greater than two (2.0) inches across the
smallest dimension.
C. This standard does not apply:
(1) Where the Municipal Engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably
be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
(2) Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end of pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin
§ 162A-3 DENNIS CODE § 162A-4
1:274
§ 162A-5. Enforcement.
This Article shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer of the
Township of Dennis.
§ 162A-6. Penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this Article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $200 for each storm drain inlet that
is not retrofitted to meet the design standard.
Chapter 162B
STORM DRAINS — IMPROPER DISPOSAL OF WASTE
§ 162B-1. Purpose.
An ordinance to prohibit the spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials
other than stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4)
operated by the Township of Dennis, so as to protect public health, safety
and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 162B-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all
solid and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the
following:
(a) A rectangular space four and five-eighths (4 5/8) inches long
and one and one-half (1 1/2) inches wide (this option does not
apply for outfall netting facilities); or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
(3) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel
bars with one inch spacing between the bars; or
(4) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an
undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New Jersey Register listed historic property.
§ 162A-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162B-2
1:275
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by Dennis Township or other public body,
and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of the State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 162B-3. Prohibited Conduct.
The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other than stormwater to
the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by Dennis Township
is prohibited. The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other than
stormwater in such a manner as to cause the discharge of pollutants to the
municipal separate storm sewer system is also prohibited.
§ 162B-4. Exceptions to Prohibition.
A. Water line flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
B. Uncontaminated ground water (e.g. infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising ground
waters).
C. Air conditioning condensate (excluding contact and non-contact cooling
water).
D. Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff).
E. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows.
F. Residential car washing water, and residential swimming pool
discharges.
G. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
H. Flows from fire fighting activities.
I. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water:
Beach maintenance equipment immediately following their use for their
intended purposes; and
Equipment used in the application of salt and de-icing materials
immediately following salt and de-icing material applications. Prior
to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt and de-icing materials
§ 162B-2 DENNIS CODE § 162B-4
1:276
§ 162B-5. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer of the
Township of Dennis and/or the New Jersey State Police.
§ 162B-6. Penalties.
Any person(s) who continues to be in violation of the provisions of this
chapter, after being duly notified, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed
$200.
Chapter 163
STORMWATER CONTROL
must be removed from equipment and vehicles to the maximum extent
practicable using dry cleaning methods(e.g., shoveling and sweeping).
Recovered materials are to be returned to storage for reuse or properly
discarded.
Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the above situation is limited to
exterior, undercarriage, and exposed parts and does not apply to
engines or other enclosed machinery.
§ 162B-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162B-6
1:277

ARTICLE I
Non-Pinelands Area
§ 163-1. Scope and Purpose.
A. Policy statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and pollutant
reduction through nonstructural or low impact techniques shall be
explored before relying on structural BMPs. Structural BMPs should be
integrated with nonstructural stormwater management strategies and
proper maintenance plans. Nonstructural strategies include both
environmentally sensitive site design and source controls that prevent
pollutants from being placed on the site or from being exposed to
stormwater. Source control plans should be developed based upon
physical site conditions and the origin, nature, and the anticipated
quantity or amount of potential pollutants. Multiple stormwater
management BMPs may be necessary to achieve the established
performance standards for water quality, quantity, and groundwater
recharge.
B. Purpose. It is the purpose of this Article to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for "major
development," as defined in Section 163-2.
C. Applicability.
(1) This Article shall be applicable to all site plans and subdivisions for
the following major developments that require preliminary or final
site plan or subdivision review:
(a) Nonresidential major developments; and
(b) Aspects of residential major developments that are not
preempted by the Residential Site Improvement Standards at
N.J.A.C. 5:21.
(2) This Article shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by the Township of Dennis.
D. Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements.
Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans pursuant
to this Article are to be considered an integral part of development
approvals under the subdivision and site plan review process and do not
relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or
approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule,
act, or ordinance. In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this Article shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. This Article
is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other
ordinances, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law except
that, where any provision of this Article imposes restrictions different
from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other
§ 163-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-1
1:279
§ 163-2. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this Article shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this Article its most reasonable application. The definitions
below are the same as or based on the corresponding definitions in the
Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
CAFRA CENTERS, CORES OR NODES — Those areas within boundaries
accepted by the Department pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:8E-5B.
CAFRA PLANNING MAP — The geographic depiction of the boundaries for
Coastal Planning Areas, CAFRA Centers, CAFRA Cores and CAFRA Nodes
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7E-5B.3.
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses serving
the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and access to
public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the County Board
of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater management plans
and implementing ordinance(s). The county review agency may either be:
A county planning agency; or
A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A 58:16A-55.5, if
the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to approve, conditionally
approve, or disapprove municipal stormwater management plans and
implementing ordinances.
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly licensed
in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, development of project requirements, creation
and development of project design and preparation of drawings and
specifications.
DESIGNATED CENTER — A State Development and Redevelopment Plan
Center as designated by the State Planning Commission such as urban,
regional, town, village, or hamlet.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or structure, any mining
excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any building or
other structure, or land or extension of use of land, by any person, for which
permission is required under the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq. In the case of development of agricultural lands, development
means: any activity that requires a state permit; any activity reviewed
by the County Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State Agricultural
provision of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher standards
shall control.
§ 163-1 DENNIS CODE § 163-2
1:280
Development Committee (SADC), and municipal review of any activity not
exempted by the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A 4:1C-l et seq.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater,
sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving waterbody
or to a particular point along a receiving waterbody.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — An area or feature which is
of significant environmental value, including but not limited to: stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or
threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland forest;
steep slopes; and well head protection and groundwater recharge areas.
Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using the
Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood designated by the
Urban Coordinating Council "in consultation and conjunction with" the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A 55:19-69.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer of
material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — The process by which water seeps into the soil from
precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any "development" that provides for ultimately
disturbing one or more acres of land. Disturbance for the purpose of this
rule is the placement of impervious surface or exposure and/or movement
of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting, or removing of vegetation.
MUNICIPALITY — Any city, borough, town, township, or village.
NODE — An area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities which are not organized in a compact
form.
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, Township of Dennis, or political subdivision of this state subject
to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-l et seq.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive
substance (except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954,
as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.), thermal waste, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal, agricultural, and
construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged directly or
§ 163-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-2
1:281
indirectly to the land, groundwaters or surface waters of the state, or
to a domestic treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both hazardous and
nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into
the ground and is not evapotranspired.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is
being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or
gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or has
occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN
PLANNING AREA (PA1) — An area delineated on the State Plan Policy Map
and adopted by the State Planning Commission that is intended to be the
focus for much of the state's future redevelopment and revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — The geographic application of the State
Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies, and
the official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, or is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities,
or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or embankment
and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A stormwater
management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a detention basin or
infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool (a retention basin), or
be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most constructed stormwater
wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater recharge
of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal nonstormwater discharges into
stormwater conveyances.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or in
storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — A flood "hazard area, which may be
influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is primarily
caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD
— A neighborhood given priority access to state resources through the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
§ 163-2 DENNIS CODE § 163-2
1:282
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONES — A zone designated by the New Jersey
Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban Enterprise
Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Previously developed portions of
areas:
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams,
wetlands, and bodies of surface or groundwater, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
WETLANDS OR WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.
§ 163-3. General standards.
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the Metropolitan
Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or Nodes;
(1)
(2) Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes;
(3) Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
(4)
A. Design and performance standards for stormwater management
measures.
(1) Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
standards in Section 163-4. To the maximum extent practicable,
these standards shall be met by incorporating nonstructural
stormwater management strategies into the design. If these
strategies alone are not sufficient to meet these standards,
structural stormwater management measures necessary to meet
these standards shall be incorporated into the design.
(2) The standards in this Article apply only to new major development
and are intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on
water quality and water quantity in receiving water bodies and
maintain groundwater recharge. The standards do not apply to new
major development to the extent that alternative design and
performance standards are applicable under a regional stormwater
management plan or Water Quality Management Plan adopted in
accordance with Department rules.
§ 163-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-4
1:283
§ 163-4. Stormwater management requirements for major
development.
A. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of a
major development in accordance with Section 163-10.
B. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered species as
documented in the Department Landscape Project or Natural Heritage
Database established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through 15.150,
particularly Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/or Clemmys
muhlnebergi (bog turtle).
C. The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater
runoff quality requirements of Section 163-4F and G:
(1) The construction of an underground utility line provided that the
disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
(2) The construction of an aboveground utility line provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
(3) The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk
or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access
is made of permeable material.
D. A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of Section 163-4F and G may be obtained for the
enlargement of an existing public roadway or railroad; or the
construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access, provided
that the following conditions are met:
(1) The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
(2) The applicant demonstrates through an alternatives analysis, that
through the use of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management strategies and measures, the option selected
complies with the requirements of Section 163-4F and G to the
maximum extent practicable;
(3) The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements
of Section 163-4F and G, existing structures currently in use, such
as homes and buildings, would need to be condemned; and
(4) The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under Subsection D.3 above within
the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream, that would
§ 163-4 DENNIS CODE § 163-4
1:284
provide additional opportunities to mitigate the requirements of
Section 163-4F and G that were not achievable on-site.
E. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
(1) To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in Section
163-4F and G shall be met by incorporating nonstructural
stormwater management strategies set forth at Section 163-4E into
the design. The applicant shall identify the nonstructural measures
incorporated into the design of the project. If the applicant
contends that it is not feasible for engineering, environmental, or
safety reasons to incorporate any nonstructural stormwater
management measures identified in Subsection E(2) below into the
design of a particular project, the applicant shall identify the
strategy considered and provide a basis for the contention.
(2) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated
into site design shall:
(a) Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the
flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
(c) Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
(d) Minimize the decrease in the "time of concentration" from
preconstruction to post-construction. 'Time of concentration"
is defined as the time it takes for runoff to travel from the
hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point
of interest within a watershed;
(e) Minimize land disturbance including clearing and grading;
(f) Minimize soil compaction;
(g) Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides;
(h) Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
(i) Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site, in order to prevent or
minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. Such source controls include, but are not limited to:
[1] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems, including features
that satisfy Section 163-4E(3) below;
§ 163-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-4
1:285
[2] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
[3] Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
[4] When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
(3) Site design features identified under Section 163-4E(2)(i)[2] above
shall comply with the following standard to control passage of solid
and floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of
this subsection, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment,
debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or settleable solids.
For exemptions to this standard see Section 163-4E(3)(c) below.
(a) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a storm
drain or surface water body under that grate:
[1] The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways
Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
[2] A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven (7.0) square
inches, or is no greater than one-half (0.5) inch across the
smallest dimension.
Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates
in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer
manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer
bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces
include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields,
open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
(b) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an
area of no more than seven (7.0) square inches, or be no
greater than two (2.0) inches across the smallest dimension.
(c) This standard does not apply:
§ 163-4 DENNIS CODE § 163-4
1:286
[1] Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
[2] Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in Section 163-4G(1) are conveyed through any
device (e.g., end of pipe netting facility, manufactured
treatment device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed,
at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
[a] A rectangular space four and five-eighths (4 5/8)
inches long and one and one-half (1 1/2) inches wide
(this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
[b] A bar screen having a bar spacing of one-half (0.5)
inch.
[3] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one inch spacing between the bars, to
the elevation of the water quality design storm as specified
in Section 163-4G(1); or
[4] Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register listed historic property.
(4) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in Section 163-4F and
G shall be dedicated to a government agency, subjected to a
conservation restriction filed with the appropriate County Clerk's
office, or subject to an approved equivalent restriction that ensures
that measure or an equivalent stormwater management measure
approved by the reviewing agency is maintained in perpetuity.
(5) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in Section 163-7, or found on the Department's
website at www.njstormwater.org.
F. Erosion control, groundwater recharge and runoff quantity standards.
(1) This subsection contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and
groundwater recharge, and control stormwater runoff quantity
impacts of major development.
§ 163-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-4
1:287
(a) The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. and
implementing rules.
(b) The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
[1] The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations at Section 163-5, either:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater management
measures maintain 100% of the average annual
preconstruction groundwater recharge volume for the
site; or
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff volume
from pre-construction to post-construction for the
2-year storm is infiltrated.
[2] This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to
projects within the "urban redevelopment area," or to
projects subject to paragraph [3] below.
[3] The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
[a] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. High
pollutant loading areas are areas in industrial and
commercial developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored, or
applied, areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded
or stored; areas where hazardous materials are
expected to be present in greater than "reportable
quantities" as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR
302.4; areas where recharge would be inconsistent
with Department approved remedial action work plan
or landfill closure plan and areas with high risks for
spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facilities; and
[b] Industrial stormwater exposed to "source material."
"Source material" means any material(s) or
machinery, located at an industrial facility, that is
directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities, which
could be a source of pollutants in any industrial
stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source
materials include, but are not limited to, raw
§ 163-4 DENNIS CODE § 163-4
1:288
materials; intermediate products; final products;
waste materials; by-products; industrial machinery
and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and detergents
that are related to process, manufacturing, or other
industrial activities that are exposed to stormwater.
[4] The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on
the groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid
adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a
naturally or seasonally high water table so as to cause
surficial ponding, flooding of basements, or interference
with the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal
systems and other subsurface structures in the vicinity or
down gradient of the groundwater recharge area.
(c) In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for
stormwater runoff calculations at Section 163-5, complete one
of the following:
[1] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that for stormwater leaving the site, post-construction
runoff hydrographs for the 2-, 10-, and 100-year storm
events do not exceed, at any point in time, the
preconstruction runoff hydrographs for the same storm
events;
[2] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that there is no increase, as compared to the preconstruction
condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the 2-, 10-, and 100-year
storm events and that the increased volume or change in
timing of stormwater runoff will not increase flood damage
at or downstream of the site. This analysis shall include the
analysis of impacts of existing land uses and projected
land uses assuming full development under existing zoning
and land use ordinances in the drainage area;
[3] Design stormwater management measures so that the
post-construction peak runoff rates for the 2-, 10-, and
100-year storm events are 50, 75 and 80 percent,
respectively, of the preconstruction peak runoff rates. The
percentages apply only to the post-construction
stormwater runoff that is attributable to the portion of the
site on which the proposed development or project is to be
constructed. The percentages shall not be applied to postconstruction
stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard
areas if the increased volume of stormwater runoff will not
increase flood damages below the point of discharge; or
§ 163-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-4
1:289
[4] In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity
analysis in accordance with [1], [2] and [3] above shall only
be applied if the increased volume of stormwater runoff
could increase flood damages below the point of
discharge.
(2) Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the
definition of major development at Section 163-2 shall be submitted
to the appropriate Soil Conservation District for review and
approval in accordance with the requirements of this section and
any applicable Soil Conservation District guidelines for stormwater
runoff quantity and erosion control. For the purposes of this
section, "agricultural development" means land uses normally
associated with the production of food, fiber and livestock for sale.
Such uses do not include the development of land for the
processing or sale of food and the manufacturing of agriculturally
related products.
G. Stormwater runoff quality standards.
(1) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
post-construction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in
stormwater runoff by 80% of the anticipated load from the
developed site, expressed as an annual average. Stormwater
management measures shall only be required for water quality
control if an additional one-quarter (1/4) acre of impervious surface
is being proposed on a development site. The requirement to
reduce TSS does not apply to any stormwater runoff in a discharge
regulated under a numeric effluent limitation for TSS imposed
under the New Jersey Pollution Discharge Elimination System
(NJPDES) rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in a discharge specifically
exempt under a NJPDES permit from this requirement. The water
quality design storm is one and one-quarter (1.25) inches of rainfall
in two hours. Water quality calculations shall take into account the
distribution of rain from the water quality design storm, as
reflected in Table 1. The calculation of the volume of runoff may
take into account the implementation of nonstructural and
structural stormwater management measures.
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000
5 0.0083
10 0.0166
15 0.0250
20 0.0500
§ 163-4 DENNIS CODE § 163-4
1:290
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative Rainfall
(inches)
25 0.0750
30 0.1000
35 0.1330
40 0.1660
45 0.2000
50 0.2583
55 0.3583
60 0.6250
65 0.8917
70 0.9917
75 1.0500
80 1.0840
85 1.1170
90 1.1500
95 1.1750
100 1.2000
105 1.2250
110 1.2334
115 1.2417
120 1.2500
(2) For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in
accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in Section 163-7, or found on the Department's
website at www.njstormwater.org. The BMP Manual and other
sources of technical guidance are listed in Section 163-7. TSS
reduction shall be calculated based on the removal rates for the
BMPs in Table 2 below. Alternative removal rates and methods of
calculating removal rates may be used if the design engineer
provides documentation demonstrating the capability of these
alternative rates and methods to the review agency. A copy of any
approved alternative rate or method of calculating the removal rate
shall be provided to the Department at the following address:
Division of Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of
§ 163-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-4
1:291
Environmental Protection, PO Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey,
08625-0418.
(3) If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required
80% TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize the
following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B — (AXB)/100
Where
R = total TSS percent load removal from application of both
BMPs, and
A = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first BMP
B = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second
BMP
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention Systems 90
Constructed Stormwater
Wetland
90
Extended Detention Basin 40-60
Infiltration Structure 80
Manufactured Treatment
Device
See Section 163-6C
Sand Filter 80
Vegetative Filter Strip 60-80
Wet Pond 50-90
(4) If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the 80% TSS
removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the runoff
from the subareas converge on-site in which case the removal rate
can be demonstrated through a calculation using a weighted
average.
(5) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the post-construction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm.
In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible,
the design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the performance standards in Sections 163-4F and G.
(6) Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which may
be obtained from the address identified in Section 163-7.
§ 163-4 DENNIS CODE § 163-4
1:292
(7) In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent
any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FW1.
(8) Special water resource protection areas shall be established along
all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and perennial
or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the
County Soil Surveys, within the associated HUC14 drainage area.
These areas shall be established for the protection of water quality,
aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance, exceptional
recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance,
and exceptional fisheries significance of those established Category
One waters. These areas shall be designated and protected as
follows:
(a) The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
[1] A 300 foot special water resource protection area shall be
provided on each side of the waterway, measured
perpendicular to the waterway from the top of the bank
outwards or from the centerline of the waterway where the
bank is not defined, consisting of existing vegetation or
vegetation allowed to follow natural succession is
provided.
[2] Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under paragraph [1] above shall
only be allowed where previous development or
disturbance has occurred (for example, active agricultural
use, parking area or maintained lawn area). The
encroachment shall only be allowed where applicant
demonstrates that the functional value and overall
condition of the special water resource protection area will
be maintained to the maximum extent practicable. In no
case shall the remaining special water resource protection
area be reduced to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the top of the bank of the waterway or
centerline of the waterway where the bank is undefined.
All encroachments proposed under this subparagraph
shall be subject to review and approval by the Department.
(b) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through
the special water resource protection area and shall comply
with the Standard for Off-Site Stability in the "Standards For
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq.
§ 163-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-4
1:293
(c) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
Standard For Off-Site Stability in the "Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq., then the stabilization measures in accordance
with the requirements of the above standards may be placed
within the special water resource protection area, provided
that:
[1] Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet
of the Category One waterway;
[2] Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this
section shall achieve a 95% TSS post-construction removal
rate;
[3] Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on
the receiving waterway;
[4] The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable;
[5] A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and Soil Conservation
District staff to identify necessary stabilization measures;
and
[6] All encroachments proposed under this section shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(d) A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as an
element of a regional stormwater management plan, or by a
municipality through an adopted municipal stormwater
management plan. If a stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to Section 163-4G(8) has been approved by
the Department of Environmental Protection, then the
provisions of the plan shall be the applicable special water
resource protection area requirements for that waterway. A
stream corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to
subsection G(8) shall maintain or enhance the current
functional value and overall condition of the special water
resource protection area as defined in G(8)(a)[1] above. In no
case shall a stream corridor protection plan allow the
reduction of the Special Water Resource Protection Area to
less than 150 feet as measured perpendicular to the waterway
subject to this subsection.
§ 163-4 DENNIS CODE § 163-4
1:294
§ 163-5. Calculation of stormwater runoff and groundwater
recharge.
(e) Subsection G(8) does not apply to the construction of one
individual single-family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development on a lot receiving preliminary or final subdivision
approval on or before February 2, 2004, provided that the
construction begins on or before February 2, 2009.
A. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
(1) The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
(a) The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS
National Engineering Handbook Section 4 — Hydrology and
Technical Release 55 — Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds; or
(b) The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational
Method for hydrograph computations.
(2) For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater
recharge, there is a presumption that the preconstruction condition
of a site or portion thereof is a wooded land use with good
hydrologic condition. The term "runoff coefficient" applies to both
the NRCS methodology at Section 163-5A(1)(a) and the Rational
and Modified Rational Methods at Section 163-5A(1)(b). A runoff
coefficient or a groundwater recharge land cover for an existing
condition may be used on all or a portion of the site if the design
engineer verifies that the hydrologic condition has existed on the
site or portion of the site for at least five years without interruption
prior to the time of application. If more than one land cover have
existed on the site during the five years immediately prior to the
time of application, the land cover with the lowest runoff potential
shall be used for the computations. In addition, there is the
presumption that the site is in good hydrologic condition (if the
land use type is pasture, lawn, or park), with good cover (if the land
use type is woods), or with good hydrologic condition and
conservation treatment (if the land use type is cultivation).
(3) In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows, or
culverts, that may reduce preconstruction stormwater runoff rates
and volumes.
(4) In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design
engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or
§ 163-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-5
1:295
§ 163-6. Standards for structural stormwater management
measures.
volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces separately to
accurately compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff
from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected impervious
cover, urban impervious area modifications as described in the
NRCS Technical Release 55 — Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds and other methods may be employed.
(5) If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management
measure is below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined
at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall take into account the
effects of tailwater in the design of structural stormwater
management measures.
B. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following:
(1) The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32 A Method for
Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
incorporated herein by reference as amended and supplemented.
Information regarding the methodology is available from the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual; at
http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at New Jersey Geological
Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427, Trenton, New Jersey,
08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.
A. Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
(1) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
take into account the existing site conditions, including, for
example, environmentally critical areas, wetlands; flood-prone
areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high water table; soil type,
permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns; and
the presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
(2) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and
ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the
intake to the outlet structure as appropriate, and shall have parallel
bars with one inch spacing between the bars to the elevation of the
water quality design storm. For elevations higher than the water
quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure shall
be spaced no greater than 1/3 the width of the diameter of the
orifice or 1/3 the width of the weir, with a minimum spacing
between bars of one inch and a maximum spacing between bars of
six inches. In addition, the design of trash racks must comply with
the requirements of Section 163-8D.
§ 163-5 DENNIS CODE § 163-6
1:296
§ 163-7. Sources for technical guidance.
(3) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and corrosion
resistant. Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions
of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3,
7.4, and 7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement.
(4) At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin,
the orifice size shall be a minimum of two and one-half (2 1/2)
inches in diameter.
(5) Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins at
Section 163-8.
B. Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized provided the design
engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its design will
accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater recharge and
water quality design and performance standards established by Section
163-4 of this Article.
C. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements
of Section 163-4 of this Article, provided the pollutant removal rates are
verified by the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced Technology and
certified by the Department.
A. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed at paragraphs (1) and (2) below, which
are available from Maps and Publications, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton,
New Jersey, 08625; (609) 777-1038.
(1) Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
as amended. Information is provided on stormwater management
measures such as: bioretention systems, constructed stormwater
wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand
filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
(2) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
B. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures
can be obtained from the following:
(1) The "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey" promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and
§ 163-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-7
1:297
§ 163-8. Safety standards for stormwater management basins.
incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be
obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee or
any of the Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4.
The location, address, and telephone number of each Soil
Conservation District may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey,
08625; (609) 292-5540;
(2) The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, (732) 932-9306; and
(3) The Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4. The
location, address, and telephone number of each Soil Conservation
District may be obtained from the State Soil Conservation
Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625, (609)
292-5540.
A. This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety through
the proper design and operation of stormwater management basins.
This section applies to any new stormwater management basin.
B. Requirements for trash racks, overflow grates and escape provisions.
(1) A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
(a) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than six
inch spacing between the bars.
(b) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect
the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
(c) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed two and one-half (2.5) feet per second under the full
range of stage and discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the
basis of the net area of opening through the rack.
(d) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 lbs./ft. sq.
(2) An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
(a) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
§ 163-7 DENNIS CODE § 163-8
1:298
(b) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
(c) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 lbs./ft. sq.
(3) For purposes of this paragraph (3), escape provisions means the
permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or other features
that provide easily accessible means of egress from stormwater
management basins. Stormwater management basins shall include
escape provisions as follows:
(a) If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure.
With the prior approval of the reviewing agency identified in
Section 163-8C a freestanding outlet structure may be
exempted from this requirement.
(b) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of
water deeper than two and one-half (2 1/2) feet. Such safety
ledges shall be comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four
to six feet in width. One step shall be located approximately
two and one-half (2 1/2) feet below the permanent water
surface, and the second step shall be located one to one and
one-half (1 1/2) feet above the permanent water surface. See
Section 163-8D for an illustration of safety ledges in a
stormwater management basin.
(c) In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior
slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm shall not be
steeper than 3 horizontal to 1 vertical.
C. Variance or exemption from safety standards.
(1) A variance or exemption from the safety standards for stormwater
management basins may be granted only upon a written finding by
the appropriate reviewing agency (municipality, county or
Department) that the variance or exemption will not constitute a
threat to public safety.
D. Illustration of safety ledges in a new stormwater management basin.
§ 163-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-8
1:299
§ 163-9. Requirements for a site development stormwater plan.
A. Submission of site development stormwater plan.
(1) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to this Article, the applicant shall submit all of the required
components of the Checklist for the Site Development Stormwater
Plan at Section 163-9C below as part of the submission of the
applicant's application for subdivision or site plan approval.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this Article.
(3) The applicant shall submit three copies of the materials listed in
the checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance
with Section 163-9C of this Article.
B. Site development stormwater plan approval. The applicant's site
development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision or
site plan review process by the municipal board or official from which
municipal approval is sought. That municipal board or official shall
consult the engineer retained by the Planning and/or Zoning Board (as
appropriate) to determine if all of the checklist requirements have been
satisfied and to determine if the project meets the standards set forth in
this Article.
C. Checklist requirements. The following information shall be required:
(1) Topographic base map. The reviewing engineer may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary. It is
recommended that the topographic base map of the site be
submitted which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the limits
of the proposed development, at a scale of 1"=200' or greater,
showing two foot contour intervals. The map as appropriate may
indicate the following: existing surface water drainage, shorelines,
steep slopes, soils, erodible soils, perennial or intermittent streams
§ 163-8 DENNIS CODE § 163-9
1:300
that drain into or upstream of the Category One waters, wetlands
and flood plains along with their appropriate buffer strips,
marshlands and other wetlands, pervious or vegetative surfaces,
existing manmade structures, roads, bearing and distances of
property lines, and significant natural and manmade features not
otherwise shown.
(2) Environmental site analysis. A written and graphic description of
the natural and manmade features of the site and its environs. This
description should include a discussion of soil conditions, slopes,
wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular
attention should be given to unique, unusual, or environmentally
sensitive features and to those that provide particular
opportunities or constraints for development.
(3) Project description and site plan(s). A map (or maps) at the scale of
the topographical base map indicating the location of existing and
proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural
facilities for stormwater management and sediment control, and
other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show
areas where alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover,
including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high
groundwater elevations. A written description of the site plan and
justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be
provided.
(4) Land use planning and source control plan. This plan shall provide
a demonstration of how the goals and standards of Sections 163-3
through 163-6 are being met. The focus of this plan shall be to
describe how the site is being developed to meet the objective of
controlling groundwater recharge, stormwater quality and
stormwater quantity problems at the source by land management
and source controls whenever possible.
(5) Stormwater management facilities map. The following information,
illustrated on a map of the same scale as the topographic base map,
shall be included:
(a) Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon, and
details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
(b) Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during
and after construction, including discharge provisions,
discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of
detention and emergency spillway provisions with maximum
discharge capacity of each spillway.
(6) Calculations.
§ 163-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-9
1:301
§ 163-10. Maintenance and repair.
(a) Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations
for the predevelopment and post-development conditions for
the design storms specified in Section 163-4 of this Article.
(b) When the proposed stormwater management control measures
(e.g., infiltration basins) depends on the hydrologic properties
of soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report
shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The
number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall
be determined based on what is needed to determine the
suitability and distribution of soils present at the location of the
control measure.
(7) Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of Section 163-10.
(8) Waiver from submission requirements. The municipal official or
board reviewing an application under this Article may, in
consultation with the Municipal Engineer, waive submission of any
of the requirements in Section 163-9C(1) through C(6) of this
Article when it can be demonstrated that the information requested
is impossible to obtain or it would create a hardship on the
applicant to obtain and its absence will not materially affect the
review process.
A. Applicability.
(1) Projects subject to review as in Section 163-1C of this Article shall
comply with the requirements of Section 163-10B and C.
B. General maintenance.
(1) The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development.
(2) The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris, or trash removal; and the name,
address, and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance (including
replacement). Maintenance guidelines for stormwater
management measures are available in the New Jersey Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan
identifies a person other than the developer (for example, a public
agency or homeowners' association) as having the responsibility for
maintenance, the plan shall include documentation of such
person's agreement to assume this responsibility, or of the
§ 163-9 DENNIS CODE § 163-10
1:302
developer's obligation to dedicate a stormwater management
facility to such person under an applicable ordinance or regulation.
(3) Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred
to the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential
development or project, unless such owner or tenant owns or
leases the entire residential development or project.
(4) If the person responsible for maintenance identified under Section
163-10B(2) above is not a public agency, the maintenance plan and
any future revisions based on Section 163-10B(7) below shall be
recorded upon the deed of record for each property on which the
maintenance described in the maintenance plan must be
undertaken.
(5) Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and
ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
(6) The person responsible for maintenance identified under Section
163-10B(2) above shall maintain a detailed log of all preventative
and corrective maintenance for the structural stormwater
management measures incorporated into the design of the
development, including a record of all inspections and copies of all
maintenance-related work orders.
(7) The person responsible for maintenance identified under Section
163-10B(2) above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the
maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan and the
deed as needed.
(8) The person responsible for maintenance identified under Section
163-10B(2) above shall retain and make available, upon request by
any public entity with administrative, health, environmental, or
safety authority over the site, the maintenance plan and the
documentation required by Section 163-10B6 and 7 above.
(9) The requirements of Section 163-10B(3) and (4) do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency.
(10) In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance and
repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the Municipal
Engineer or his designee. The municipality, in its discretion, may
extend the time allowed for effecting maintenance and repair for
§ 163-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-10
1:303
§ 163-11. Penalties.
Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains,
or uses any building, structure or land in violation of this Article shall
be subject to the following penalties: A fine not to exceed $500 for the
first offense and not less than $500 nor more than $1,000 for second or
subsequent offenses.
§ 163-12. Effective date.
This Article shall take effect immediately upon the approval by the county
review agency, or 60 days from the receipt of the Article by the county
review agency if the county review agency should fail to act.
§ 163-13. Severability.
If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or
clause of this Article shall be judged invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the
remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or clause of
this Article.
§ 163-14. through § 163-20. (Reserved)
good cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform
such maintenance and repair, the municipality or county may
immediately proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the
responsible person.
C. Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
§ 163-10 DENNIS CODE § 163-14
1:304
ARTICLE II
Pinelands Area
[Amended 2-4-08 by Ord. No. 2008-01]
§ 163-21. Scope and purpose.
A. Purpose.
(1) It is hereby determined that:
(a) Land development projects and associated disturbance of
vegetation and soil and changes in land cover, including
increases in impervious cover, alter the hydrologic response of
local watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and
volumes. If inadequately or improperly managed, this
stormwater runoff can deplete groundwater resources and
increase flooding, stream channel erosion, and sediment
transport and deposition.
(b) This stormwater runoff contributes to increased quantities of
waterborne pollutants.
(c) Increases of stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint
source pollutants have occurred in the past as a result of land
development, and contribute to the degradation of the water
resources of Dennis Township.
(d) Certain lands of Dennis Township lie within the Pinelands Area,
and therefore, development in this portion of Dennis Township
is subject to the requirements of the Pinelands Protection Act
(N.J.S.A. 13:18A-1 et seq.) and the implementing regulations
and minimum standards contained in the Pinelands
Comprehensive Management Plan (N.J.A.C. 7:50-1.1 et seq.)
(CMP). The purpose and intent of these regulations and
standards is to promote orderly development of the Pinelands
so as to preserve and protect the significant and unique
natural, ecological, agricultural, archaeological, historical,
scenic, cultural and recreational resources of the Pinelands.
(e) Pinelands Area resources are to be protected in accordance
with Pinelands Comprehensive Management Plan at N.J.A.C.
7:50 et seq., New Jersey's Stormwater Management Rules at
N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.1 et seq. and New Jersey's surface water quality
antidegradation policies contained in the New Jersey Surface
Water Quality Standards at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.1 et seq. Permitted
uses shall maintain the ecological character and quality of the
Pinelands, including good water quality and natural rates and
volumes of flow.
(f) Increased stormwater rates and volumes and the sediments
and pollutants associated with stormwater runoff from future
§ 163-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-21
1:305
development projects within the Pinelands Area have the
potential to adversely affect Dennis Township's streams and
water resources and the streams and water resources of
downstream municipalities.
(g) Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution
can be controlled and minimized through the regulation of
stormwater runoff from development sites.
(h) It is in the public interest to regulate the discharge of
stormwater runoff from "major development" projects, as
defined in Section 163-27 of this Article, conducted within the
Pinelands Area, as provided in this Article, in order to control
and minimize increases in stormwater runoff rates and
volumes, to maintain groundwater recharge, and to control
and minimize soil erosion, stream channel erosion and
nonpoint source pollution associated with stormwater runoff.
(2) Therefore, it is the purpose of this Article to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for major
development, consistent with the statewide stormwater
requirements at N.J.A.C. 7:8, the regulations and standards
contained in the Pinelands CMP, and the provisions of the adopted
master plan and land use ordinances of Dennis Township.
B. Goals and techniques.
(1) Through this Article, Dennis Township has established the
following goals for stormwater control:
(a) To reduce flood damage, including damage to life and property;
(b) To minimize any increase in stormwater runoff from new
development;
(c) To reduce soil erosion from any development or construction
project;
(d) To assure the adequacy of existing and proposed culverts and
bridges, and other in-stream structures;
(e) To maintain groundwater recharge;
(f) To minimize any increase in nonpoint pollution;
(g) To maintain the integrity of stream channels for their biological
functions, as well as for drainage;
(h) To restore, protect, maintain and enhance the quality of the
streams and water resources of Dennis Township and the
ecological character and quality of the Pinelands Area;
(i) To minimize pollutants in stormwater runoff from new and
existing development in order to restore, protect, enhance and
§ 163-21 DENNIS CODE § 163-21
1:306
maintain the chemical, physical and biological integrity of the
surface and groundwaters of Dennis Township, to protect
public health and to enhance the domestic, municipal,
recreational, industrial and other uses of water; and
(j) To protect public safety through the proper design and
operation of stormwater management basins.
(2) In order to achieve the goals for stormwater control set forth in this
Article, Dennis Township has identified the following management
techniques:
(a) Implementation of multiple stormwater management Best
Management Practices (BMPs) may be necessary to achieve
the performance standards for stormwater runoff quantity and
rate, groundwater recharge, erosion control, and stormwater
runoff quality established through this Article.
(b) Compliance with the stormwater runoff quantity and rate,
groundwater recharge, erosion control, and stormwater runoff
quality standards established through N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.1 et seq.,
and this Article, shall be accomplished to the maximum extent
practicable through the use of nonstructural BMPs, before
relying on structural BMPs. Nonstructural BMPs are also
known as Low Impact Development (LID) techniques.
(c) Nonstructural BMPs shall include both environmentally
sensitive site design and source controls that prevent
pollutants from being placed on the site or from being exposed
to stormwater.
(d) Source control plans shall be developed based upon physical
site conditions and the origin, nature and the anticipated
quantity or amount of potential pollutants.
(e) Structural BMPs, where necessary shall be integrated with
nonstructural stormwater management strategies and proper
maintenance plans.
(f) When using structural BMPs, multiple stormwater
management measures, smaller in size and distributed
spatially throughout the land development site, shall be used
wherever possible to achieve the performance standards for
water quality, quantity and groundwater recharge established
through this Article before relying on a single, larger
stormwater management measure to achieve these
performance standards.
C. Applicability.
(1) This Article shall apply to:
§ 163-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-21
1:307
§ 163-22. Requirements for a site development stormwater plan.
(a) All site plans and subdivisions for major developments
occurring within the Pinelands Area that require preliminary
or final site plan or subdivision review; and
(b) All major development projects undertaken by Dennis
Township shall comply with this Article.
D. Procedures. In addition to other development review procedures set
forth in the Code of Dennis Township, major developments located
within the Pinelands Area shall comply with the stormwater
management requirements and specifications set forth in this Article.
New agricultural development that meets the definition of major
development in Section 163-27 of this Article shall be submitted to the
appropriate Soil Conservation District for review and approval in
accordance with the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5.4(b) 7:8.
E. Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements.
(1) Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans
pursuant to this Article are to be considered an integral part of
development approvals under the subdivision and site plan review
process and do not relieve the applicant of the responsibility to
secure required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any
other applicable ordinance, code, rule, regulation, statute, act or
other provision of law.
(2) In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Article
shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of
the public health, safety, and general welfare. This Article is not
intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other
ordinances, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law
except that, where any provision of this Article imposes restrictions
different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or
regulation, or other provision of law, the more restrictive or
stringent provisions or higher standards shall control.
(3) In the event that a regional stormwater management plan(s) is
prepared and formally adopted pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.1 et seq.
for any drainage area(s) or watershed(s) of which Dennis Township
is a part, the stormwater provisions of such a plan(s) shall be
adopted by Dennis Township within one year of the adoption of a
Regional Stormwater Management Plan (RSWMP) as an
amendment to an Areawide Water Quality Management Plan. Local
ordinances proposed to implement the RSWMP shall be submitted
to the Commission for certification within six months of the
adoption of the RSWMP per N.J.A.C. 7:8 and the Pinelands CMP
(N.J.A.C. 7:50).
A. Submission of site development stormwater plan.
§ 163-21 DENNIS CODE § 163-22
1:308
(1) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a site
development that is subject to this Article, the applicant shall
submit all of the required components of the Checklist for the Site
Development Stormwater Plan at Section 163-22C below as part of
the applicant's application for subdivision or site plan approval.
These required components are in addition to any other
information required under any provisions of Dennis Township's
Land Use Ordinance or by the Pinelands Commission pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 7:50-1.1 et seq.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that the site development project
meets the standards set forth in this Article.
(3) The applicant shall submit three copies of the materials listed in
the checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance
with Section 163-22C of this Article
B. Site development stormwater plan approval.
(1) The applicant's site development stormwater plan shall be
reviewed as a part of the subdivision or site plan review process by
the municipal board or official from whom municipal approval is
sought. That municipal board or official shall consult the engineer
retained by the Planning and/or Zoning Board (as appropriate) to
determine if all of the checklist requirements have been satisfied
and to determine if the project meets the standards set forth in this
Article.
C. Checklist requirements. Any application for approval of a major
development shall include at least the following information. All
required engineering plans shall be submitted to the Dennis Township
and the Pinelands Commission in CAD Format 15 or higher, registered
and rectified to NJ State Plane Feet NAD 83 or Shape Format NJ State
Plan Feet NAD 83, and all other documents shall be submitted in both
paper and commonly used electronic file formats such as pdf., word
processing, database or spreadsheet files. Three copies of each item
shall be submitted.
(1) Topographic base map. The applicant shall submit a topographic
base map of the site which extends a minimum of 300 feet beyond
the limits of the proposed development, at a scale of one inch = 200
feet or greater, showing one foot contour intervals. The map shall
indicate the following: existing surface water drainage, shorelines,
steep slopes, soils, highly erodible soils, perennial or intermittent
streams that drain into or upstream of any Category One or
Pinelands Waters, wetlands and floodplains along with their
appropriate buffer strips, marshlands and other wetlands, pervious
or vegetative surfaces, existing surface and subsurface humanmade
structures, roads, bearing and distances of property lines,
and significant natural and manmade features not otherwise
§ 163-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-22
1:309
shown. Dennis Township or the Pinelands Commission may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary.
(2) Environmental site analysis. The applicant shall submit a written
description along with the drawings of the natural and humanmade
features of the site and its environs. This description should
include:
(a) A discussion of environmentally critical areas, soil conditions,
slopes, wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site.
Particular attention should be given to unique, unusual or
environmentally sensitive features and to those that provide
particular opportunities for or constraints on development; and
(b) Detailed soil and other environmental conditions on the portion
of the site proposed for installation of any stormwater BMPs,
including, at a minimum: soils report based on on-site soil
tests; locations and spot elevations in plan view of test pits and
permeability tests; permeability test data and calculations; and
any other required soil data (e.g., mounding analyses results)
correlated with location and elevation of each test site; crosssection
of proposed stormwater BMP with side-by-side
depiction of soil profile drawn to scale and seasonal high water
table elevation identified; and any other information necessary
to demonstrate the suitability of the specific proposed
structural and nonstructural stormwater management
measures relative to the environmental conditions on the
portion(s) of the site proposed for implementation of those
measures.
(3) Project description and site plan(s). The applicant shall submit a
map (or maps) at the scale of the topographical base map
indicating the location of existing and proposed buildings, roads,
parking areas, utilities, structural facilities for stormwater
management and sediment control, and other permanent
structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show areas where
alterations will occur in the natural terrain and cover, including
lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high groundwater
elevations. A written description of the site plan and justification
for proposed changes in natural conditions shall also be provided.
(4) Land Use Planning and Source Control Plan.
(a) The applicant shall submit a detailed Land Use Planning and
Source Control Plan which provides a description of how the
site will be developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater
recharge and stormwater runoff quantity and quality standards
at Section 163-24 through use of nonstructural or low impact
development techniques and source controls to the maximum
extent practicable before relying on structural BMPs. The Land
Use Planning and Source Control Plan shall include a detailed
§ 163-22 DENNIS CODE § 163-22
1:310
narrative and associated illustrative maps and/or plans that
specifically address how each of the following nine
nonstructural strategies identified in Subchapter 5 of the
NJDEP Stormwater Management Rules (N.J.A.C. 7:8-5) and
set forth below paragraph (4)(a)[1] through [9] will be
implemented to the maximum extent practicable to meet the
standards at Section 163-24 of this Article on the site. If one
or more of the nine nonstructural strategies will not be
implemented on the site, the applicant shall provide a detailed
rationale establishing a basis for the contention that use of the
strategy is not practicable on the site.
[1] Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
[2] Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect
the flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
[3] Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
[4] Minimize the decrease in the pre-development "time of
concentration;"
[5] Minimize land disturbance including clearing and grading;
[6] Minimize soil compaction and all other soil disturbance;
[7] Provide low-maintenance landscaping that provides for the
retention and planting of native plants and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides, in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.24;
[8] Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas; and
[9] Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the
use or exposure of pollutants at the site in order to prevent
or minimize the release of those pollutants into
stormwater runoff. These source controls shall include, but
are not limited to:
[a] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation
of trash and debris in drainage systems;
[b] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of
trash and debris from drainage systems;
[c] Site design features that help to prevent and/or
contain spills or other harmful accumulations of
pollutants at industrial or commercial developments;
and
§ 163-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-22
1:311
[d] Applying fertilizer in accordance with the
requirements established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and
implementing rules, when establishing vegetation
after land disturbance.
(b) For sites where stormwater will be generated from "high
pollutant loading areas" or where stormwater will be exposed
to "source material," as defined in Section 163-27 of this
Article, the applicant shall also demonstrate in the Land Use
Planning and Source Control Plan that the requirements of
Section 163-24 have been met.
(c) The use of nonstructural strategies to meet the performance
standards in Section 163-24 of this Article is not required for
development sites creating less than one acre of disturbance.
However, each application for major development and any
other application where Dennis Township otherwise requires a
landscaping plan shall contain a landscaping or revegetation
plan in accordance with the CMP standards at N.J.A.C.
7:50-6.24(c). In addition, the applicant shall demonstrate that,
at a minimum, existing trees and vegetation on the
development site will be preserved and protected according to
the minimum standards established by provisions of the Dennis
Township Land Use Ordinance, Zoning Ordinance or by
conditions of zoning or variance approval.
(5) Stormwater management facilities map. The applicant shall submit
a map, at the same scale as the topographic base map, depicting
the following information:
(a) The total area to be disturbed, paved and/or built upon,
proposed surface contours, land area to be occupied by the
stormwater management facilities and the type of vegetation
thereon, and details of the proposed plan to manage and
dispose of stormwater; and
(b) Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during
and after construction, including discharge provisions,
discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of
detention (if applicable) and emergency spillway provisions
with maximum discharge capacity of each spillway.
(6) Calculations (groundwater recharge and stormwater runoff rate,
volume and quality). The applicant shall submit comprehensive
hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations for the
predevelopment and post-development conditions for the design
storms specified in Section 163-23. The standards for groundwater
recharge and stormwater runoff rate, volume and quality required
by Section 163-24 shall be met using the methods, calculations and
assumptions provided in Section 163-23.
§ 163-22 DENNIS CODE § 163-22
1:312
§ 163-23. Methodologies for the calculation of stormwater runoff
rate and volume, stormwater runoff quality, and groundwater
recharge.
(7) Inspection, maintenance and repair plan. The applicant shall
submit a detailed plan describing how the proposed stormwater
management measure(s) shall meet the maintenance and repair
requirements of Section 163-26 of this Article. Said plan shall
include, at a minimum, the following elements:
(a) The frequency with which inspections will be made;
(b) The specific maintenance tasks and requirements for each
proposed structural and nonstructural BMP;
(c) The name, address and telephone number for the entity
responsible for implementation of the maintenance plan;
(d) The reporting requirements; and
(e) Copies of the inspection and maintenance reporting sheets.
(8) Exception from submission requirements. An exception may be
granted from submission of any of these required components
(except paragraph 7 above, inspection, maintenance, and repair
plan) if its absence will not materially affect the review process.
However, items required pursuant to the application requirements
in the Pinelands CMP (N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.2(b)) shall be submitted to
the NJ Pinelands Commission unless the Executive Director waives
or modifies the application requirements.
A. Method of calculating stormwater runoff rate and volume.
(1) In complying with the Stormwater Runoff Quantity and Rate
Standards in Section 163-24B, the design engineer shall calculate
the stormwater runoff rate and volume using the USDA Natural
Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) Runoff Equation, Runoff
Curve Numbers, and Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described
in the NRCS National Engineering Handbook Part 630 - Hydrology
and Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds,
incorporated herein by reference, as amended and supplemented.
Alternative methods of calculation may be utilized, provided such
alternative methods are at least as protective as the NRCS
methodology when considered on a regional stormwater
management basis.
(2) In calculating stormwater runoff using the NRCS methodology, the
design engineer shall separately calculate and then combine the
runoff volumes from pervious and directly connected impervious
surfaces within each drainage area within the parcel.
§ 163-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-23
1:313
(3) Calculation of stormwater runoff from unconnected impervious
surfaces shall be based, as applicable, upon the Two-Step method
described in the current New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual or the NRCS methodology.
(4) In calculating stormwater runoff using the NRCS methodology, the
design engineer shall use appropriate 24-hour rainfall depths as
developed for the project site by the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, available online at
http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/index.html.
(5) When calculating stormwater runoff for pre-developed site
conditions, the design engineer shall use the following criteria:
(a) When selecting or calculating Runoff Curve Numbers (CNs) for
predeveloped project site conditions, the project site's land
cover shall be assumed to be woods in good condition.
However, another land cover may be used to calculate runoff
coefficients if:
[1] Such land cover has existed at the site or portion thereof
without interruption for at least five years immediately
prior to the time of application; and
[2] The design engineer can document the character and
extent of such land cover through the use of photographs,
affidavits, and/or other acceptable land use records.
(b) If more than one land cover has existed on the site during the
five years immediately prior to the time of application, the land
cover with the lowest runoff potential shall be used for the
computations.
(c) All predeveloped land covers shall be assumed to be in good
hydrologic condition and, if cultivated, shall be assumed to
have conservation treatment.
(d) In calculating predeveloped site stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall include the effects of all land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows,
and culverts, that affect predeveloped site stormwater runoff
rates and/or volumes.
(e) Where tailwater will affect the hydraulic performance of a
stormwater management measure, the design engineer shall
include such effects in the measure's design.
B. Method of calculating stormwater runoff quality.
(1) In complying with the Stormwater Runoff Quality Standards in
Section 163-24F(1), the design engineer shall calculate the
stormwater runoff rate and volume using the USDA Natural
Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) Runoff Equation, Runoff
§ 163-23 DENNIS CODE § 163-23
1:314
Curve Numbers, and Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described
in the NRCS National Engineering Handbook Part 630 - Hydrology
and Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds,
as amended and supplemented.
(2) The design engineer shall also use the NJDEP Water Quality Design
Storm, which is one and one-quarter (1.25) inches of rainfall falling
in a nonlinear pattern in two hours. Details of the Water Quality
Design Storm are shown in Table 1.
(3) Calculation of runoff volumes, peak rates, and hydrographs for the
Water Quality Design Storm may take into account the
implementation of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management measures.
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution65
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000
5 0.0083
10 0.0166
15 0.0250
20 0.0500
25 0.0750
30 0.1000
35 0.1330
40 0.1660
45 0.2000
50 0.2583
55 0.3583
60 0.6250
65 0.8917
70 0.9917
75 1.0500
80 1.0840
85 1.1170
90 1.1500
95 1.1750
100 1.2000
65.Source: N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(a).
§ 163-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-23
1:315
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative Rainfall
(inches)
105 1.2250
110 1.2334
115 1.2417
120 1.2500
(4) Total Suspended Solids (TSS) reduction calculations.
(a) If more than one stormwater BMP in series is necessary to
achieve the required 80% TSS reduction for a site, the
applicant shall utilize the following formula to calculate TSS
reduction:
R = A + B - (A x B)/100, where:
R = total TSS percent load removal from application of
both BMPs;
A = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first
BMP; and
B = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second
BMP.
(b) If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the 80% TSS
removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the
runoff from the subareas converge on site, in which case the
removal rate can be demonstrated through a calculation using
a weighted average.
(5) TSS removal rates for stormwater BMPs.
(a) For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in
accordance with the New Jersey BMP Manual. The BMP
Manual may be obtained from the address identified in Section
163-32A or found on the NJDEP's website at
www.njstormwater.org. TSS reduction shall be calculated
based on the removal rates for the BMPs in Table 2.
(b) Alternative stormwater management measures, removal rates
and methods of calculating removal rates may be used if the
design engineer provides documentation demonstrating the
capability of these alternative rates and methods to Dennis
Township. Any alternative stormwater management measure,
removal rate or method of calculating the removal rate shall be
subject to approval by Dennis Township and a copy shall be
provided to the following:
§ 163-23 DENNIS CODE § 163-23
1:316
[1] The Division of Watershed Management, New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, PO Box 418,
Trenton, NJ, 08625-0418; and
[2] The New Jersey Pinelands Commission, PO Box 7, New
Lisbon, NJ, 08064.
Table 2: Pollutant Removal Rates for BMPs66
Best
Management
Practice
TSS Percent
Removal
Rate
Total
Phosphorus
Percent
Removal
Rate
Total
Nitrogen
Percent
Removal
Rate
Bioretention
Systems
90 60 30
Constructed
Stormwater
Wetland
90 50 30
Extended
Detention
Basin
40-60 (final
rate based
upon
detention
time; see
New Jersey
BMP Manual,
Chap. 9)
20 20
Infiltration
basin
80 60 50
Manufactured
Treatment
Device
Pollutant
removal
rates as
certified by
NJDEP; see
Section
163-23.
Pollutant
removal
rates as
certified by
NJDEP; see
Section
163-23.
Pollutant
removal
rates as
certified by
NJDEP; see
Section
163-23.
80 (porous
paving)
Pervious
Paving
Systems 80
(permeable
pavers with
storage bed)
60 50
66.Source: 7:8-5.5(c) and New Jersey BMP Manual Chapter 4.
§ 163-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-23
1:317
Table 2: Pollutant Removal Rates for BMPs
Best
Management
Practice
TSS Percent
Removal
Rate
Total
Phosphorus
Percent
Removal
Rate
Total
Nitrogen
Percent
Removal
Rate
0 - volume
reduction
only
(permeable
pavers
without
storage bed)
0 - volume
reduction
only
(permeable
pavers
without
storage bed)
0 - volume
reduction
only
(permeable
pavers
without
storage bed)
Sand Filter 80 50 35
60 (turf
grass)
70 (native
grasses,
meadow and
planted
woods)
Vegetative
Filter Strip
(For filter
strips with
multiple
vegetated
covers, the
final TSS
removal rate
should be
based upon a
weighted
average of
the adopted
rates shown
in Table 2,
based upon
the relative
flow lengths
through each
cover type)
80
(indigenous
woods)
30 30
Wet Pond/
Retention
Basin
50-90 (final
rate based
upon pool
volume and
detention
time; see NJ
BMP
Manual)
50 30
(6) Nutrient removal rates for stormwater BMPs. For purposes of postdevelopment
nutrient load reduction calculations, Table 2 presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in
§ 163-23 DENNIS CODE § 163-23
1:318
accordance with the New Jersey BMP Manual. If alternative
stormwater BMPs are proposed, the applicant shall demonstrate
that the selected BMPs will achieve the nutrient removal standard
required in Section 163-24F.
C. Methods of calculating groundwater recharge.
(1) In complying with the groundwater recharge requirements in
Section 163-24C(1)(a), the design engineer may calculate
groundwater recharge in accordance with the New Jersey
Groundwater Recharge Spreadsheet (NJGRS) computer program
incorporated herein by reference as amended and supplemented.
Information regarding the methodology is available in Section
163-31A or from the New Jersey BMP Manual.
(2) Alternative groundwater recharge calculation methods to meet
these requirements may be used upon approval by the Municipal
Engineer.
(3) In complying with the groundwater recharge requirements in
Section 163-24C, 1(b), the design engineer shall:
(a) Calculate stormwater runoff volumes in accordance with the
USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and Runoff
Curve Numbers, as described in the NRCS National
Engineering Handbook Part 630 - Hydrology and Technical
Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds as
amended and supplemented; and
(b) Use appropriate 2-year, 24-hour rainfall depths as developed
for the project site by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, available online at http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/
hdsc/pfds/index.html.
(4) When calculating groundwater recharge or stormwater runoff for
predeveloped site conditions, the design engineer shall use the
following criteria:
(a) When selecting land covers or calculating Runoff Curve
Numbers (CNs) for predeveloped project site conditions, the
project site's land cover shall be assumed to be woods.
However, another land cover may be used to calculate runoff
coefficients if:
[1] Such land cover has existed at the site or portion thereof
without interruption for at least five years immediately
prior to the time of application; and
[2] The design engineer can document the character and
extent of such land cover through the use of photographs,
affidavits, and/or other acceptable land use records.
§ 163-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-23
1:319
§ 163-24. Stormwater management performance standards for
major development.
(b) If more than one land cover, other than woods, has existed on
the site during the five years immediately prior to the time of
application, the land cover with the lowest runoff potential
(including woods) shall be used for the computations.
(c) All predeveloped land covers shall be assumed to be in good
hydrologic condition and, if cultivated, shall be assumed to
have conservation treatment.
A. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
(1) To the maximum extent practicable, the performance standards in
Section 163-24 for major development shall be met by
incorporating the nine nonstructural strategies identified in
Subchapter 5 of the NJ Stormwater Management Rules (N.J.A.C.
7:8-5), and set forth in Section 163-22C(4)(a), into the design. The
applicant shall identify within the Land Use Planning and Source
Control Plan required by Section 163-22C(4) of this Article how
each of the nine nonstructural measures will be incorporated into
the design of the project to the maximum extent practicable.
(2) If the applicant contends that it is not practical for engineering,
environmental or safety reasons to incorporate any of the nine
nonstructural strategies into the design of a particular project, the
applicant shall provide a detailed rationale establishing a basis for
the contention that use of the strategy is not practical on the site.
This rationale shall be submitted in accordance with the checklist
requirements established by Section 163-22 to Dennis Township. A
determination by Dennis Township that this rationale is inadequate
or without merit shall result in a denial of the application unless
one of the following conditions are met:
(a) The Land Use Planning and Source Control Plan is amended to
include a description of how all nine nonstructural measures
will be implemented on the development site, and the amended
Plan is approved by Dennis Township;
(b) The Land Use Planning and Source Control Plan is amended to
provide an alternative nonstructural strategy or measure that
is not included in the list of nine nonstructural measures, but
still meets the performance standards in Section 163-24, and
the amended Plan is approved by Dennis Township; or
(c) The Land Use Planning and Source Control Plan is amended to
provide an adequate rationale for the contention that use of the
particular strategy is not practical on the site, and the
amended Plan is approved by Dennis Township.
§ 163-23 DENNIS CODE § 163-24
1:320
(3) In addition to all other requirements of this section, each applicant
shall demonstrate that, at a minimum, existing trees and vegetation
on the development site will be preserved, protected and
maintained according to the minimum standards established by
provisions of the Dennis Township Land Use Ordinance, Zoning
Ordinance or by conditions of zoning or variance approval. Existing
trees and vegetation shall be protected during construction
activities in accordance with the "Standard for Tree Protection
During Construction" provided in the NJ State Soil Conservation
Committee Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in
New Jersey, which is incorporated herein by reference as amended
and supplemented.
(4) In addition to all other requirements of this section, each
application for major development, and any other application
where Dennis Township otherwise requires a landscaping plan,
shall contain a landscaping or revegetation plan in accordance with
the Pinelands CMP standards at N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.24(c).
(5) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in Section 163-24
shall be dedicated to a government entity; shall be subjected to a
conservation easement filed with the appropriate County Clerk's
office; or shall be subjected to an equivalent form of restriction
approved by Dennis Township that ensures that that measure, or
equivalent stormwater management measure is maintained in
perpetuity, as detailed in Section 163-26 of this Article.
(6) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey BMP Manual, which may be obtained
from the address identified in Section 163-32A or found on the
NJDEP's website at www.njstormwater.org.
(7) Exception for major development sites creating less than one acre
of disturbance. The use of nonstructural strategies to meet the
performance standards in Section 163-24 of this Article is not
required for major development creating less than one acre of
disturbance. However, the following requirements shall be met:
(a) Each application for major development and any other
application where Dennis Township otherwise requires a
landscaping plan shall contain a landscaping or revegetation
plan prepared in accordance with the Pinelands CMP
standards (N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.24(c));
(b) Each applicant shall demonstrate that, at a minimum, existing
trees and vegetation on the development site will be preserved
and protected according to the minimum standards established
by provisions of the Dennis Township Land Use Ordinance,
Zoning Ordinance or by conditions of zoning or variance
approval; and
§ 163-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-24
1:321
(c) Existing trees and vegetation shall be protected during
construction activities in accordance with the "Standard for
Tree Protection During Construction" provided in the NJ State
Soil Conservation Committee Standards for Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control in New Jersey, which is incorporated herein
by reference as amended and supplemented.
B. Stormwater runoff quantity and rate standards.
(1) There shall be no direct discharge of stormwater runoff from any
point or nonpoint source to any wetland, wetlands transition area
or surface waterbody. In addition, stormwater runoff shall not be
directed in such a way as to increase the volume and/or rate of
discharge into any surface water body from that which existed
prior to development of the site.
(2) To the maximum extent practical, there shall be no direct discharge
of stormwater runoff onto farm fields so as to protect farm crops
from damage due to flooding, erosion and long-term saturation of
cultivated crops and cropland.
(3) For all major developments, the total runoff volume generated from
the net increase in impervious surfaces by a 10 year, 24 hour storm
shall be retained and infiltrated on site.
(4) In addition, the design engineer, using the assumptions and factors
for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge calculations
contained in Section 163-23, shall either:
(a) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that
the post-developed stormwater runoff hydrographs from the
project site for the 2-, 10-, and 100-year storms do not exceed,
at any point in time, the site's predeveloped runoff
hydrographs for the same storms;
(b) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that
under post-developed site conditions:
[1] There is no increase in predeveloped stormwater runoff
rates from the project site for the two-, 10-, and 100-year
storms; and
[2] Any increased stormwater runoff volume or change in
stormwater runoff timing for the two-, 10-, and 100-year
storms will not increase flood damage at or downstream of
the project site. When performing this analysis for
predeveloped site conditions, all off-site development
levels shall reflect existing conditions. When performing
this analysis for post-developed site conditions, all off-site
development levels shall reflect full development in
accordance with current zoning and land use ordinances;
or
§ 163-24 DENNIS CODE § 163-24
1:322
(c) Demonstrate that the peak post-developed stormwater runoff
rates from the project site for the two, 10 and 100-year storms
are fifty, seventy-five and eighty percent (50%, 75% and 80%),
respectively, of the site's peak predeveloped stormwater runoff
rates for the same storms. Peak outflow rates from on-site
stormwater measures for these storms shall be adjusted where
necessary to account for the discharge of increased
stormwater runoff rates and/or volumes from project site areas
not controlled by the onsite measures. These percentages do
not have to be applied to those portions of the project site that
are not proposed for development at the time of application,
provided that such areas are:
[1] Protected from future development by imposition of a
conservation easement, deed restriction, or other
acceptable legal measures; or
[2] Would be subject to review under these standards if they
are proposed for any degree of development in the future.
(5) In tidal flood hazard areas, a stormwater runoff quantity analysis in
accordance with paragraphs (a), (b), and (c) above shall only be
applied if the increased volume of stormwater runoff could increase
flood damages below the point of discharge.
(6) The standards for stormwater runoff quantity and rate required by
this section shall be met using the methods, calculations and
assumptions provided in Section 163-23.
C. Groundwater recharge standards.
(1) For all major developments, with the exception of those described
in Section 163-24C(4), below, the design engineer, using the
assumptions and factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater
recharge calculations contained in Section 163-23, shall either:
(a) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that
the post-developed project site maintains 100% of the site's
pre-developed average annual groundwater recharge volume;
or
(b) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that
any increase in the project site's stormwater runoff volume for
the two year, 24 hour storm from predeveloped to postdeveloped
conditions is infiltrated on site.
(2) The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on the
groundwater table and design the project site and all site
groundwater recharge measures so as to avoid adverse hydraulic
impacts. Adverse hydraulic impacts include, but are not limited to:
raising the groundwater table so as to cause surface ponding;
flooding of basements and other subsurface structures and areas;
§ 163-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-24
1:323
preventing a stormwater infiltration basin from completely
draining via infiltration within 72 hours of a design storm event;
and interference with the proper operation of subsurface sewage
disposal systems and other surface and subsurface facilities in the
vicinity of the groundwater recharge measure.
(3) The standards for groundwater recharge required by this section
shall be met using the methods, calculations and assumptions
provided in Section 163-23.
(4) Exceptions.
(a) The preceding groundwater recharge standards shall not apply
to sites that create less than one acre of disturbance.
D. Erosion control standards. The minimum design and performance
standards for erosion control are those established under the Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and its
implementing regulations, N.J.A.C 2:90-1.1 through 1.4.
E. Stormwater runoff quality standards.
(1) There shall be no direct discharge of stormwater runoff from any
point or nonpoint source to any wetland, wetland transition area or
surface waterbody.
(2) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
total suspended solids (TSS) load in the stormwater runoff from the
post-developed site by 80% expressed as an annual average.
(3) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce the nutrient load in the stormwater runoff from the postdeveloped
site by the maximum extent practicable. In achieving
this reduction, the design of the development site shall include
nonstructural and structural stormwater management measures
that optimize nutrient removal while still achieving the
groundwater recharge, runoff quantity and rate, and TSS removal
standards in this section.
(4) The standards for stormwater runoff quality required by this
section shall be met using the methods, calculations, assumptions
and pollutant removal rates provided in Section 163-23.
(5) Exceptions.
(a) The preceding stormwater runoff quality standards shall not
apply to the following major development sites:
[1] Major development sites where less than one-quarter
(0.25) acre of additional impervious surface is proposed;
or
§ 163-24 DENNIS CODE § 163-24
1:324
[2] Major residential development sites that create less than
one acre of disturbance.
(b) The TSS reduction requirement in Section 163-24F(2) shall not
apply to any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated under
a numeric effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the
NJPDES rules (N.J.A.C. 7:14A) or in a discharge specifically
exempt under a NJPDES permit from this requirement.
(c) The stormwater runoff quantity and rate standards in Section
163-24B shall still be met for all major development sites.
F. Additional stormwater quality standards for high pollutant loading
areas and areas where stormwater runoff is exposed to source material.
(1) This subsection applies to the following areas of a major
development as defined in Section 163-27 of this Article:
(a) High pollutant loading areas (HPLAs); and
(b) Areas where stormwater is exposed to "source material."
(2) For a major development in areas described in paragraphs (1)(a) or
(1)(b) above, in addition to the infiltration requirements specified in
Section 163-24B(2) and the groundwater recharge requirements
specified in Section 163-24C, the applicant shall demonstrate in the
Land Use Planning and Source Control Plan required in Section
163-22C,4 that the following requirements have been met:
(a) The extent of the areas described in paragraphs (1)(a) and
(1)(b) above have been minimized on the development site to
the maximum extent practicable;
(b) The stormwater runoff from the areas described in paragraphs
(1)(a) and (1)(b) above is segregated to the maximum extent
practicable from the stormwater runoff generated from the
remainder of the site such that co-mingling of the stormwater
runoff from the areas described in paragraphs (1)(a) and (1)(b)
above and the remainder of the site will be minimized;
(c) The amount of precipitation falling directly on the areas
described in paragraphs (1)(a) and (1)(b) above is minimized to
the maximum extent practicable by means of a canopy, roof or
other similar structure that reduces the generation of
stormwater runoff; and
(d) The stormwater runoff from or co-mingled with the areas
described in paragraphs (1)(a) and (1)(b) above for the Water
Quality Design Storm, defined in Section 163-23B Table 1 shall
be subject to pretreatment by one or more of the following
stormwater BMPs, designed in accordance with the New
Jersey BMP Manual to provide 90% TSS removal:
§ 163-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-24
1:325
[1] Bioretention system;
[2] Sand filter;
[3] Wet ponds which shall be hydraulically disconnected by a
minimum of two feet of vertical separation from the
seasonal high water table and shall be designed to achieve
a minimum 80% TSS removal rate;
[4] Constructed stormwater wetlands; and/or
[5] Media filtration system manufactured treatment device
with a minimum 80% TSS removal as verified by the New
Jersey Corporation for Advanced Technology and as
certified by NJDEP.
(e) If the potential for contamination of stormwater runoff by
petroleum products exists on site, prior to being conveyed to
the pretreatment BMP required in Section 163-24D(2)(d)
above, the stormwater runoff from the areas described in
paragraphs (1)(a) and (1)(b) above shall be conveyed through
an oil/grease separator or other equivalent manufactured
filtering device to remove the petroleum hydrocarbons. The
applicant shall provide the reviewing agency with sufficient
data to demonstrate acceptable performance of the device.
G. Threatened and endangered species and associated habitat standards.
Stormwater management measures shall address the impacts of the
development on habitat for threatened and endangered species, in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.2(c), N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.27, and 7:50-6.33
and 34.
H. Exceptions and mitigation requirements.
(1) Exceptions from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements established by this Article may be granted, at the
discretion of Dennis Township, and subject to approval by the
Pinelands Commission, provided that all of the following conditions
are met:
(a) The exception is consistent with that allowed by Dennis
Township;
(b) Dennis Township has an adopted and effective municipal
stormwater management plan in accordance with N.J.A.C.
7:8-4.4, which includes a mitigation plan in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 7:8-4.2(c) 11, and is also certified by the Pinelands
Commission. The mitigation plan shall identify what measures
are necessary to offset the deficit created by granting the
exception and the municipality shall submit a written report to
the county review agency and the NJDEP describing the
§ 163-24 DENNIS CODE § 163-24
1:326
exception and the required mitigation. Guidance for
developing municipal stormwater management plans,
including mitigation plans, is available from the NJDEP,
Division of Watershed Management and the New Jersey BMP
Manual.
(c) The applicant demonstrates that mitigation, in addition to the
requirements of mitigation plan discussed in paragraph (b)
above, will be provided consistent with one of the following
options:
[1] Mitigation may be provided off site, but within the
Pinelands Area and within the same drainage area as the
development site, and shall meet or exceed the equivalent
recharge, quality or quantity performance standard which
is lacking on the development site due to the exception; or
[2] In lieu of the required mitigation, a monetary "in lieu
contribution" may be provided by the applicant to Dennis
Township in accordance with the following:
[a] The amount of the in lieu contribution shall be
determined by Dennis Township, but the maximum in
lieu contribution required shall be equivalent to the
cost of implementing and maintaining the stormwater
management measure(s) for which the exception is
granted;
[b] The in lieu contribution shall be used to fund an offsite
stormwater control mitigation project(s) located
within the Pinelands Area, within the same drainage
area as the development site, and shall meet or exceed
the equivalent recharge, quality or quantity
performance standards which is lacking on the
development site. Such mitigation project shall be
identified by Dennis Township in Dennis Township's
adopted municipal stormwater management plan. The
stormwater control project to which the monetary
contribution will be applied shall be identified by
Dennis Township at the time the exception is granted.
The applicant shall amend the project description and
site plan required in Section 163-22C(3) to
incorporate a description of both the standards for
which an on-site exception is being granted and of the
selected off-site mitigation project.
[c] Dennis Township shall expend the in lieu contribution
to implement the selected off-site mitigation project
within five years from the date that payment is
received. Should Dennis Township fail to expend the in
lieu contribution within the required time frame, the
§ 163-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-24
1:327
§ 163-25. Design, construction, and safety standards for structural
stormwater management measures.
mitigation option provided in Section 163-24H(1)(c)[2]
of this Article shall be void and Dennis Township shall
be prohibited from collecting in lieu contributions.
(2) An exception from strict compliance granted in accordance with
subsection H(1) above shall not constitute a waiver of strict
compliance from the requirements of the Pinelands Comprehensive
Management Plan at N.J.A.C. 7:50. An applicant should contact the
Pinelands Commission to determine whether a waiver of strict
compliance is also required in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:50,
Subchapter 4, Part V.
A. General design and construction standards.
(1) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
meet the standards established in this section. These standards
have been developed to protect public safety, conserve natural
features, create an aesthetically pleasing site and promote proper
on-site stormwater management.
(2) The following structural stormwater management measures may
be utilized as part of a stormwater management system at a major
land development in the Pinelands, provided that the applicant
demonstrates that they are designed, constructed and maintained
so as to meet the standards and requirements established by this
Article. If alternative stormwater management measures are
proposed, the applicant shall demonstrate that the selected
measures will achieve the standards established by this Article.
(a) Bioretention systems;
(b) Constructed stormwater wetlands;
(c) Extended detention basins;
(d) Infiltration basins;
(e) Vegetated filter strips;
(f) Infiltration basins and trenches;
(g) Wet ponds with suitable liners;
(h) Pervious paving systems; and
(i) Manufactured treatment devices, provided their pollutant
removal rates are verified by the New Jersey Corporation for
Advanced Technology and certified by the NJDEP.
(3) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
take into account the existing site conditions, including
§ 163-24 DENNIS CODE § 163-25
1:328
environmentally critical areas, wetlands, flood-prone areas, slopes,
depth to seasonal high water table, soil type, permeability and
texture, and drainage area and drainage patterns.
(4) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed
and constructed to be strong, durable, and corrosion resistant
(measures that are consistent with the relevant portions of the
Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3, 7.4,
and 7.8 shall be deemed to meet this requirement); to minimize and
facilitate maintenance and repairs; and to ensure proper
functioning.
(5) For all stormwater management measures at a development site,
each applicant shall submit a detailed Inspection, Maintenance and
Repair Plan consistent with the requirements of Section 163-25 of
this Article.
(6) To the maximum extent practicable, the design engineer shall
design structural stormwater management measures on the
development site in a manner that:
(a) Limits site disturbance, maximizes stormwater management
efficiencies, and maintains or improves aesthetic conditions;
(b) Utilizes multiple stormwater management measures, smaller
in size and distributed spatially throughout the land
development site, instead of a single larger structural
stormwater management measure;
(c) Incorporates pretreatment measures. Pretreatment can extend
the functional life and increase the pollutant removal capability
of a structural stormwater management measure.
Pretreatment measures may be designed in accordance with
the New Jersey BMP Manual or other sources approved by the
municipal engineer.
(7) Stormwater management basins shall be designed in a manner that
complements and mimics the existing natural landscape, including
but not limited to the following design strategies:
(a) Use of natural, non-wetland wooded depressions for
stormwater runoff storage; and
(b) Establishment of attractive landscaping in and around the
basin that mimics the existing vegetation and incorporates
native Pinelands plants, including, but not limited to, the
species listed in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.25 and 6.26.
(8) Stormwater management basins shall be designed with gently
sloping sides. The maximum allowable basin side slope shall be
three horizontal to one vertical (3:1).
§ 163-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-25
1:329
(9) Guidance on the design and construction of structural stormwater
management measures may be found in the New Jersey BMP
Manual. Other guidance sources may also be used upon approval
by the Municipal Engineer.
(10) After all construction activities and required field testing have been
completed on the development site, as-built plans depicting design
and as-built elevations of all stormwater management measures
shall be prepared by a licensed land surveyor and submitted to the
Municipal Engineer. Based upon the Municipal Engineer's review
of the as-built plans, all corrections or remedial actions deemed by
the Municipal Engineer to be necessary due to the failure to comply
with the standards established by this Article and/or any reasons of
public health or safety shall be completed by the applicant. In lieu
of review by the Municipal Engineer, Dennis Township reserves the
right to engage a professional engineer to review the as-built plans.
The applicant shall pay all costs associated with such review.
B. Design and construction standards for stormwater infiltration BMPs.
(1) Stormwater infiltration BMPs, such as bioretention systems with
infiltration, dry wells, infiltration basins, pervious paving systems
with storage beds, and sand filters with infiltration, shall be
designed, constructed and maintained to completely drain the total
runoff volume generated by the basin's maximum design storm
within 72 hours after a storm event. Runoff storage for greater
times can render the BMP ineffective and may result in anaerobic
conditions, odor and both water quality and mosquito breeding
problems.
(2) Stormwater infiltration BMPs shall be designed, constructed and
maintained to provide a minimum separation of at least two feet
between the elevation of the lowest point of the bottom of the
infiltration BMP and the seasonal high water table.
(3) A stormwater infiltration BMP shall be sited in suitable soils
verified by field testing to have permeability rates between one and
20 inches per hour. If such site soils do not exist or if the design
engineer demonstrates that it is not practical for engineering,
environmental or safety reasons to site the stormwater infiltration
BMP(s) in such soils, then the stormwater infiltration BMP(s) may
be sited in soils verified by field testing to have permeability rates
in excess of 20 inches per hour, provided that a bioretention
system, designed, installed and maintained in accordance with the
New Jersey BMP Manual, is installed to meet one of the following
conditions:
(a) The bioretention system is constructed as a separate measure
designed to provide pretreatment of stormwater and to convey
the pretreated stormwater into the infiltration BMP; or
§ 163-25 DENNIS CODE § 163-25
1:330
(b) The bioretention system is integrated into and made part of the
infiltration BMP and, as such, does not require an underdrain
system. If this option is selected, the infiltration BMP shall be
designed and constructed so that the maximum water depth in
the bioretention system portion of the BMP during treatment
of the stormwater quality design storm is 12 inches in
accordance with the New Jersey BMP Manual.
(4) The minimum design permeability rate for the soil within a BMP
that relies on infiltration shall be one-half (0.5) inch per hour. A
factor of safety of two shall be applied to the soil's field-tested
permeability rate to determine the soil's design permeability rate.
For example, if the field-tested permeability rate of the soil is four
inches per hour, its design permeability rate would be two inches
per hour. The minimum design permeability rate for the soil within
a stormwater infiltration basin shall also be sufficient to achieve the
minimum 72 hour drain time described in paragraph (1) above. The
maximum design permeability shall be 10 inches per hour.
(5) A soil's field tested permeability rate shall be determined in
accordance with the following:
(a) The predevelopment field test permeability rate shall be
determined according to the methodologies provided in
Section 163-31C(3) of this Article;
(b) The results of the required field permeability tests shall
demonstrate a minimum tested infiltration rate of one inch per
hour;
(c) After all construction activities have been completed on the
site and the finished grade has been established in the
infiltration BMP, post-development field permeability tests
shall also be conducted according to the methodologies
provided in Section 163-31C(3) of this Article;
(d) If the results of the post-development field permeability tests
fail to achieve the minimum required design permeability rates
in paragraph (5) above utilizing a factor of safety of two, the
stormwater infiltration BMP shall be renovated and retested
until such minimum required design permeability rates are
achieved; and
(e) The results of all field permeability tests shall be certified by a
professional engineer and transmitted to the Municipal
Engineer.
(6) To help ensure maintenance of the design permeability rate over
time, a six inch layer of K5 soil shall be placed on the bottom of a
stormwater infiltration BMP. This soil layer shall meet the textural
and permeability specifications of a K5 soil as provided at N.J.A.C.
7:9A, Appendix A, Figure 6, and be certified to meet these
§ 163-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-25
1:331
specifications by a professional engineer licensed in the State of
New Jersey. The depth to the seasonal high water table shall be
measured from the bottom of the K5 sand layer.
(7) The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on the
groundwater table and design the project site and all stormwater
infiltration basins so as to avoid adverse hydraulic impacts.
Adverse hydraulic impacts include, but are not limited to: raising
the groundwater table so as to cause surface ponding; flooding of
basements and other subsurface structures and areas; preventing a
stormwater infiltration basin from completely draining via
infiltration within 72 hours of a design storm event; and
interference with the proper operation of subsurface sewage
disposal systems and other surface and subsurface structures in
the vicinity of the stormwater infiltration basin.
(8) The design engineer shall conduct a mounding analysis, as defined
in Section 163-27, of all stormwater infiltration BMPs. The
mounding analysis shall be conducted in accordance with the
requirements in Section 163-31C(3)(l). Where the mounding
analysis identifies adverse impacts, the stormwater infiltration
BMP shall be redesigned or relocated, as appropriate.
(9) Stormwater infiltration BMPs shall be constructed in accordance
with the following:
(a) To avoid sedimentation that may result in clogging and reduce
the basin's permeability rate, stormwater infiltration basins
shall be constructed according to the following:
[1] Unless the conditions in paragraph [2] below are met, a
stormwater infiltration basin shall not be placed into
operation until its drainage area is completely stabilized.
Instead, upstream runoff shall be diverted around the
basin and into separate, temporary stormwater
management facilities and sediment basins. Such
temporary facilities and basins shall be installed and
utilized for stormwater management and sediment control
until stabilization is achieved in accordance with the
Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey, which is incorporated herein by reference as
amended and supplemented.
[2] If the design engineer determines that, for engineering,
environmental or safety reasons, temporary stormwater
management facilities and sediment basins cannot be
constructed on the site, the stormwater infiltration basin
may be placed into operation prior to the complete
stabilization of its drainage area provided that the basin's
bottom during this period is constructed at a depth at least
two feet higher than its final design elevation. All other
§ 163-25 DENNIS CODE § 163-25
1:332
infiltration BMP construction requirements in this section
shall be followed. When the drainage area is completely
stabilized, all accumulated sediment shall be removed
from the infiltration BMP, which shall then be excavated
to its final design elevation in accordance with the
construction requirements of this section and the
performance standards in Section 163-24.
(b) To avoid compaction of subgrade soils of BMPs that rely on
infiltration, no heavy equipment such as backhoes, dump
trucks or bulldozers shall be permitted to operate within the
footprint of the BMP. All excavation required to construct a
stormwater infiltration BMP shall be performed by equipment
placed outside the BMP. If this is not possible, the soils within
the excavated area shall be renovated and tilled after
construction is completed to reverse the effects of compaction.
In addition, post-development soil permeability testing shall be
performed in accordance with subsection B(5) of this section.
(c) Earthwork associated with stormwater infiltration BMP
construction, including excavation, grading, cutting or filling,
shall not be performed when soil moisture content is above the
lower plastic limit.
C. Safety standards for structural stormwater management measures.
(1) If a structural stormwater management measure has an outlet
structure, escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the
structure. Escape provisions means the permanent installation of
ladders, steps, rungs, or other features that provide readily
accessible means of ingress and egress from the outlet structure.
(2) A trash rack is a device intended to intercept runoff-borne trash
and debris that might otherwise block the hydraulic openings in an
outlet structure of a structural stormwater management measure.
Trash racks shall be installed upstream of such outlet structure
openings as necessary to ensure proper functioning of the
structural stormwater management measure in accordance with
the following:
(a) The trash rack should be constructed primarily of bars aligned
in the direction of flow with one inch spacing between the bars
to the elevation of the water quality design storm. For
elevations higher than the water quality design storm, the bars
shall be spaced no greater than 1/3 the width of the hydraulic
opening it is protecting or six inches, whichever is less.
Transverse bars aligned perpendicular to flow should be sized
and spaced as necessary for rack stability and strength.
(b) The trash rack shall not adversely affect the hydraulic
performance of either the outlet structure opening it is
protecting or the overall outlet structure.
§ 163-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-25
1:333
(c) The trash rack shall have sufficient net open area under clean
conditions to limit the peak design storm velocity through it to
a maximum of two and one-half (2.5) feet per second.
(d) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(3) An overflow grate is a device intended to protect the opening in the
top of a stormwater management measure outlet structure. If an
outlet structure has an overflow grate, such grate shall meet the
following requirements:
(a) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance;
(b) The overflow grate spacing shall be no more than two inches
across the smallest dimension; and
(c) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(4) The maximum side slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm
shall not be steeper than three horizontal to one vertical (3:1).
(5) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
structural stormwater management measures having a permanent
pool of water deeper than two and one-half (2 1/2) feet. Such safety
ledges shall be comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four to
six feet in width. One step shall be located approximately two and
one-half (2 1/2) feet below the permanent water surface, and the
second step shall be located one to one and one-half (1 1/2) feet
above the permanent water surface. See paragraph (a) below, for
an illustration of safety ledges in a stormwater management basin.
(a) Illustration of safety ledges.67
67.Source: N.J.A.C. 7:8-6 Appendix A.
§ 163-25 DENNIS CODE § 163-26
1:334
§ 163-26. Inspection, maintenance and repair of stormwater
management measures.
A. Applicability. Projects subject to review pursuant to Section 163-21C of
this Article shall comply with the requirements of Sections 163-26B and
163-26C below.
B. General inspection, maintenance and repair plan.
(1) The design engineer shall prepare an inspection, maintenance and
repair plan for the stormwater management measures, including
both structural and nonstructural measures incorporated into the
design of a major development. This plan shall be submitted as part
of the checklist requirements established in Section 163-22C.
Inspection and maintenance guidelines for stormwater
management measures are available in the New Jersey BMP
Manual.
(2) The Inspection, maintenance and repair plan shall contain the
following:
(a) Accurate and comprehensive drawings of the site's stormwater
management measures;
(b) Specific locations of each stormwater management measure
identified by means of longitude and latitude as well as block
and lot number;
(c) Specific preventative and corrective maintenance tasks and
schedules for such tasks for each stormwater BMP;
(d) Cost estimates, including estimated cost of sediment, debris or
trash removal; and
(e) The name, address and telephone number of the person or
persons responsible for regular inspections and preventative
and corrective maintenance (including repair and
replacement). If the responsible person or persons is a
corporation, company, partnership, firm, association,
municipality or political subdivision of this state, the name and
telephone number of an appropriate contact person shall also
be included.
(3) The person responsible for inspection, maintenance and repair
identified under Section 163-26B(2) above shall maintain a detailed
log of all preventative and corrective maintenance performed for
the site's stormwater management measures, including a record of
all inspections and copies of all maintenance-related work orders in
the inspection, maintenance and repair plan. Said records and
inspection reports shall be retained for a minimum of five years.
(4) If the inspection, maintenance and repair plan identifies a person
other than the developer (for example, a public agency or
§ 163-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-26
1:335
homeowners' association) as having the responsibility for
inspection and maintenance, the plan shall include documentation
of such person's agreement to assume this responsibility, or of
the developer's obligation to dedicate a stormwater management
measure to such person under an applicable ordinance or
regulation.
(5) If the person responsible for inspection, maintenance and repair
identified under Section 163-26B(3) above is not a public agency,
the maintenance plan and any future revisions based on Section
163-26B(6) below shall be recorded upon the deed of record for
each property on which the maintenance described in the
maintenance plan shall be undertaken.
(6) The person responsible for inspection, maintenance and repair
identified under Section 163-26B(2) above shall evaluate the
effectiveness of the inspection, maintenance and repair plan at
least once per year and update the plan and the deed as needed.
(7) The person responsible for inspection, maintenance and repair
identified under Section 163-26B(2) above shall submit the updated
inspection, maintenance and repair plan and the documentation
required by Sections 163-26B(2) and 163-26B(3) above to Dennis
Township once per year.
(8) The person responsible for inspection, maintenance and repair
identified under Section 163-26B(2) above shall retain and make
available, upon request by any public entity with administrative,
health, environmental or safety authority over the site the
inspection, maintenance and repair plan and the documentation
required by Sections 163-26B(2) and 163-26B(3) above.
C. Responsibility for inspection, repair and maintenance shall not be
assigned or transferred to the owner or tenant of an individual property
in a residential development or project, unless such owner or tenant
owns or leases the entire residential development or project.
D. Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including, but not limited to: repairs or replacement to any associated
appurtenance of the measure; removal of sediment, debris, or trash;
restoration of eroded areas; snow and ice removal; fence repair or
replacement; restoration of vegetation; repair or replacement of
linings; and restoration of infiltration function.
E. Stormwater management measure easements shall be provided by the
property owner as necessary for facility inspections and maintenance
and preservation of stormwater runoff conveyance, infiltration, and
detention areas and facilities. The purpose of the easement shall be
specified in the maintenance agreement.
§ 163-26 DENNIS CODE § 163-26
1:336
F. In the event that the stormwater management measure becomes a
public health nuisance or danger to public safety or public health, or if
it is in need of maintenance or repair, Dennis Township shall so notify
the responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance and repair
of the facility in a manner that is approved by the Municipal Engineer or
the Municipal Engineer's designee. Dennis Township, at its discretion,
may extend the time allowed for effecting maintenance and repair for
good cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform such
maintenance and repair within the allowable time, Dennis Township
may immediately proceed to do so with its own forces and equipment
and/or through contractors. The costs and expenses of such
maintenance and repair by Dennis Township shall be entered on the tax
roll as a special charge against the property and collected with any
other taxes levied thereon for the year in which the maintenance and
repair were performed.
G. Requirements for inspection, maintenance and repair of stormwater
BMPs that rely on infiltration. If a stormwater infiltration BMP is
incorporated into the design of a major development, the applicant shall
include the following requirements in its inspection, maintenance and
repair plan:
(1) Once per month (if needed): Mow side slopes, remove litter and
debris, stabilize eroded banks, repair erosion at inflow structure(s);
(2) After every storm exceeding one inch of rainfall: Ensure that
infiltration BMPs drain completely within 72 hours after the storm
event. If stored water fails to infiltrate 72 hours after the end of the
storm, corrective measures shall be taken. Raking or tilling by light
equipment can assist in maintaining infiltration capacity and break
up clogged surfaces;
(3) Four times per year (quarterly): Inspect stormwater infiltration
BMPs for clogging and excessive debris and sediment
accumulation within the BMP, remove sediment (if needed) when
completely dry;
(4) Two times per year: Inspect for signs of damage to structures,
repair eroded areas, check for signs of petroleum contamination
and remediate;
(5) Once per year: Inspect BMPs for unwanted tree growth and remove
if necessary, disc or otherwise aerate bottom of infiltration basin to
a minimum depth of six inches; and
(6) After every storm exceeding one inch of rainfall, inspect and, if
necessary, remove and replace K5 sand layer and accumulated
sediment, to restore original infiltration rate.
§ 163-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-26
1:337
§ 163-27. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this Article shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this Article its most reasonable application. When used in this
Article, the following terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed to
them.
DENNIS TOWNSHIP — The Planning Board, Zoning Board of Adjustment or
other board, agency or official of Dennis Township with authority to approve
(7) Additional guidance for the inspection, maintenance and repair of
stormwater infiltration BMPs can be found in the New Jersey BMP
Manual.
H. Financing of inspection, maintenance and repair of stormwater BMPs.
An adequate means of ensuring permanent financing of the inspection,
maintenance and repair of stormwater BMPs shall be implemented and
detailed in the inspection, maintenance and repair plan. Permanent
financing of the inspection, maintenance and repair of stormwater
BMPs shall be accomplished by:
(1) The assumption of the inspection and maintenance program by a
municipality, county, public utility or homeowners' association.
(2) The required payment of fees to a municipal stormwater fund in an
amount equivalent to the cost of both ongoing maintenance
activities and necessary structural replacements. The fee schedule
is as follows:
Inspection, Maintenance and Repair of Stormwater BMPs
FEE SCHEDULE
1. Removal of debris, silts and
sediments from outlet
structures
$ 500/Yr.
2. Removal of silts and
sediments from basins
$ 500/Yr.
3. Mowing and raking $1,000/Acre
4. Landscape maintenance $1,500/Yr.
5. Snow and ice removal $ 400/Yr.
6. Replacement of 5K sand if
necessary
$ 800/Yr.
7. Scarify and desilt basin $2,800/5 Years
8. Repair of structural
components
$ 500/yr.
9. Annual inspection by
Municipal Engineer
$ 540/Yr.
§ 163-26 DENNIS CODE § 163-27
1:338
or disapprove subdivisions, site plans, construction permits, building
permits or other applications for development approval. For the purposes
of reviewing development applications and ensuring compliance with the
requirements of this Article, Dennis Township may designate the Municipal
Engineer or other qualified designee to act on behalf of Dennis Township.
AQUACULTURE — The propagation, rearing and subsequent harvesting
of aquatic organisms in controlled or selected environments, and their
subsequent processing, packaging and marketing, including but not limited
to, activities to intervene in the rearing process to increase production
such as stocking, feeding, transplanting and providing for protection from
predators.
CERTIFICATION — Either a written statement signed and sealed by a
licensed New Jersey professional engineer attesting that a BMP design or
stormwater management system conforms to or meets a particular set of
standards or to action taken by the Commission pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-3,
Part II or Part IV. Depending upon the context in which the term is use, the
terms "certify" and "certified" shall be construed accordingly.
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density caused by subjecting
soil to greater-than-normal loading. Compaction can also decrease soil
infiltration and permeability rates.
CONSTRUCTION — The construction, erection, reconstruction, alteration,
conversion, demolition, removal or equipping of buildings, structures or
components of a stormwater management system including but not limited
to collection inlets, stormwater piping, swales and all other conveyance
systems, and stormwater BMPs.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the County Board
of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater management plans
and implementing ordinance(s). The county review agency may either be:
A county planning agency; or
A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A. 58:16A-55.5, if
the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to approve, conditionally
approve, or disapprove municipal stormwater management plans and
implementing ordinances.
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly licensed
in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, development of project requirements, creation
and development of project design and preparation of drawings and
specifications.
DESIGN PERMEABILITY — The tested permeability rate with a factor of
safety of two applied to it (e.g., if the tested permeability rate of the soils is
four inches per hour, the design rate would be two inches per hour).
DEVELOPMENT — The change of or enlargement of any use or disturbance
of any land, the performance of any building or mining operation, the
division of land into two or more parcels, and the creation or termination of
rights of access or riparian rights including, but not limited to:
§ 163-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-27
1:339
DEVELOPMENT, MAJOR — Any division of land into five or more lots;
any construction or expansion of any housing development of five or more
dwelling units; any construction or expansion of any commercial or
industrial use or structure on a site of more than three acres; or any
"development," grading, clearing or disturbance of an area in excess of
5,000 square feet. Disturbance for the purpose of this Article is the
placement of impervious surface or exposure and/or movement of soil or
bedrock or clearing, cutting or removing of vegetation.
DEVELOPMENT, MINOR — All development other than major development.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater,
sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a BMP, a stormwater
management system, a particular receiving waterbody or a particular point
along a receiving waterbody.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREA — An area or feature which is of
significant environmental value, including but not limited to: stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or
threatened animal species; threatened or endangered plants of the
Pinelands pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:5-6.27(a); large areas of contiguous open
(1) A change in type of use of a structure or land;
A reconstruction, alteration of the size, or material change in the
external appearance of a structure or land;
(2)
A material increase in the intensity of use of land, such as an increase
in the number of businesses, manufacturing establishments, offices or
dwelling units in a structure or on land;
(3)
Commencement of resource extraction or drilling or excavation on a
parcel of land;
(4)
(5) Demolition of a structure or removal of trees;
(6) Commencement of forestry activities;
(7) Deposit of refuse, solid or liquid waste or fill on a parcel of land;
In connection with the use of land, the making of any material change
in noise levels, thermal conditions, or emissions of waste material; and
(8)
Alteration, either physically or chemically, of a shore, bank, or flood
plain, seacoast, river, stream, lake, pond, wetlands or artificial body of
water.
In the case of development on agricultural land, i.e. lands used for an
agricultural use or purpose as defined at N.J.A.C. 7:50-2.11,
development means: any activity that requires a state permit; any
activity reviewed by the County Agricultural Boards (CAB) and the
State Agricultural Development Committee (SADC), and municipal
review of any activity not exempted by the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A.
4:1C-1 et seq.
(9)
§ 163-27 DENNIS CODE § 163-27
1:340
space or upland forest; steep slopes; and well head protection and
groundwater recharge areas. T & E habitat constitutes habitat that is
critical for the survival of a local population of threatened and endangered
species or habitat that is identified using the Department's Landscape
Project as approved by the Department's Endangered and Nongame
Species Program, whichever is more inclusive. Threatened and endangered
wildlife shall be protected in conformance with N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.33.
EXCEPTION — The approval by the approving authority of a variance or
other material departure from strict compliance with any section, part,
phrase or provision of this Article. An exception may be granted only under
certain specific, narrowly-defined conditions described herein and does not
constitute a waiver of strict compliance with any section, part, phrase
or provision of the Pinelands Comprehensive Management Plan (N.J.A.C.
7:50-1.1 et seq.).
EXTENDED DETENTION BASIN — A facility constructed through filling
and/or excavation that provides temporary storage of stormwater runoff.
It has an outlet structure that detains and attenuates runoff inflows and
promotes the settlement of pollutants. An extended detention basin is
normally designed as a multi-stage facility that provides runoff storage
and attenuation for both stormwater quality and quantity management.
The term "stormwater detention basin" shall have the same meaning as
"extended detention basin."
FINISHED GRADE — The elevation of the surface of the ground after
completion of final grading, either via cutting, filling or a combination
thereof.
GRADING — Modification of a land slope by cutting and filling with the
native soil or redistribution of the native soil which is present at the site.
GROUNDWATER — Water below the land surface in a zone of saturation.
GROUNDWATER MOUNDING ANALYSIS — A test performed to
demonstrate that the groundwater below a stormwater infiltration basin will
not "mound up," encroach on the unsaturated zone, break the surface of the
ground at the infiltration area or downslope, and create an overland flow
situation.
HEAVY EQUIPMENT — Equipment, machinery, or vehicles that exert
ground pressure in excess of eight pounds per square inch.
HIGH POLLUTANT LOADING AREA — An area in an industrial or
commercial development site: where solvents and/or petroleum products
are loaded/unloaded, stored, or applied; where pesticides are loaded/
unloaded or stored; where hazardous materials are expected to be present
in greater than "reportable quantities" as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR 302.4; where recharge
would be inconsistent with NJDEP-approved remedial action work plan or
landfill closure plan; and/or where a high risk exists for spills of toxic
materials, such as gas stations and vehicle maintenance facilities. The term
"HPLA" shall have the same meaning as "High Pollutant Loading Area."
§ 163-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-27
1:341
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer of
material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — The process by which precipitation enters the soil
through its surface.
IN LIEU CONTRIBUTION — A monetary fee collected by Dennis Township
in lieu of requiring strict on-site compliance with the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity and/or stormwater runoff quality standards
established in this Article.
INSTALL — To assemble, construct, put in place or connect components of
a stormwater management system.
MITIGATION — Acts necessary to prevent, limit, remedy or compensate
for conditions that may result from those cases where an applicant has
demonstrated the inability or impracticality of strict compliance with the
stormwater management requirements set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:8, in an
adopted regional stormwater management plan, or in a local ordinance
which is as protective as N.J.A.C. 7:8, and an exception from strict
compliance is granted by Dennis Township and the Pinelands Commission.
NEW JERSEY STORMWATER BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES MANUAL
— Guidance developed by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, in coordination with the New Jersey Department of Agriculture,
the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs, the New Jersey
Department of Transportation, municipal engineers, county engineers,
consulting firms, contractors, and environmental organizations to address
the standards in the New Jersey Stormwater Management Rules, N.J.A.C.
7:8. The BMP manual provides examples of ways to meet the standards
contained in the rule. An applicant may demonstrate that other proposed
management practices will also achieve the standards established in the
rules. The manual, and notices regarding future versions of the manual,
are available from the Division of Watershed Management, NJDEP, PO
Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625; and on the NJDEP's website,
www.njstormwater.org. The term "New Jersey BMP Manual" shall have the
same meaning as "New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices
Manual."
NJDEP — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
NJPDES — The New Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System as set
forth in N.J.S.A. 58:1 0A-1 et seq. and in N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the NJDEP pursuant to the authority
of the Water Pollution Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10A-1 et seq., and N.J.A.C.
7:14A for a discharge of pollutants.
NONPOINT SOURCE —
Any human-made or human-induced activity, factor, or condition, other
than a point source, from which pollutants are or may be discharged;
(1)
Any human-made or human-induced activity, factor, or condition, other
than a point source, that may temporarily or permanently change any
(2)
§ 163-27 DENNIS CODE § 163-27
1:342
NONSTRUCTURAL BMP — A stormwater management measure, strategy
or combination of strategies that reduces adverse stormwater runoff
impacts through sound site planning and design. Nonstructural BMPs
include such practices as minimizing site disturbance, preserving important
site features, reducing and disconnecting impervious cover, flattening
slopes, utilizing native vegetation, minimizing turf grass lawns, maintaining
natural drainage features and characteristics and controlling stormwater
runoff and pollutants closer to the source. The term "low impact
development technique" shall have the same meaning as "nonstructural
BMP."
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
PERMEABILITY — The rate at which water moves through a saturated unit
area of soil or rock material at hydraulic gradient of one, determined as
prescribed in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-6.2 (Tube Permeameter Test), N.J.A.C. 6.5 (Pit
Bailing Test) or N.J.A.C. 6.6 (Piezometer Test). Alternative permeability test
procedures may be accepted by the approving authority provided the test
procedure attains saturation of surrounding soils, accounts for hydraulic
head effects on infiltration rates, provides a permeability rate with units
expressed in inches per hour and is accompanied by a published source
reference. Examples of suitable sources include hydrogeology,
geotechnical, or engineering text and design manuals, proceedings of
American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) symposia, or peerreview
journals. Neither a Soil Permeability Class Rating Test, as described
in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-6.3, nor a Percolation Test, as described in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-6.4,
are acceptable tests for establishing permeability values for the purpose of
complying with this Article.
PERMEABLE — Having a permeability of one inch per hour or faster. The
terms "permeable soil," "permeable rock" and "permeable fill" shall be
construed accordingly.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, municipality or political subdivision of this state subject to
municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
PINELANDS COMMISSION OR COMMISSION — The Commission created
pursuant Section 5 of the Pinelands Protection Act, N.J.S.A. 13:18A-5.
PINELANDS CMP — The New Jersey Pinelands Comprehensive
Management Plan (N.J.A.C. 7:50 1.1 et seq).
chemical, physical, biological, or radiological characteristic of waters
of the state from what was or is the natural, pristine condition of such
waters, or that may increase the degree of such change; or
Any activity, factor, or condition, other than a point source, that
contributes or may contribute to water pollution.
The term "NPS" shall have the same meaning as "nonpoint source."
(3)
§ 163-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-27
1:343
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance,
including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit,
well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding
operation, landfill leachate collection system, vessel, or other floating craft,
from which pollutants are or may be discharged. This term does not include
return flows from irrigated agriculture.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive
substances (except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954,
as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.)), thermal waste, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, suspended solids, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal,
agricultural, and construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged
directly or indirectly to the land, groundwaters or surface waters of the
state, or to a domestic treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both hazardous
and nonhazardous pollutants.
PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER — A person licensed to practice professional
engineering in the State of New Jersey pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:8-27 et seq.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into
the ground and is not evapotranspired.
REPLICATE — One of two or more soil samples or tests taken at the same
location (within five feet of each other) and depth, within the same soil
horizon or substratum. In the case of fill material, replicate tests are tests
performed on sub-samples of the same bulk sample packed to the same bulk
density.
SAND — A particle size category consisting of mineral particles which are
between 0.05 and two (2.0) millimeters in equivalent spherical diameter.
Also, a soil textural class having 85% or more of sand and a content of silt
and clay such that the percentage of silt plus one and one-half (1.5) times
the percentage of clay does not exceed 15, as shown in Section 163-131C(1)
(USDA Soil Textural Triangle).
SEASONALLY HIGH WATER TABLE — The upper limit of the shallowest
zone of saturation which occurs in the soil, identified as prescribed in
N.J.A.C. 7:9A-5.8.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is
being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or
gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or has
occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin which
is not a rock substratum, including sediments below the biologically active
and/or weathered zones.
SOURCE MATERIAL — Any material(s) or machinery, located at an
industrial facility, that is directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities, which could be a source of
§ 163-27 DENNIS CODE § 163-27
1:344
pollutants in any industrial stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source
materials include, but are not limited to, raw materials; intermediate
products; final products; waste materials; by-products; industrial machinery
and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and detergents that are related to
process, manufacturing, or other industrial activities that are exposed to
stormwater.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, or is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities,
or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER INFILTRATION BMP — A basin or other facility constructed
within permeable soils that provides temporary storage of stormwater
runoff. An infiltration BMP does not normally have a structural outlet to
discharge runoff from the stormwater quality design storm. Instead, outflow
from an infiltration BMP is through the surrounding soil. The terms
"infiltration measure" and "infiltration practice" shall have the same
meaning as "stormwater infiltration basin."
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater recharge
of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal non-stormwater discharges -
into stormwater conveyances. This includes, but is not limited to, structural
and nonstructural stormwater Best Management Practices described in
the New Jersey BMP Manual and designed to meet the standards for
stormwater control contained within this Article. The terms "stormwater
Best Management Practice" and "stormwater BMP" shall have the same
meaning as "stormwater management measure."
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or in
storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
SUITABLE SOIL — Unsaturated soil, above the seasonally high water table,
which contains less than 50% by volume of coarse fragments and which has
a tested permeability rate of between one and 20 inches per hour.
SURFACE WATER — Any waters of the state which are not groundwater.
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — A flood hazard area, which may be
influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is primarily
caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
TIME OF CONCENTRATION — The time it takes for runoff to travel from
the hydraulically most distant point of the drainage area to the point of
interest within a watershed.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The insoluble solid matter suspended in
water and stormwater that is separable by laboratory filtration in
accordance with the procedure contained in the "Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater" prepared and published jointly by
the American Public Health Association, American Water Works Association
§ 163-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-27
1:345
and the Water Pollution Control Federation. The term "TSS" shall have the
same meaning as "Total Suspended Solids."
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface and groundwater, whether natural or artificial, within
the boundaries of New Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction.
WATER TABLE — The upper surface of a zone of saturation.
WELL — A bored, drilled or driven shaft, or a dug hole, which extends below
the seasonally high water table and which has a depth which is greater than
its largest surface dimension.
WETLANDS — Those lands which are inundated or saturated by water at
a magnitude, duration and frequency sufficient to support the growth of
hydrophytes. Wetlands include lands with poorly drained or very poorly
drained soils as designated by the National Cooperative Soils Survey of the
Soil Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture.
Wetlands include coastal wetlands and inland wetlands, including
submerged lands. The "New Jersey Pinelands Commission Manual for
Identifying and Delineating Pinelands Area Wetlands: A Pinelands
Supplement to the Federal Manual for Identifying and Delineating
Jurisdictional Wetlands," dated January, 1991, as amended, may be utilized
in delineating the extent of wetlands based on the definitions of wetlands
and wetlands soils contained in this section, N.J.A.C. 7:50 2.11, 6.4 and 6.5.
The term "wetland" shall have the same meaning as "wetlands."
WET POND — A stormwater facility constructed through filling and/or
excavation that provides both permanent and temporary storage of
stormwater runoff. It has an outlet structure that creates a permanent
pool and detains and attenuates runoff inflows and promotes the settling
of pollutants. A stormwater retention basin can also be designed as a
multi-stage facility that also provides extended detention for enhanced
stormwater quality design storm treatment and runoff storage and
attenuation for stormwater quantity management. The term "stormwater
retention basin" shall have the same meaning as "wet pond."
§ 163-28. Penalties.
Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains, or
uses any building, structure or land in violation of this Article shall be
subject to the following penalties:
§ 163-29. Effective date.
This Article shall take effect immediately upon the following:
A. Not to exceed $500 for first offense. Not less than $500, nor more than
$1,000 for the second or subsequent offenses.
A. Certification by the Pinelands Commission in accordance with N.J.A.C.
7:50 Subchapter 3; and
§ 163-27 DENNIS CODE § 163-29
1:346
§ 163-30. Severability.
If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or
clause of this Article shall be judged invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the
remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of
this Article.
§ 163-31. Appendices.
B. Approval by the county review agency in accordance with N.J.A.C.
7:8-4.4.
A. Methods for calculating groundwater recharge.
(1) The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32: A Method for
Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey. Available
at http://www.njgeology.org/geodata/dgs99-2.htm.
(2) The New Jersey Groundwater Recharge Spreadsheet (NJGRS).
Available in the New Jersey BMP Manual, Chapter 6, at
http://www.njstormwater.org/bmp- manual2.htm.
B. NJDEP Nonstructural Strategies Point System. The New Jersey
Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.2(a), and Section
163-24A of this Article, require nonstructural stormwater management
strategies to be incorporated into the site design of a major
development. A total of nine strategies are to be used to the maximum
extent practical to meet the groundwater recharge, stormwater quality
and stormwater quantity requirements of the Rules prior to utilizing
structural stormwater management measures. The New Jersey
Nonstructural Stormwater Management Strategies Point System
(NSPS) provides a tool to assist planners, designers and regulators in
determining that the strategies have been used to the "maximum extent
practical" at a major development as required by the Rules. Refer
online to http://www.njstormwater.org for information on the NSPS.
C. Soils.
(1) USDA Soil Textural Triangle.68
(2) Definitions. For the purposes of this appendix, the following terms
shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them.
68.Source: US Department of Agriculture.
§ 163-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-31
1:347
A-HORIZON — The uppermost mineral horizon in a normal soil
profile. The upper part of the A-horizon is characterized by
maximum accumulation of finely divided, dark colored organic
residues, known as humus, which are intimately mixed with the
mineral particles of the soil.
ARTESIAN ZONE OF SATURATION — A zone of saturation which
exists immediately below a hydraulically restrictive horizon, and
which has an upper surface that is at a pressure greater than
atmospheric, either seasonally or throughout the year.
CHROMA — The relative purity or strength of a color, a quantity
which decreases with increasing grayness. Chroma is one of the
three variables of soil color as defined in the Munsell system of
classification.
CLAY — A particle size category consisting of mineral particles
which are smaller than 0.002 millimeters in equivalent spherical
diameter. Also, a soil textural class having more than 40% clay,
less than 45% sand, and less than 40% silt, as shown in Section
161-31C(1) (USDA Soil Textural Triangle).
CLAY LOAM — A soil textural class having twenty-seven to forty
percent (27%—40%) clay and twenty to forty-five percent
(20%—45%) sand, as shown in Section 163-31C(1) (USDA Soil
Textural Triangle).
COARSE FRAGMENT — A rock fragment contained within the
soil which is greater than two millimeters in equivalent spherical
diameter or which is retained on a two millimeter sieve.
COUNTY SOIL SURVEY REPORT — A report prepared by the US
Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation
Service which includes maps showing the distribution of soil
mapping units throughout a particular county together with
narrative descriptions of the soil series shown and other
information relating to the uses and properties of the various soil
series.
DIRECT SUPERVISION — Control over and direction of work
carried out by others with full knowledge of and responsibility for
such work.
EQUIVALENT SPHERICAL DIAMETER OF A PARTICLE — The
diameter of a sphere which has a volume equal to the volume of the
particle.
EXCESSIVELY COARSE HORIZON — A horizon of limited thickness
within the soil profile which provides inadequate removal of
pollutants from stormwater due to a high coarse fragment content,
excessively coarse texture and/or excessively rapid permeability.
EXCESSIVELY COARSE SUBSTRATUM — A substratum below the
soil profile which extends beyond the depth of soil profile pits and
borings and which provides inadequate removal of pollutants from
§ 163-31 DENNIS CODE § 163-31
1:348
stormwater due to a high coarse fragment content, excessively
coarse texture and/or excessively rapid permeability.
EXTREMELY FIRM CONSISTENCE — A type of soil material whose
moist aggregated mass crushes only under very strong pressure;
cannot be crushed between the thumb and forefinger and shall be
broken apart bit by bit.
FIRM CONSISTENCE — A type of soil material whose moist
aggregated mass crushes under moderate pressure between the
thumb and forefinger but resistance is distinctly noticeable.
HARD CONSISTENCE — A type of soil material whose dry
aggregated mass is moderately resistant to pressure; can be
broken in the hands without difficulty but is barely breakable
between the thumb and forefinger.
HUE — The dominant spectral color, one of the three variables of
soil color defined within the Munsell system of classification.
HYDRAULICALLY RESTRICTIVE HORIZON — A horizon within
the soil profile which slows or prevents the downward or lateral
movement of water and which is underlain by permeable soil
horizons or substrata. Any soil horizon which has a saturated
permeability less than one (1.0) inch per hour is hydraulically
restrictive.
HYDRAULICALLY RESTRICTIVE SUBSTRATUM — A substratum
below the soil profile which slows or prevents the downward or
lateral movement of water and which extends beyond the depth of
profile pits or borings or to a massive substratum. A substratum
which has a saturated permeability less than one (1.0) inch per
hour is hydraulically restrictive.
LOAMY SAND — A soil textural class, as shown in Section
163-31C(1) (USDA Soil Textural Triangle), that has a maximum of
eighty-five to ninety percent (85%-90%) sand with a percentage
of silt plus one and a half (1.5) times the percentage of clay not
in excess of 15; or a minimum of seventy to eight-five percent
(70%-85%) sand with a percentage of silt plus one and a half (1.5)
times the percentage of clay not in excess of 30.
LOWER PLASTIC LIMIT — The moisture content corresponding
to the transition between the plastic and semi-solid states of soil
consistency. This corresponds to the lowest soil moisture content at
which the soil can be molded in the fingers to form a rod or wire,
one-eighth (1/8) inches in thickness, without crumbling.
MOTTLING — A color pattern observed in soil consisting of
blotches or spots of contrasting color. The term "mottle" refers to
an individual blotch or spot. The terms "color variegation," "iron
depletion" and "iron concentration" are equivalent to the term
"mottling." Mottling due to redoximorphic reactions is an indication
of seasonal or periodic and recurrent saturation.
§ 163-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-31
1:349
MUNSELL SYSTEM — A system of classifying soil color consisting
of an alpha-numeric designation for hue, value and chroma, such
as "7.5 YR 6/2," together with a descriptive color name, such as
"strong brown."
O-HORIZON — A surface horizon, occurring above the A-horizon
in some soils, which is composed primarily of undecomposed or
partially decomposed plant remains which have not been
incorporated into the mineral soil.
PERCHED ZONE OF SATURATION — A zone of saturation which
occurs immediately above a hydraulically restrictive horizon and
which is underlain by permeable horizons or substrata which are
not permanently or seasonally saturated.
PIEZOMETER — A device consisting of a length of metal or plastic
pipe, open at the bottom or perforated within a specified interval,
and used for the determination of depth to water, permeability or
hydraulic head within a specific soil horizon or substratum.
PLATY STRUCTURE — Characterized by a soil aggregate which
has one axis distinctly shorter than the other two and are oriented
with the short axis vertical.
REGIONAL ZONE OF SATURATION — A zone of saturation which
extends vertically without interruption below the depth of soil
borings and profile pits.
SANDY CLAY — A soil textural class having 35% or more of clay
and 45% or more of sand, as shown in Section 163-31C(1) (USDA
Soil Textural Triangle).
SANDY LOAM — A soil textural class, as shown in Section
163-31C(1) (USDA Soil Textural Triangle), that has a maximum
of 20% clay, and the percentage of silt plus twice the percentage
of clay exceeds 30, and contains 52% or more sand; or less than
7% clay, less than 50% silt, and between forty-three and fifty-two
percent (43%—52%) sand.
SILT — A particle size category consisting of mineral particles
which are between 0.002 and 0.05 millimeters in equivalent
spherical diameter. It also means a soil textural class having 80% or
more of silt and 12% or less of clay, as shown in Section 163-31C(1)
(USDA Soil Textural Triangle).
SILT LOAM — A soil textural class having 50 percent or more of
silt and twelve to twenty-seven percent (12%—27%) of clay; or fifty
to eighty percent (50%—80%) of silt and less than 12% of clay, as
shown in Section 163-31C(1) (USDA Soil Textural Triangle).
SILTY CLAY — A soil textural class having 40% or more of clay and
40% or more of silt, as shown in Section 163-31C(1) (USDA Soil
Textural Triangle).
§ 163-31 DENNIS CODE § 163-31
1:350
SILTY CLAY LOAM — A soil textural class having twenty-seven to
forty (27%—40%) percent of clay and less than 20% of sand, as
shown in Section 163-31C(1) (USDA Soil Textural Triangle).
SOIL AGGREGATE — A naturally occurring unit of soil structure
consisting of particles of sand, silt, clay, organic matter, and coarse
fragments held together by the natural cohesion of the soil.
SOIL COLOR — The soil color name and Munsell color designation
determined by comparison of the moist soil with color chips
contained in a Munsell soil color book.
SOIL CONSISTENCE — The resistance of a soil aggregate or clod
to being crushed between the fingers or broken by the hands.
Terms for describing soil consistence described are in N.J.A.C.
7:9A-5.3(h).
SOIL HORIZON — A layer within a soil profile differing from layers
of soil above and below it in one or more of the soil morphological
characteristics including color, texture, coarse fragment content,
structure, consistence and mottling.
SOIL LOG — A description of the soil profile which includes the
depth, thickness, color, texture, coarse fragment content, mottling,
structure and consistence of each soil horizon or substratum.
SOIL MAPPING UNIT — An area outlined on a map in a County
Soil Survey Report and marked with a letter symbol designating a
soil phase, a complex of two or more soil phases, or some other
descriptive term where no soil type has been identified.
SOIL PHASE — A specific type of soil which is mapped by the
Natural Resources Conservation Service and which belongs to a
soil series described within the County Soil Survey Report.
SOIL PROFILE — A vertical cross-section of undisturbed soil
showing the characteristic horizontal layers or horizons of the soil
which have formed as a result of the combined effects of parent
material, topography, climate, biological activity and time.
SOIL SERIES — A grouping of soil types possessing a specific
range of soil profile characteristics which are described within the
County Soil Survey Report. Each soil series may consist of several
"soil phases" which may differ in slope, texture of the surface
horizon or stoniness.
SOIL STRUCTURAL CLASS — One of the shape classes of soil
structure described in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-5.3(g).
SOIL STRUCTURE — The naturally occurring arrangement, within
a soil horizon, of sand, silt and clay particles, coarse fragments and
organic matter, which are held together in clusters or aggregates
of similar shape and size.
SOIL TEST PIT — An excavation made for the purpose of exposing
a soil profile which is to be described.
§ 163-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-31
1:351
SOIL TEXTURAL CLASS — One of the classes of soil texture
defined within the USDA system of classification. (Soil Survey
Manual, Agricultural Handbook No. 18, USDA Soil Conservation
Service 1962.)
SOIL TEXTURE — The relative proportions of sand, silt and clay
in that portion of the soil which pass through a sieve with two
millimeter openings.
STATIC WATER LEVEL — The depth below the ground surface or
the elevation with respect to some reference level, of the water
level observed within a soil profile pit or boring, or within a
piezometer, after this level has stabilized or become relatively
constant with the passage of time.
SUBSTRATUM — A layer of soil or rock material present below the
soil profile and extending beyond the depth of soil borings or profile
pits.
UNSUITABLE SOIL — All soil other than suitable soil.
USDA SYSTEM OF CLASSIFICATION — The system of classifying
soil texture used by the United States Department of Agriculture
which defines 12 soil textural classes based upon the weight
percentages of sand, silt and clay in that portion of the soil which
pass through a sieve with two millimeter openings. The soil textural
classes are shown graphically on the USDA Soil Textural Triangle,
as shown in Section 163-31C(1).
VALUE — The relative lightness or intensity of a color, one of the
three variables of soil color defined within the Munsell system of
classification.
VERY FIRM CONSISTENCE — Characterized by a moist soil which
crushes under strong pressure; barely crushable between thumb
and forefinger.
VERY HARD CONSISTENCE — Characterized by a dry soil which
is resistant to pressure, can be broken in the hands only with
difficulty; not breakable between the thumb and forefinger.
ZONE OF SATURATION — A layer within or below the soil profile
which is saturated with groundwater either seasonally or
throughout the year. This includes both regional and perched
zones.
(3) Methods for assessing soil suitability for infiltration stormwater
management BMPs. The results of a subsurface investigation shall
serve as the basis for the site selection and design of stormwater
infiltration BMPs. The subsurface investigation shall include, but
not be limited to, a series of soil test pits and soil permeability tests
conducted in accordance with the following:
(a) All soil test pits and soil permeability results shall be
performed under the direct supervision of a professional
§ 163-31 DENNIS CODE § 163-31
1:352
engineer. All soil logs and permeability test data shall be
accompanied by a certification by a professional engineer. The
results and location (horizontal and vertical) of all soil test pits
and soil permeability tests, both passing and failing, shall be
reported to Dennis Township.
(b) During all subsurface investigations and soil test procedures,
adequate safety measures shall be taken to prohibit
unauthorized access to the excavations at all times. It is the
responsibility of persons performing or witnessing subsurface
investigations and soil permeability tests to comply with all
applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations
governing occupational safety.
(c) A minimum of two soil test pits shall be excavated within the
footprint of any proposed infiltration BMP to determine the
suitability and distribution of soil types present at the site.
Placement of the test pits shall be within 20 feet of the basin
perimeter, located along the longest axis bisecting the BMP.
For BMPs larger than 10,000 square feet in area, a minimum of
one additional soil test pit shall be conducted within each
additional area of 10,000 square feet. The additional test pit(s)
shall be placed approximately equidistant to other test pits, so
as to provide adequate characterization of the subsurface
material. In all cases, where soil and or groundwater
properties vary significantly, additional test pits shall be
excavated in order to accurately characterize the subsurface
conditions below the proposed infiltration BMP. Soil test pits
shall extend to a minimum depth of eight feet below the lowest
elevation of the basin bottom or to a depth that is at least two
times the maximum potential water depth in the proposed
infiltration BMP, whichever is greater.
(d) A soil test pit log shall be prepared for each soil test pit. The
test pit log shall, at a minimum, provide the elevation of the
existing ground surface, the depth and thickness (in inches) of
each soil horizon or substratum, the dominant matrix or
background and mottle colors using the Munsell system of
classification for hue, value and chroma, the appropriate
textural class as shown on the USDA textural triangle, the
volume percentage of coarse fragments (larger than two
millimeters in diameter), the abundance, size, and contrast of
mottles, the soil structure, soil consistence, and soil moisture
condition, using standard USDA classification terminology for
each of these soil properties. Soil test pit logs shall identify the
presence of any soil horizon, substratum or other feature that
exhibits an in-place permeability rate less than one inch per
hour.
(e) Each soil test pit log shall report the depth to seasonally high
water level, either perched or regional, and the static water
§ 163-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-31
1:353
level based upon the presence of soil mottles or other
redoxomorphic features, and observed seepage or saturation.
Where redoxomorphic features including soil mottles resulting
from soil saturation are present, they shall be interpreted to
represent the depth to the seasonal high water table unless
soil saturation or seepage is observed at a higher level. When
the determination of the seasonally high water table shall be
made in ground previously disturbed by excavation, direct
observation of the static water table during the months of
January through April shall be the only method permitted.
(f) Any soil horizon or substratum which exists immediately below
a perched zone of saturation shall be deemed by rule to exhibit
unacceptable permeability (less than one inch per hour). The
perched zone of saturation may be observed directly, inferred
based upon soil morphology, or confirmed by performance of a
hydraulic head test as defined at N.J.A.C. 7:9A-5.9.
(g) Stormwater infiltration BMPs shall not be installed in soils that
exhibit artesian groundwater conditions. A permeability test
shall be conducted in all soils that immediately underlie a
perched zone of saturation. Any zone of saturation which is
present below a soil horizon which exhibits an in-place
permeability of less than 0.2 inches per hour shall be
considered an artesian zone of saturation unless a minimum
one foot thick zone of unsaturated soil, free of mottling or other
redoxomorphic features and possessing a chroma of four or
higher, exists immediately below the unsuitable soil.
(h) A minimum of one permeability test shall be performed at each
soil test pit location. The soil permeability rate shall be
determined using test methodology as prescribed in N.J.A.C.
7:9A-6.2 (Tube Permeameter Test), 6.5 (Pit Bailing Test) or 6.6
(Piezometer Test). When the tube permeameter test is used, a
minimum of two replicate samples shall be taken and tested.
Alternative permeability test procedures may be accepted by
the approving authority provided the test procedure attains
saturation of surrounding soils, accounts for hydraulic head
effects on infiltration rates, provides a permeability rate with
units expressed in inches per hour and is accompanied by a
published source reference. Examples of suitable sources
include hydrogeology, geotechnical or engineering text and
design manuals, proceedings of American Society for Testing
and Materials (ASTM) symposia, or peer-review journals.
Neither a Soil Permeability Class Rating Test, as described in
N.J.A.C. 7:9A-6.3, nor a Percolation Test, as described in
N.J.A.C. 7:9A-6.4, are acceptable tests for establishing
permeability values for the purpose of complying with this
Article.
§ 163-31 DENNIS CODE § 163-31
1:354
(i) Soil permeability tests shall be conducted on the most
hydraulically restrictive horizon or substratum to be left in
place below the basin as follows. Where no soil replacement is
proposed, the permeability tests shall be conducted on the
most hydraulically restrictive horizon or substratum within
four feet of the lowest elevation of the basin bottom or to a
depth equal to two times the maximum potential water depth
within the basin, whichever is greater. Where soil replacement
is proposed, the permeability tests shall be conducted within
the soil immediately below the depth of proposed soil
replacement or within the most hydraulically restrictive
horizon or substratum to a depth equal to two times the
maximum potential water depth within the basin, whichever is
greater. Permeability tests may be performed on the most
hydraulically restrictive soil horizons or substrata at depths
greater than those identified above based upon the discretion
of the design or testing engineer. The tested infiltration rate
should then be divided by two to establish the soil's design
permeability rate. Such division will provide a 100% safety
factor to the tested rate.
(j) The minimum acceptable "tested permeability rate" of any soil
horizon or substratum shall be one inch per hour. Soil
materials that exhibit tested permeability rates slower than
one inch per hour shall be considered unsuitable for
stormwater infiltration. The maximum reportable "tested
permeability rate" of any soil horizon or substratum shall be no
greater than 20 inches per hour regardless of the rate attained
in the test procedure.
(k) After all construction activities have been completed on the
development site and the finished grade has been established
in the infiltration BMP, a minimum of one permeability test
shall be conducted within the most hydraulically restrictive soil
horizon or substratum below the as-built BMP to ensure the
performance of the infiltration BMP is as designed. Hand tools
and manual permeability test procedures shall be used for the
purpose of confirming BMP performance. In addition, the
infiltration BMP shall be flooded with water sufficient to
demonstrate the performance of the BMP. Test results shall be
certified to the Municipal Engineer.
(l) A groundwater mounding analysis shall be provided for each
stormwater infiltration BMP. The groundwater mounding
analysis shall calculate the maximum height of the
groundwater mound based upon the volume of the maximum
design storm. The professional engineer conducting the
analysis shall provide the Municipal Engineer with the
methodology and supporting documentation for the mounding
analysis used and shall certify to Dennis Township, based upon
§ 163-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-31
1:355
the analysis, that the groundwater mound will not cause
stormwater or groundwater to break out to the land surface
or cause adverse impact to adjacent surface water bodies,
wetlands or subsurface structures including but not limited
to basements and septic systems. If there is more than one
infiltration BMP proposed, the model shall indicate if and how
the mounds will interact. The mounding analysis shall be
calculated using the most restrictive soil horizon that will
remain in place within the explored aquifer thickness unless
alternative analyses are authorized by the Municipal Engineer.
The mounding analysis shall be accompanied by a cross section
of the infiltration BMP and surrounding topography and the
mound analysis shall extend out to the point(s) at which the
mound intersects with the preexisting maximum water table
elevation.
(m) The applicant shall demonstrate that stormwater infiltration
BMPs meet the 72 hour drain time requirement established in
Section 163-5B(1) of this Article.
D. Pretreatment measures for infiltration BMPs. By reducing incoming
velocities and capturing coarser sediments, pretreatment can extend
the functional life and increase the pollutant removal capability of
infiltration measures. Therefore, the installation of pretreatment
measures is recommended for all development sites. Pretreatment
measures may include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Vegetative filter strips;
(2) Bioretention systems. Used in conjunction with a bioretention
system, the infiltration basin takes the place of the standard
underdrain;
(3) Sand filters;
(4) Grassed swales; and
(5) Detention basins.
E. Collection and conveyance.
(1) Bicycle-safe inlet grates. Site development plans that incorporate
site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash and
debris from drainage systems shall comply with the following
standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials through
storm drain inlets. For purposes of this paragraph, "solid and
floatable materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other
floating, suspended, or settleable solids.
(a) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
§ 163-31 DENNIS CODE § 163-31
1:356
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a storm
drain or surface water body under that grate:
[1] The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways
Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
[2] A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven square inches, or
is no greater than one-half (0.5) inch across the smallest
dimension. Examples of grates subject to this standard
include grates in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curbopening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm
sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of
spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces
include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields,
open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
(b) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an
area of no more than seven square inches, or be no greater
than two inches across the smallest dimension.
(c) This standard does not apply:
[1] Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
[2] Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in Section 163-3 are conveyed through any
device (e.g., end-of-pipe netting facility, manufactured
treatment device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed,
at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
[a] A rectangular space four and five-eighths (4 5/8)
inches long and one and one-half (1.5) inches wide
(this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
[b] A bar screen having a bar spacing of one-half (0.5)
inch.
[3] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one inch spacing between the bars, to
the elevation of the water quality design storm as specified
in Section 163-3 of this Article; or
§ 163-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-31
1:357
§ 163-32. Additional sources for technical guidance.
[4] Where the NJDEP determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register listed historic property.
(2) Catch basins. Catch basins are storm drain inlets with or without
sumps. Catch basins may provide pretreatment for other
stormwater BMPs by capturing large sediments. The sediment and
pollutant removal efficiency of catch basins depends on the size of
the sump and the performance of routine maintenance to retain the
available sediment storage space in the sump. Where catch basins
with sumps are proposed, the minimum two feet separation
between the bottom of the sump and seasonally high water table
shall be provided.
(3) Open or perforated conveyance piping. Where adequate separation
to the seasonal high water table exists, stormwater from the
development site may be conveyed to a stormwater basin via a
system of perforated pipes. These pipes may be made of PVC or
corrugated metal and are available with perforations of varying
size and spacing. Perforated pipe specifications shall be certified by
a professional engineer. A professional engineer shall certify that
perforated conveyance piping will not act to intercept the seasonal
high water table and convey groundwater to the stormwater basin.
All open or perforated stormwater conveyance systems shall be
installed with a minimum separation of two feet from the seasonal
high water table.
A. NJDEP Technical Guidance Sources.
(1) New Jersey BMP Manual. Available from the Division of Watershed
Management, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, PO Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625; or online at
http://www.njstormwater.org.
(2) NJDEP Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual.
Available from the Division of Watershed Management, New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, PO Box 418, Trenton,
New Jersey, 08625; or online at http://njedl.rutgers.edu/ftp/PDFs/
1188.pdf .
B. Additional guidance sources.
(1) New Jersey Pinelands Commission, PO Box 7, 15 Springfield Road,
New Lisbon, New Jersey, 08064; Phone: 609-894-7300; Website:
http://www.state.nj.us/pinelands.
(2) State Soil Conservation Committee Standards for Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control in New Jersey. Available from all State Soil
§ 163-31 DENNIS CODE § 163-32
1:358
§ 163-33. through § 163-35. (Reserved)
Conservation Districts, including Cape-Atlantic Soil Conservation
District, 6260 Old Harding Highway, Mays Landing, New Jersey,
08330; Phone (609) 325-3144; Fax (609) 625-7360; Website:
http:/www.capeatlantic.org.
(3) State Soil Conservation Districts.
(4) New Jersey Department of Transportation, PO Box 600, Trenton,
NJ, 08625-0600; Phone: 609-530-3536; Website:
http:/www.state.nj.us/transportation.
§ 163-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-33
1:359

ARTICLE III
Illicit Connection to Storm Sewers Prohibited
[Adopted 10-30-06 as Ord. No. 2006-15]
§ 163-36. Purpose.
The purpose of this Article is to prohibit illicit connections to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Township of Dennis, so as
to protect public health, safety and to prescribe penalties for the failure to
comply.
§ 163-37. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this Article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include singular number and words
used in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is
always mandatory and not merely directory. The definitions below are the
same as or based on corresponding definitions in the New Jersey Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A-1.2.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or household
operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or nonphysical connection that
discharges domestic sewage, non-contact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Township of
Dennis, unless that discharge is authorized under the NJPDES permit other
than the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit (NJPDES Permit
Number NJO141852). Nonphysical connections may include, but are not
limited to leaks, flows, or overflows into the municipal separate storm sewer
system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Nondomestic waste, including, but not limited to
those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the Federal
Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317 (a), (b), or (c)).
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Township of Dennis or other public
body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperature
for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact
with any raw material, intermediate product (other than heat) or finished
§ 163-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-37
1:361
product. Non-contact cooling water may however contain algaecides, or
biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat exchangers, and/or
corrosion I inhibitors.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production or
use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct,
or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is not limited to,
leachate and cooling water other than non-contact cooling water.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 163-38. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the
Township of Dennis any domestic sewerage, non-contact cooling water,
process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater).
§ 163-39. Enforcement.
This Article shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Officers and the
New Jersey State Police.
§ 163-40. Penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this Article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000 per day.
§ 163-41. Severability.
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this Article is
declared to be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and
phrase, and the finding or holding of any such portion of this Article to
be unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any cause, or reason, shall not
affect any other portion of this Article.
§ 163-42. Effective date.
This Article shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption and
any publication as may be required by law.
§ 163-37 DENNIS CODE § 163-42
1:362
Chapter 164
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
§ 163-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-42
1:363

ARTICLE I
Openings and Excavations
[Adopted 11-13-1990 as Ord. No. 90-200]
§ 164-1. Minimum standards for pavement.
The minimum standards for the construction of street improvements in
reference to subgrade, gravel base and bituminous concrete pavement are
as follows:
§ 164-2. Permit required.
A. Subgrade. Where fill is required, the underlying ground surface shall be
stripped of all brush and trees before filling is commenced. The
material used for fill shall be suitable therefor and shall be free from
large or frozen lumps, wood and other extraneous material. All fill shall
be within 3% of the optimum moisture content prior to backfilling, as
determined by AASHTO T-99 Method C. The fill shall be formed in
successive layers of not more than eight inches in depth after
compaction, and each layer shall be thoroughly compacted by means of
operating construction equipment over it, mechanical rammers or
vibrators or by pneumatic tampers. All backfill materials shall be
compacted to 98% of maximum dry density as determined by AASHTO
T-99 Method C. Before construction of the gravel base is commenced,
the subgrade shall be neatly dressed to the proper lines, grades and
cross section.
B. Gravel base. The gravel base course shall consist of six inches of
compacted road gravel, Type I-5, conforming to the requirements of the
New Jersey Department of Transportation Standard Specifications, as
currently amended. The finished base shall be compacted to a density of
not less than 95%, hard, smooth and even, free from defects and at the
proper grade and contour.
C. Bituminous concrete pavement. Streets shall be permanently paved
with two-inch-thick bituminous stabilized base course Mix No. I-2 and a
two-inch-thick bituminous concrete surface course of FABC-1 Mix No.
I-5. The pavement shall be constructed in accordance with the
requirements of the New Jersey Department of Transportation
Standard Specifications, as currently amended.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to disturb the
surface of or make any opening or excavations of any kind in any public
street, avenue, road or highway, either paved or unpaved, for any
purpose unless such person, firm or corporation shall have first
obtained a street opening permit and paid the fees therefor.
B. It shall be unlawful for any permit to be issued under the criteria as set
forth in Subsection A or any following section for a period of five years
after the resurfacing, repaving or reconstruction of any street in the
Township of Dennis unless an emergency situation has been declared
§ 164-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-2
1:365
§ 164-3. Unlawful to fail to comply with permit.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation having obtained a
street opening permit to disturb a greater area of surface than specified
in such permit or to leave open at any time any trench or excavation for a
period longer than is specified in the permit, nor shall there be left open
at any time any trench or excavation of a length greater than 100 feet. No
trench or excavation shall be left open at any time after dusk.
§ 164-4. Duties of excavator.
by the Township Committee of the Township of Dennis, New Jersey,
which emergency shall require the street to be opened.
A. It shall be the duty of any person, firm or corporation making any
excavation within any highway of said municipality to protect the
paving upon either side of the opening, to use sheet piling or such other
means as will prevent the escape of soil from under it and, in
determining the number of square yards of paving disturbed, to include
such area of the pavement adjoining the opening made as will, in the
opinion of such person or persons in charge of the highways of the
Township of Dennis, be required to be taken up and relaid by reason of
such failure to properly protect the same.
B. All openings and excavations shall be safely guarded by placing
barricades and warning signs during the day and by barricades and
lights from sunset to sunrise, and such other and further precautions
shall be taken as may be necessary for the proper protection of life and
property. If the entire excavation will exceed more than 1/2 of the width
of the pavement, only 1/2 of the pavement shall be opened, and this is to
be backfilled before the remainder of the excavation is opened, so as to
permit the free flow of vehicular traffic. One lane for vehicular traffic
shall be provided at all times. All signs shall conform to the Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, as currently amended.
C. The person, firm or corporation making such excavation shall fill up
such excavation to within 11 inches of the existing surrounding finished
surface before making any other excavations, said filling to be in
accordance with the requirements for subgrade in § 164-1. He shall
further fill up such excavation to within four inches of the existing
surrounding finished surface, said filling to be in accordance with the
requirements for gravel base in § 164-1. He shall further place two twoinch
lifts of bituminous concrete pavement. Only if bituminous plants
are closed and it is not possible to obtain bituminous concrete may cold
patch be substituted for hot bituminous concrete with the approval of
the person or persons in charge of the highways of the Township of
Dennis. The bituminous concrete or cold patch material shall be placed,
compacted and maintained until such time as the permanent repairs
are made by the person, firm or corporation that had made the
excavation causing the requirement of this repair. Said filling and
§ 164-2 DENNIS CODE § 164-4
1:366
§ 164-5. Issuance of permit.
The Township Clerk of Dennis Township is hereby authorized to issue
a street opening permit to make openings or excavations within public
streets, avenues, roads or highways of Dennis Township to such person, firm
or corporation as shall apply for and pay the fees therefor as hereinafter
mentioned, which permit shall be valid for the period as stated thereon and
shall designate the location and surface area of such excavation to be made,
the period of time the excavation is to remain open, the name of the person,
firm or corporation to whom such permit shall be issued and the fees and
deposits paid therefor.
§ 164-6. Fees and deposits.
paving is to be done and completed within the time designated in the
permit for completing such excavation.
A. To defray the expense of issuing the permit and inspection and
replacing of the surface or paving of excavation made, any person, firm
or corporation obtaining such permit shall pay to the Township Clerk
for such permit the following fees:
(1) For every permit for making openings or excavations within any
unpaved public street, avenue, road or highway: $50. In addition to
the fee for the permit, the applicant shall deposit with the Clerk of
the Township of Dennis cash, a certified check or a money order to
the order of the Township of Dennis in the amount of $10 per
square yard of opening, but no less than $50 for the purposes
hereinafter expressed. [Amended 11-24-1997 by Ord. No.
97-16]
(2) For every permit for making openings or excavations within any
public street, avenue, road or highway whose surface is paved or
otherwise covered or treated: $50. In addition to the fee for the
permit, as herein provided, the applicant shall deposit with the
Clerk of the Township of Dennis cash, a certified check or a money
order to the order of the Township of Dennis in the amount of $20
per square yard of opening, but not less than $300, for the
purposes hereinafter expressed. [Amended 11-24-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-16]
(3) In lieu of said security deposit, any public utility corporation, as
defined in Title 48, Chapter 2, Section 13, of the Revised Statutes of
New Jersey, may file with the Township Clerk a bond to the
township in the sum of not less than $10,000, conditioned upon
said utility's restoring to its original condition any public street,
avenue, road or highway with the township opened or excavated by
said utility, and otherwise complying with all provisions of this
Article and further conditioned for the payment to the township of
any moneys which said township is obligated to expend in order to
restore such public street, avenue, road or highway to its original
§ 164-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-6
1:367
condition. Said bond shall not be considered to be filed unless
approved by resolution of the Township Committee. In the event
that, after a proper filing of bond by a utility, the utility shall fail
to abide strictly by the provisions of this Article, the Township
Committee may, by resolution, revoke the privileges granted under
its bond, return the bond to the utility and require the security
deposit specified above for all future road and street openings
made by said utility. Nothing contained in this section shall be
construed to relieve said utility of its obligation to obtain the permit
provided for by this Article. [Amended 11-24-1997 by Ord. No.
97-16]
(4) In the case of an emergency involving any underground gas, water,
sewer, telephone or electric facility where immediate repair is
required to prevent loss or damage to streets or property, or to
provide continuation of service, it shall not be necessary to obtain a
permit before commencing such repair, but such permit shall be
obtained within two days thereafter, and this subsection shall not
be held or taken in any case to exempt the person, firm or
corporation repairing said facility from any other of the provisions
of this Article.
B. The Township Clerk shall keep records of all permits issued by him and
pay the fees therefor to the Township Treasurer, which fees shall be
accounted for by him in his reports to the Township Committee.
C. The Township of Dennis shall resurface or repave the street so opened
or excavated at the expense of the permittee in those instances where
the permittee has not completed, within 30 days, weather permitting,
the proper refilling and/or resurfacing of such street opening. The
refilling or resurfacing of street openings by the city shall be done in
accordance with the following schedule:
(1) The cost of resurfacing the opening in an unpaved street with such
material as is contained on the other portion of said street shall be
$10 per square yard or fraction thereof. [Amended 11-24-1997
by Ord. No. 97-16]
(2) The cost of resurfacing the opening in a paved street shall be $20
per square yard or fraction thereof. [Amended 11-24-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-16]
D. A public utility company shall be entitled to permanently restore the
surface of public streets, avenues, roads and highways. Said restoration
shall be in conformance with § 164-1. Upon completion of said work, the
Public Works Department of Dennis Township shall make inspection of
the same and shall certify to the Township Clerk that the work has been
completed in a satisfactory manner. In the event that the pavement or
surface of the public street, avenue, road or highway shall not have
been completed to the satisfaction of the Public Works Department of
Dennis Township, the Public Works Department shall proceed to
§ 164-6 DENNIS CODE § 164-6
1:368
§ 164-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this Article shall, upon conviction thereof before the Mayor or other proper
officer who shall try the same, be subject to a fine not exceeding the sum of
$500 or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days.
complete said work and relay the pavement or surface in a manner
satisfactory to it. Upon completion thereof, the Public Works
Department shall certify to the Township Clerk the costs of so doing,
and, in that event, the township shall charge to the public utility
company said costs.
E. The Township of Dennis shall retain, from the deposit money
hereinabove referred to, the sum calculated as the cost of said
resurfacing as hereinabove provided, and any sum remaining or unused
from said deposit money shall be returned.
§ 164-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-7
1:369
Chapter 165
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
§ 164-7 DENNIS CODE § 164-7
1:370
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Amended 7-15-13 by Ord. No. 2013-03]
§ 165-1. Title.
§ 165-2. Purpose. [Amended 8-9-1982 by Ord. 82-96]
The purpose of this chapter shall be to provide rules, regulations and
standards to guide land subdivision in the Township of Dennis and to
implement the goals and objectives of the Pinelands Comprehensive
Management Plan. It shall be ad-ministered to ensure orderly growth and
development, the conservation, protection and proper use of land and
adequate provisions for circulation, utilities and services in order to assure
and promote the comfort, health, safety, convenience and general welfare
of the municipality.
§ 165-3. Compliance required. [Amended 4-24-1989 by Ord. No.
89-168]
All development proposed by the township or any agency thereof will
comply with all the requirements for public development set forth in N.J.A.C.
7:50-4.51 et seq. and all the standards set forth in this chapter.
§ 165-4. Administration. [Amended 1-31-1977 by Ord. No. 77-34]
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the Township of
Dennis Planning Board in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., except
that the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall administer the provisions as
authorized in § 185-75 of Chapter 185, Zoning.
§ 165-5. Right to review. [Amended 1-31-1977 by Ord. No. 77-34]
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to restrict the right of any party
to obtain a review by any court of competent jurisdiction according to law.
§ 165-6. Interpretation. [Amended 1-31-1977 by Ord. No. 77-34]
A. The title of this chapter is "An ordinance establishing rules, regulations
and standards governing the subdivision of land within the Township of
Dennis, County of Cape May, and the State of New Jersey, pursuant to
the authority set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., setting forth the
procedure to be followed by the Planning Board in applying and
administering these rules, regulations and standards, and providing
penalties for the violation thereof."
B. Short title. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Land
Subdivision Ordinance of the Township of Dennis."
A. These rules, regulations and standards shall be considered the
minimum requirements for the protection of the public health, safety
§ 165-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-6
1:371
§ 165-7. Definitions. [Amended 1-31-1977 by Ord. No. 77-34,
5-23-1977 by Ord. No. 77-42; 8-9-1982 by Ord. No. 82-96]
and welfare of the citizens of the Township of Dennis. Any action taken
by the municipality under the terms of this chapter shall give primary
consideration to the matters mentioned in this chapter and to the
welfare of the entire community. However, no additional right-of-way or
improvements will be required for subdivisions with minor adjustments
in boundaries between two existing lots which do not result in the
creation of any new lots.
B. A public hearing on each application shall be held in accordance with
§ 185-76 of Chapter 185, Zoning.
C. A notice of decision of each application shall be given in accordance
with § 185-83 of Chapter 185, Zoning.
D. Records shall be kept in accordance with § 185-82 of Chapter 185,
Zoning.
A. Any word or term not defined herein or defined in the Zoning Ordinance
of the Township of Dennis is used with a meaning of standard usage.
B. Definitions of township-wide application. As used in this chapter, the
following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ADVERSE EFFECT — Conditions or situations creating, imposing,
aggravating or leading to impractical, unsafe or unsatisfactory
conditions on a subdivided property or adjacent property such as
improper circulation and drainage rights-of-way, inadequate drainage
facilities, insufficient street widths, unsuitable street grades, unsuitable
street locations to accommodate prospective traffic or coordinate and
compose a convenient system, locating lots in a manner not adaptable
for the intended purposes without danger to health or peril from flood,
fire, erosion or other menace, providing for lots of insufficient size and
neither providing nor making future allowance for access to the interior
portion of the lot or for other facilities required by this chapter.
AGRICULTURAL PURPOSES — The use of land solely for the growing
and harvesting of crops and/or the raising and breeding of animals.
Within the Pinelands Area, "agricultural purposes" shall consist of any
production of plants or animals useful to man, including but not limited
to forages or sod crops; grains and feed crops; dairy animals and
dairy products; poultry and poultry products; livestock, including beef
cattle, sheep, swine, horses, ponies, mules or goats, and including
the breeding and grazing of any or all of such animals; trees and
forest products; fruits of all kinds, including grapes, nuts and berries;
vegetables; nursery, floral, ornamental and greenhouse products; or
any land devoted to and meeting the requirements and qualifications
for payments or other compensations pursuant to a soil conservation
program under an agency of the federal government.
§ 165-6 DENNIS CODE § 165-7
1:372
BOARD — The Planning Board of the Township of Dennis.
DRAINAGE AND UTILITY RIGHT-OF-WAY — The lands required for the
installation and maintenance of stormwater and sanitary sewers, water
pipes or drainage ditches and other utilities required along a natural
stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the
flow of water therein to safeguard the public against flood damage in
accordance with Chapter 16A of Title 58 of the New Jersey Revised
Statutes, as amended and supplemented.
FLOOD HAZARD AREAS — See § 105-4 of Chapter 105, Flood Damage
Prevention.[Amended 12-10-1990 by Ord. No. 90-204]
LOT — Any parcel of land separated from other parcels or portions
as by a subdivision plat or deed of record, survey map or by metes
and bounds, except that no portion of a street shall be included in
calculating the lot boundaries or areas.
MAINTENANCE BOND — Any security acceptable to the Township
Committee to assure the maintenance of duly approved improvements
installed by the developer for a period of two years after the release of
the performance
MASTER PLAN — A composite of the mapped and written proposals
recommending the physical development of the municipality, which
shall have been duly adopted by the Planning Board.
MATURE TREE — Any woody perennial having a diameter greater
than 24 inches at any point or a height in excess of 30 feet.[Added
12-10-1990 by Ord. No. 90-205]
NATURAL REVEGETATION LIST — Plantings recommended by the
Dennis Township Natural Resource Committee that have best adapted
to the climate, soil and topography of the Township of Dennis or those
listed in Section 6.23 of the Pinelands Comprehensive Management
Plan (CMP) for properties within the Pinelands Area portion of the
township. A list of such plantings shall be on file with the Township
Clerk.[Added 12-10-1990 by Ord. No. 90-205; amended 3-28-1994
by Ord. No. 94-260]
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted in accordance with the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. The map shall be deemed conclusive with
respect to the location and width of streets and public drainageways
and the location and extent of flood-control basins and public areas,
whether or not such streets, ways, basins or areas are improved or
unimproved or are in actual physical existence.
OWNER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership
or corporation having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought
to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide
the same under this chapter.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Any security in accordance with the
requirements of Article VII of this chapter which may be accepted in
lieu of a requirement that certain improvements be made before the
§ 165-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-7
1:373
Planning Board approves a plat, including performance bonds, escrow
agreements and other similar collateral or surety agreements.
PLAT — The map of a subdivision.
PREFERRED TREES[Added 12-10-1990 by Ord. No. 90-205,
repealed 3-28-1994 by Ord. No. 94-260] —
RESUBDIVISION — The further division of a lot; the adjustment of a lot
line or lot lines; or the combing of two or more contiguous lots into a
lesser number of lots.
SETBACK LINE — A line drawn parallel with a street line and drawn
through the point of a building nearest to the street line. The term
"required setback" means a line that is established a minimum
horizontal distance from the street line and beyond which a building or
part of a building is not permitted to extend toward the street line or lot
line.
SIGHT EASEMENT AT INTERSECTION — A triangular-shaped area
established in accordance with the requirements of this chapter in
which nothing shall been erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in
such a manner as to obstruct vision two and one-half (2 1/2) feet above
the center-line grade of either street.[Amended 12-10-1990 by Ord.
No. 90-204]
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive
or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway
or which is shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law or
which is approved by official action as provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq. or which is shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office
of the county recording officer prior to the appointment of a Planning
Board and the grant to such Board of the power to review plats,
and includes the land between the street right-of-way lines, whether
improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders,
gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within the
SKETCH PLAT — The sketch map of a subdivision of sufficient
accuracy to be used for the purposes of discussion and
classification, and including the information specified in Article II,
§ 165-10, of this chapter.
(1)
PRELIMINARY PLAT — The preliminary map indicating the
proposed layout of the subdivision which is submitted to the
Secretary of the Planning Board for Planning Board consideration
and tentative approval, and including the information specified in
Article III, § 165-15, of this chapter.
(2)
FINAL PLAT — The final map of all or a portion of the subdivision
which is presented to the Planning Board for final approval in
accordance with these regulations and which, if approved, shall be
filed with the proper county recording officer.
(3)
§ 165-7 DENNIS CODE § 165-7
1:374
street right-of-way lines. For purposes of this chapter, "streets" shall
conform to the adopted Master Plan classifications:
STREET LINE — The edge of the existing right-of-way or future street
right-of-way, as shown on the Master Plan or Official Map, whichever
would result in the widest right-of-way, and which line forms the
division between the street and lot.
SUBDIVIDER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate,
copartnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity commencing
proceedings under this chapter to effect a subdivision of land
hereunder for himself or for another with the written consent of the
owner according to the provisions of this chapter.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into
two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale
or development. The following shall not be considered "subdivisions"
within the meaning of this chapter if no new streets are created:
divisions of land found by the Planning Board or Subdivision Committee
thereof appointed by the Chairman to be for agricultural purposes
where all resulting parcels are five acres or larger in size; divisions of
property by testamentary or intestate provisions; divisions of property
upon court order, including but not limited to judgments of foreclosure;
consolidation of existing lots by deed or other recorded instrument; and
the conveyance of one or more adjoining lots, tracts or parcels of land
owned by the same person or persons and all of which are found and
certified by the administrative officer to conform to the requirements of
the township's development regulations and are shown and designated
ARTERIALS — Roads that have as their prime function the
transport of regional traffic, characterized by high volumes,
extended destinations and substantial numbers of commercial
vehicles.
(1)
PRIMARY COLLECTORS — Roads which carry traffic from local
streets to major traffic generators or to arterial roads. Traffic
characteristics of this type of collector tend to have a higher
percentage of trucks than secondary collectors.
(2)
SECONDARY COLLECTORS — Roads which carry primarily
residential traffic between traffic generators or arterials and local
streets.
(3)
LOCALS — Roads which function primarily to provide access to
abutting properties.
(4)
CUL-DE-SAC — A short, dead-end local street terminating in a
circular or other turnaround area.
(5)
MARGINAL ACCESS — Streets located parallel and adjacent to
arterial streets and highways which are designed to provide access
to abutting properties without interrupting highway traffic, except
at recognized intersections and access points.
(6)
§ 165-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-7
1:375
as separate lots, tracts or parcels on the Township Tax Maps. The term
"subdivision" shall also include the term "resubdivision."[Amended
1-31-1977 by Ord. No. 77-34; 12-27-1982 by Ord. No. 82-98;
4-24-1989 by Ord. No. 89-168; 12-10-1990 by Ord. No. 90-204]
SUBDIVISION COMMITTEE — A Committee of at least three Board
members appointed by the Chairman of the Board with the approval
of the majority of the Board for the purpose of reviewing subdivision
applications prior to action by the entire Board to determine whether
such applications comply with all provisions of this chapter and with
other duties relating to land subdivision which may be conferred on this
Committee by the Board through a motion duly adopted and recorded.
TREE — Any woody perennial having a diameter greater than two and
one-half (2 1/2) inches, measured at a point four and one-half (4 1/2)
feet above the ground.[Added 12-10-1990 by Ord. No. 90-205]
TREE REGISTER — A list of trees within the township which are of
special significance and are therefore worthy of protection by virtue
of their size, age, type, history or relationship to historical or cultural
events. A list of such trees as determined by the Township Natural
Resource Committee shall be kept on file with the Township
Clerk.[Added 12-10-1990 by Ord. No. 90-205]
MINOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision containing not more than
three lots [two new lots and the remaining parcel] fronting on an
existing street or streets, not involving any new street or road
or the installation of any road improvements or the extension of
township facilities and not adversely affecting the development of
the remainder of the parcel or adjoining property and not in conflict
with any provision or portion of any Master Plan, Official Map,
Zoning Ordinance or this chapter and not a further subdivision of
an original tract of land for which previous "minor subdivision(s)"
have been approved by the Planning Board within the past 12
months and where the combination of the proposed and approved
"minor subdivision(s)" constitutes a major subdivision. The original
tract of land shall be considered any tract in existence at the time
of the adoption of this chapter as shown on the Township Tax Maps.
Any readjustment of lot lines resulting in no new lots shall be
classified a "minor subdivision."
(1)
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision.
(2)
C. Pinelands Area definitions. The following definitions shall only apply to
those portions of the township that are located within the Pinelands
Area:
CERTIFICATE OF FILING — A certificate issued by the Pinelands
Commission pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.34 that a complete application
for development has been filed.[Amended 4-24-1989 by Ord. No.
89-168]
§ 165-7 DENNIS CODE § 165-7
1:376
COMMISSION — The Pinelands Commission created pursuant to
Section 5 of the Pinelands Protection Act.
COMPREHENSIVE MANAGEMENT PLAN — The plan adopted by the
Pinelands Commission pursuant to the Pinelands Protection Act, as
amended, and contained in N.J.A.C. 7:50.
DAY — For purposes of computing time limits, a calendar day.
DEVELOPMENT MAJOR — Any division of land into five or more lots;
any construction or expansion of any housing development of five or
more dwelling units; any construction or expansion of any commercial
or industrial use or structure on a site of more than three acres; or any
grading, clearing or disturbance of an area in excess of 5,000 square
feet.[Added 4-24-1989 by Ord. No. 89-1681
DEVELOPMENT MINOR — All development other than major
development.[Added 4-24-1989 by Ord. No. 89-168]
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land
by drains, grading or other means, including control of runoff to
minimize erosion and sedimentation during and after construction or
development and means necessary for water supply preservation or
prevention or alleviation of flooding.
INTERIM RULES AND REGULATIONS — The regulations adopted by
the Pinelands Commission pursuant to the Pinelands Protection Act to
govern the review of applications from the adoption of the regulations
until the Pinelands Comprehensive Management Plan took effect on
January 14, 1981. These regulations were formerly codified as N.J.A.C.
7:lG-1 et seq.[Added 4-241989 by Ord. No. 89-168]
PINELANDS AREA —THAT AREA DESIGNATED AS SUCH BY
SECTION 10(A) OF THE PINELANDS PROTECTION ACT —
PINELANDS DEVELOPMENT REVIEW BOARD — The agency
responsible from February 8, 1979, until June 28, 1979, for the review
of and action on applications for development in the Pinelands Area
which required approvals of other state agencies, except where the
Pinelands Commission acted on applications during that time
period.[Added 4-24-1989 by Ord. No. 89-168]
PINELANDS PROTECTION ACT — N.J.S.A. 13:18A-1 to 18A-29.
PUBLIC PURPOSE USES — The use of land or buildings by the
Governing Body of the township or any officially created authority or
agency thereof.
§ 165-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-7
1:377

ARTICLE II
Sketch Plat
[Amended 7-15-13 by Ord. No. 2013-03]
§ 165-8. Purpose of submission.
A sketch plat is required of all applicants seeking a subdivision prior to
subdividing or resubdividing for the purpose of classification and initial
discussion so that they may obtain the advice of the Planning Board in the
formative stages of the design and for the purpose of assuring maximum
coordination with the Master Plan.
§ 165-9. Procedures for submission. [Amended 1-31-1977 by Ord.
No. 77-34]
A. The applicant shall submit to the administrative officer, within the time
limits specified by Article II of Chapter 98, 17 copies of the sketch plat
of the proposed subdivision for purposes of classification, preliminary
discussion and appropriate action and 17 copies of the application. The
administrative officer shall process the application and forward the
sketch plats to the Secretary of the Planning Board, who shall issue an
application number. Once an application has been assigned a number,
such number shall appear on all papers, maps, plats and other
documents submitted for processing in conjunction with the
subdivision. [Amended 1-31-77 by Ord. No. 77-34; 3-20-07 by Ord.
No. 2007-03]
B. Upon receipt of the copies of the sketch plat and at least 10 days prior
to the next regular meeting of the Planning Board, the Secretary of the
Planning Board shall forward two copies of the sketch plat, deed or
easement (if required for county purposes) and one copy of the
application to the County Planning Board and one copy of the sketch
plat to the Township Engineer; one copy of the application and sketch
plat shall be retained for the Planning Board's file; and the remaining
copies of the sketch plat and one copy of the application shall be
forwarded to the Subdivision Committee. [Amended 1-31-1977 by
Ord. No. 77-34]
C. Classification constitutes the only approval necessary for minor
subdivisions. Prior to such classification, the Subdivision Committee
should review the proposed minor subdivision to ensure that the sketch
plat is in accordance with the definition of "minor subdivision" as
stipulated in § 165-7 of this chapter and that the details and
specifications indicated in Article II, § 165-10B., have been met.
D. No lot(s) shall be created which is (are) determined by the Dennis
Township Planning Board to be unsuitable for the intended use for
reason of flooding, inadequate drainage, soil and rock formations with
severe limitations for development, susceptibility to mud or earth
slides, severe erosion potential, unfavorable topography, inadequate
§ 165-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-9
1:379
water supply or sewage disposal capabilities or any other feature
harmful to the health, safety or welfare of the future residents or
property owners of the proposed subdivision or the Township of Dennis
at large.
E. Any subdivision determined by the Board to be creating, imposing,
aggravating or leading to the possibility of an adverse effect upon either
the original property being subdivided or upon any adjacent properties
may be required to be revised by the subdivider to remove such adverse
effect(s) prior to further review, classification or approval by the Board,
or, where the remaining portion of the original tract is of sufficient size
to be subdivided further, the subdivider may be required to submit a
sketch plat of the entire remaining portion of the tract to indicate a
feasible plan whereby the applied-for subdivision, together with
subsequent subdivision(s), may be submitted that will not create,
impose aggravate or lead to any such adverse effect.
F. The Subdivision Committee, if appointed, shall review the sketch plat
for classification purposes and discuss the proposed plan as it relates to
the Master Plan, Zoning Ordinance and the design standards and
improvement requirements of this chapter. The Subdivision Committee
shall offer its comments and recommendations to the Board at a
regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning Board within 45 days of
the submission of the application to the administrative officer. Should
the application be determined by the Subdivision Committee or
Planning Board either to be incomplete or to require substantial
revisions, the applicant shall be notified within the forty-five-day time
period and may thereafter submit an appropriately revised application
to the administrative officer as in the first instance. [Amended
1-31-1977 by Ord. No. 77-34]
G. If the sketch plat is considered for classification as a minor subdivision,
the Board shall act on the proposed plat within 45 days of its complete
and proper submission to the administrative officer or within such
further time as may be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the
Planning Board to act within the prescribed time period shall constitute
minor subdivision approval. If classified as a minor subdivision by
majority action of the Planning Board, a notation to that effect,
including the date of classification, shall be made on the master copy.
All prints of the plat shall be signed by the Chairman and Secretary of
the Planning Board (or the Acting Chairman or Secretary where either
or both may be absent) and returned to the subdivider within one week
thereof. No further approval of the subdivision shall be required. In the
event that the same is disapproved by the Planning Board, the
Secretary of the Planning Board shall, within three days of such action,
notify the subdivider of such disapproval and reasons therefor. In acting
on the application, the township shall consider a report received, in
writing, from the County Planning Board within 30 days after its receipt
of the plat. If a reply is not received from the County Planning Board
§ 165-9 DENNIS CODE § 165-9
1:380
§ 165-10. Details. [Added 8-9-1982 by Ord. No. 82-96; amended
4-24-1989 by Ord. No. 89-168]
within 30 days, the sketch plat shall be deemed to have been approved
by it. [Amended 1-31-1977 by Ord. No. 77-34]
H. Before the Secretary of the Planning Board returns any approved
sketch plat to the subdivider, the subdivider shall have sufficient copies
made to furnish one copy to each of the following.
(1) The Township Clerk.
(2) The Township Engineer.
(3) The Construction Official and Zoning Officer.
(4) The Tax Assessor.
(5) The Secretary of the Planning Board.
(6) The County Planning Board.
(7) The Secretary of the Board of Health.
(8) The Pinelands Commission, if required pursuant to Article V.
[Added 8-9-1982 by Ord. No. 82-96; amended 4-24-1989 by
Ord. No. 89-168]
I. A plat map drawn in compliance with the Map Filing Law, P.L. 1960, c.
141 (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.69), shall be filed by the subdivider with
the county recording officer within 190 days from the date of approval
by the Planning Board of the minor subdivision sketch plat. Unless filed
within the 190 days, the approval shall expire and will require Planning
Board approval as in the first instance. The zoning requirements and
general terms and conditions, whether conditional or otherwise, upon
which minor subdivision approval was granted, shall not be changed for
a period of two years after the date of minor subdivision approval by the
Planning Board, provided that the approved minor subdivision shall
have been duly recorded as provided in this subsection. [Amended
1-31-1977 by Ord. No. 77-34]
J. The sketch plat shall be classified within 45 days of its complete and
proper submission to the administrative officer or within such further
time as may be consented to by the applicant. When classified as a
major subdivision, a notation to that effect shall be made on the plat
which shall be returned to the subdivider for compliance with the
procedures in §§ 165-12 and 165-18.
A. The submitted sketch plat shall be based on Tax Map information or
some other similarly accurate base and shall be neatly and accurately
69.Editor's Note: See now N.J.S.A. 46:26A, 46:26B and 46:26C.
§ 165-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-10
1:381
drawn. The following information shall be included: [Amended
5-23-1977 by Ord. No. 77-42; 8-9-1982 by Ord. No. 82-96]
(1) The location of that portion which is to be subdivided in relation to
the entire tract.
(2) All existing structures and wooded areas within the portion to be
subdivided and within 200 feet thereof. [Amended 4-24-1989 by
Ord. No. 89-168]
(3) The name of the owner and interest in the property and names of
all adjoining property owners as disclosed by the most recent
municipal tax records.
(4) The applicant's name and address if different than the owner and
the owner's signed consent to the filing of the application.
(5) The Tax Map sheet, block and lot numbers.
(6) All existing and proposed streets and roads and streams within 500
feet of the subdivision, with rights-of-way indicated and
topographical features such as cliffs and wetlands. [Amended
4-24-1989 by Ord. No. 89-168]
(7) All proposed lot lines and existing lot lines proposed to be
eliminated.
(8) The location and size of all drainage structures and drainage
ditches, streams and brooks and the direction of flow of such
streams or brooks in the area to be subdivided or within 500 feet of
the subdivision.
(9) A general description of proposed drainage, water and sanitary
facilities. In the case of sanitary facilities, the location, size, type
and capacity shall be shown and, if available, results of soil borings
and percolation tests in accordance with N.J.S.A. 58:11-23 et seq.
(10) The approximate location and approximate width of all existing and
proposed utility easements in the area to be subdivided.
(11) Zoning district boundaries affecting the tract.
(12) North arrow.
(13) The scale of the plat and the date of the latest revisions.
(14) Acreage of the entire tract and the area being subdivided to the
nearest tenth of an acre.
(15) The number of new lots created.
(16) The name and address of the owner, subdivider and person
preparing the plat.
§ 165-10 DENNIS CODE § 165-10
1:382
(17) A key map showing the entire subdivision and its relation to the
surrounding areas at a scale of one inch equals not more than 2,000
feet.
B. Special details and specifications required of proposed minor
subdivision prior to classification. No plat shall be classified as a minor
subdivision unless drawn by a professional engineer and/or land
surveyor licensed to practice in the State of New Jersey and bearing the
signature, seal and license number and address of said professional
engineer and/or land surveyor. The sketch plat shall be based on Tax
Map information or some other similarly accurate base at a scale not
more than 100 feet to the inch on one of four standard sizes, namely
eight and one-half by thirteen (8 1/2 x 13) inches, fifteen by twenty-one
(15 x 21) inches, twenty-four by thirty-six (24 x 36) inches or thirty by
forty-two (30 x 42) inches, to enable the entire tract to be shown on one
sheet and shall show or include the following information:
(1) Contours as shown on the United States Geological Survey
topographic sheets.
(2) Marshes, ponds, streams and land subject to flooding in the
subdivision and within 200 feet thereof.
(3) Building setback lines. Such setback lines shall be measured from
the street line as specified in the Dennis Township Development
Plan and Zoning Ordinance.
(4) All areas designated as wetlands under the New Jersey Wetlands
Act of 1970 (N.J.S.A. 13:9A-1 et seq.), or it shall be so stated if there
are none. No plat shall be classified as a minor subdivision which
contains designated coastal wetlands unless accompanied by
written approval from the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Bureau of Marine Lands Management.
[Amended 8-9-1982 by Ord. No. 82-96; 4-24-1989 by Ord. No.
89-168]
(5) All areas under the jurisdiction of the Coastal Area Facility Review
Act (N.J.S.A. 13:19-1 et seq.) shall be shown, or it shall be so stated
if there are none.
(6) Within the Pinelands Area, the information required pursuant to
Article V.
§ 165-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-10
1:383

ARTICLE III
Preliminary Plat
[Amended 7-15-13 by Ord. No. 2013-03]
§ 165-11. Purpose of submission.
A preliminary plat and the supporting documents for a proposed subdivision
which has received sketch plat clarification constitute the material to be
officially submitted to the Planning Board. They show the general design
of the subdivision and its public improvements so that the Planning Board
can indicate its approval or disapproval of the subdivision prior to the
time that the final plat, including the design and detailing of the public
improvements and utilities, is completed. Approval of the preliminary plat
does not constitute an approval of the final plat.
§ 165-12. Procedures for submission.
A. A preliminary plat shall be submitted to the administrative officer
within the time limits specified in Article II of Chapter 98. It shall be
submitted in at least 17 copies and shall be accompanied by 17 copies
of the application forms for preliminary approval and four copies of any
protective covenants or deed restrictions applying to the land being
subdivided, or it shall be so stated if there are none. [Amended
1-31-1977 by Ord. No. 77-34; 3-20-07 by Ord. No. 2007-03]
B. At the time of submission, the fees provided by Article II of Chapter 98
shall be paid.
C. Upon receipt of the necessary material from the applicant, the
administrative officer shall retain one copy each of the preliminary plat,
the completed application and any applicable protective covenants or
deed restrictions and shall then immediately forward the remaining
copies to the Secretary of the Planning Board.
D. The Secretary shall retain two complete sets of maps and application
forms and any protective covenants and deed restrictions for the
Planning Board and forward complete sets of plans to the following
persons:
(1) The County Planning Board [two copies and one copy of the
application and any applicable protective covenants or deed
restrictions.
(2) The County Engineer.
(3) The Township Engineer.
(4) The Secretary of the Board of Health.
(5) The Construction Official.
§ 165-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-12
1:385
§ 165-13. Public hearing. [Amended 1-31-1977 by Ord. No. 77-34]
(6) The Municipal Clerk of adjoining municipality if lands covered by
the preliminary plat lie within 200 feet of a township boundary.
(7) The Commissioner of the Department of Transportation in the case
of proposed subdivisions which abut state highways.
(8) Such other county and state officials as may be directed by the
Planning Board.
A. All public hearings held on applications for preliminary subdivision
approval shall require public notice of the hearing.
B. The Board shall set the date, time and place for the public hearing and
shall inform the applicant of this at least 20 days prior to said hearing
date.
C. Notice of the hearing shall be given by the applicant at least 10 days
prior to the date of the hearing:
(1) By publication in the official newspaper of the municipality, if there
is one, or in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality.
(2) To all owners of real property, as shown on the current tax
duplicate, located within 200 feet in all directions of the property
which is the subject of the hearing, which notice shall be given by
serving a copy thereof on the property owner, as shown on the
current tax duplicate, or his agent in charge of the property or by
mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to the property owner at his
address as shown on said current tax duplicate. It is not required
that a return receipt be obtained. The notice is deemed complete
upon mailing. (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-14).
(3) Notice to a partnership owner may be made by service upon any
partner, notice to corporate owner may be made by service upon its
president, a vice president, secretary or other person authorized by
appointment or by law to accept service on behalf of the
corporation, behalf of the corporation.
(4) To the Municipal Clerk of any adjoining municipality or
municipalities when the property involved is located within 200
feet of said adjoining municipality or municipalities, which notice
shall be given by personal service or certified mail.
(5) To the Cape May County Planning Board when the application for
development involves property adjacent to an existing county road
or proposed road shown on the Cape May County Official Map or
the Cape May County Master Plan or adjoins other county land.
(6) To the Commissioner of Transportation of the State of New Jersey
when the property abuts a state highway.
§ 165-12 DENNIS CODE § 165-13
1:386
(7) To the State Planning Commission when the hearing involves an
application for development of property which exceeds 150 acres
or 500 dwelling units, in which case the notice shall include a copy
of any maps or documents required to be on file with the Township
Clerk.
(8) Within the Pinelands Area, the notice requirements of § 165-22B
shall be met. [Added 8-9-1982 by Ord. No. 82-96; amended
4-29-1989 by Ord. No. 89-168]
D. Upon the written request of an applicant, the Township Tax Assessor
shall, within seven days, make and certify a list from said current tax
duplicates of names and addresses of owners within Dennis Township to
whom the applicant is required to give notice. The applicant shall be
charged $10 for said list and shall be entitled to rely upon the
information contained in such list, and failure to give notice to any
owner not on the list shall not invalidate any hearing or proceeding.
Additionally, the applicant shall be responsible for giving proper notice
to all property owners pursuant to Subsection C(2) above who do not
reside within Dennis Township.
E. The applicant shall file an affidavit or proof of service with the Board.
F. The notice shall state the date, time and place of the hearing and the
nature of the matters to be considered and an identification of the
property proposed for development by street address, if any, or by
reference to lot and block numbers as shown on the current tax
duplicate in the Municipal Tax Assessor's office and the location and
times at which any maps or documents for which approval is sought are
available for inspection.
G. No public hearing shall be held on any preliminary plat until the Board
receives a report, in writing, from those to whom copies of the plat had
been forwarded; or, if within 30 days after receiving the preliminary
plat, the County Planning Board or any other agency or individual to
whom the preliminary plat was forwarded does not return any
comments to the Board, the preliminary plat shall be deemed to have
been approved by them unless, by mutual agreement between the
County Planning Board or other township, county or state official and
the applicant, the thirty-day period shall be extended for an additional
thirty-day period; however, any such extensions shall not extend the
time within which the Board is required to act.
H. Any communications received prior to or at the hearing will be
considered in relation to the approval or disapproval of the plat. At the
public hearing, all parties having an interest therein shall be given an
opportunity to be heard. Minutes of every such hearing shall be kept
and shall include the names of the persons appearing and addressing
the Board and of the persons who appear by attorney, agent or other
representative, the action taken by the Board, the findings, if any, made
§ 165-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-13
1:387
§ 165-14. Action by township. [Amended 1-31-1977 by Ord. No.
77-34]
by it and the reasons therefor. The minutes shall thereafter be made
available for inspection at the office of the Township Clerk.
A. Upon the submission of a complete application for a subdivision of 10
its or fewer, the Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within
45 days of the date of such submission or within such further time as
may be consented to by the developer. Upon the submission of a
complete application for a subdivision of more than 10 lots or whenever
an application includes a request for relief pursuant to Chapter 185,
Zoning, the Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 95
days of the date of such submission or within such further time as may
be consented to by the developer. Otherwise, the Board shall be deemed
to have granted preliminary approval of the subdivision. If the
application is found to be incomplete, the applicant shall be notified
thereof within 45 days of the date of submission, or it shall be deemed
to be properly submitted.
B. Should minor revisions or additions to the plan be deemed necessary,
the Board may grant preliminary approval subject to specified
conditions. Should major revisions to the plan be deemed necessary, the
Board shall require that an amended plan be submitted and proceeded
upon as in the case of the original application for preliminary approval.
C. The recommendations of the County Planning Board and those of all
other agencies and officials to whom the preliminary plat was submitted
for review shall be given careful consideration in the final decision on
the plat. If the County Planning Board or the Township Engineer
approves the preliminary plat, such approval shall be noted on the plat.
If the Board acts favorably on the preliminary plat, the Chairman and
Secretary of the Board (or the Acting Chairman and Secretary where
either or both may be absent) shall affix their signatures to the plat with
a notation that it has been approved and the date of such approval, and
it shall be returned to the subdivider for compliance with final approval
requirements pursuant to § 165-18 of Article IV.
D. After approval of the preliminary plat by the Board, copies of the signed
plat shall be furnished by the Clerk of the Board to each of the following
within 10 days from the date of such approval:
(1) The Township Clerk.
(2) The Township Engineer.
(3) The Planning Board.
(4) The Township Board of Health.
(5) The County Planning Board.
§ 165-13 DENNIS CODE § 165-14
1:388
§ 165-15. Details. [Added 12-10-1990 by Ord. No. 90-205]
(6) The Construction Official and Zoning Officer.
(7) The subdivider for compliance with final plat requirements.
(8) Such other township, county or state officials as directed by the
Board.
E. Preliminary approval of a subdivision shall confer upon the applicant
the following rights for a three-year period from the date of the
preliminary approval:
(1) That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be changed, including but not
limited to use requirements; layout and design standards for
streets, curbs and sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions; and offtract
improvements.
(2) That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or a section or
sections of the preliminary subdivision.
(3) That the applicant may apply for and the Board may grant
extensions on such preliminary approval for additional periods of at
least one year, but not to exceed a total extension of two years,
provided that if the design standards have been revised by
ordinance, such revised standards may govern.
F. If the Board, after consideration and discussion of the preliminary plat,
determines that it is unacceptable, a notation shall be made by the
Chairman of the Board to that effect on the plat and a resolution
adopted setting forth the reasons for such rejection. One copy of the
plat and said resolution shall be returned to the subdivider within 10
days of such determination.
A. The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn or reproduced at
a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet. Preliminary plats shall
be designed by a professional engineer or land surveyor licensed to
practice in the State of New Jersey. The plat shall be designed in
compliance with the provisions of Article VI of this chapter and shall
show or be accompanied by the following information on existing and
proposed features:
(1) A key map showing the subdivision and its relation to the
surrounding areas, at a scale of one inch equals not less than 2,000
feet.
(2) Title block, including.
(a) The name of the subdivision, municipality and county.
(b) The name and address of the subdivider.
§ 165-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-15
1:389
(c) The name and address of the owner or owners of record and
the names and addresses of all property owners within 200 feet
of the extreme limits of the subdivision as shown on the most
recent list prepared by the Tax Assessor.
(d) The name, address, signature and license number of the
professional person who prepared the drawing.
(e) The acreage of the tract to be subdivided to nearest tenth of an
acre.
(f) The total number of proposed lots.
(3) The scale and North arrow.
(4) The date of original preparation and of each subsequent revision
thereof.
(5) Existing block and lot numbers of the tract(s) to be subdivided as
they appear on the Municipal Tax Map and proposed block and lot
numbers as provided upon request from the Township Tax Assessor.
(6) The subdivision boundary line (heavy solid line).
(7) The location of existing and proposed property lines, streets,
buildings (with an indication as to whether existing buildings will
be retained or removed), watercourses, railroads, bridges,
culverts, drainpipes and any natural features, such as wooded
areas and rock formations, to the proper scales, both within the
tract and within 200 feet of its boundary.
(8) Street rights-of-way within the subdivision and within 200 feet of
its boundaries, including:
(a) The name of each street.
(b) The location and width.
(c) The center-line elevation at intersections and other critical
points.
(d) A typical cross section and center-line profiles for all proposed
new streets. They shall clearly indicate the type and width of
pavement and location of curbs and sidewalks, if any, and tree
planting strips. At intersections, any existing proposed sight
triangles and the radius of curblines shall be clearly indicated.
(9) Other recorded rights-of-way and easements on the subdivision,
including:
(a) An identification and description.
(b) The location and width.
(c) Restrictions of use, if any.
§ 165-15 DENNIS CODE § 165-15
1:390
(10) The location of other utility structures, such as water and sewer
mains, gas transmission lines and high-tension power lines, on the
subdivision and within 200 feet of its boundaries.
(11) Existing and proposed contours at one-foot intervals. All contour
lines shall be referenced to the New Jersey Geodetic Control
Survey datum.
(12) Lot layout, including:
(a) Lot lines and dimensions of each lot to the nearest 1/10 foot.
(b) Building setback lines (dashed) and their dimensions from the
street line.
(c) Existing zoning and boundaries thereof.
(d) Identification of lots or parcels to be reserved or dedicated to
public use, if any.
(13) Drainage characteristics, shown in the following manner to comply
with Cape May County regulations:
(a) When a brook or stream is proposed for alteration,
improvement or relocation or when a drainage structure is
proposed on a running stream with a drainage area of 1/2
square mile or greater, evidence of submission of the
improvement to the New Jersey Division of Water Policy and
Supply shall accompany the subdivision.
(b) Cross sections of watercourses and/or drainage swales shall be
provided at an appropriate scale showing extent of floodplain,
if defined, top-of-bank normal water levels and bottom
elevations at the following locations:
[1] At any point where a watercourse crosses a boundary of
the subdivision.
[2] At fifty-foot intervals for a distance of 300 feet upstream
and downstream of any proposed and/or existing culvert or
bridge within or adjacent to the subdivision.
[3] Immediately upstream and downstream of any point of
juncture of two or more watercourses.
[4] At a maximum of five-hundred foot intervals along all
watercourses which run through or adjacent to the
subdivision.
(c) When ditches, streams or watercourses are to be altered,
improved or relocated, the method of stabilizing slopes and
measures to control erosion and siltation, as well as typical
ditch sections and profiles shall be shown on the plan or
accompanying it.
§ 165-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-15
1:391
(d) The boundaries of the floodplain of all watercourses and tidal
waters within or adjacent to the subdivision, if defined, shall be
indicated.
(e) Profile of stream bed 300 feet upstream and downstream from
proposed property limits of development shall be provided.
(14) The total acreage in the drainage basin of any watercourse running
through or adjacent to a subdivision in the area upstream of the
subdivision.
(15) The total acreage in the drainage basin to the nearest downstream
drainage structure and the acreage in the subdivision which drain
to the structure.
(16) The location and extent of drainage and conservation easements
and limits of stream encroachment lines.
(17) The location, extent and water-level elevation of all existing or
proposed lakes or ponds within or adjacent to the subdivision.
(18) Plans and computations for any storm drainage systems, including
the following:
(a) All existing or proposed storm sewer lines within or adjacent to
the subdivision, showing size and profile of the lines, direction
of flow and the location of each manhole and inlet.
(b) The location and extent of any proposed dry wells,
groundwater recharge basins, retention basins or other water
or soil conservation devices.
(19) Plans of proposed utility layouts, including sewers, storm drains,
water, gas, telephone and electricity, and showing feasible
connections to existing or any proposed utility systems; when such
service will be provided by an existing utility company, a letter from
the company stating that services will be made available before
occupancy will be sufficient and when individual on-lot water
supply and/or sewage disposal is proposed, the plan for such
system must be approved by the appropriate local and state
agencies.
(20) Plans showing existing and proposed sanitary sewerage facilities
serving the subdivision, including the following:
(a) The location, size and slope of all sanitary sewer lines,
pumping stations and connections to existing facilities.
(b) The location of any proposed sanitary sewage treatment
plants.
§ 165-15 DENNIS CODE § 165-15
1:392
(c) Test hole data, which shall conform to Article VI and contain
the following data and certified by an engineer licensed to
practice in the State of New Jersey:
[1] The date, location and graphic representation of findings
of all test holes, including groundwater level and soil types
of each hole. At least one test hole shall be required for
each proposed lot, provided that the submitted plat shall
indicate the potential location of a septic system for said
lot. [Amended 5-23-1977 by Ord. No. 77-42]
[2] Critical conditions and areas where drainage structures
requiring seepage are to be constructed.
(21) Plans showing the size and location of all water mains and the
source of water.
(22) All areas designated as wetlands under the New Jersey Wetlands
Act of 1970 (N.J.S.A. 13:9A-1 et seq.), or it shall be so stated if there
are none. Plats containing wetlands shall be accompanied by
written approval of the proposed subdivision and improvements
from the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection,
Bureau of Marine Lands Management.
(23) Whether the proposed subdivision is within the jurisdiction of the
Coastal Area Facility Review Act (N.J.S.A. 13:19-1 et seq.).
[Amended 12-10-1990 by Ord. No. 90-204]
(24) A certification from the Tax Collector that all taxes are paid to date.
(25) A copy of any protective covenants or deed restrictions applying to
the land being subdivided.
(26) The proposed permanent monuments.
(27)Within the Pinelands Area, the information required pursuant to
Article V. [Added 8-9-1982 by Ord. No. 82-96; amended
4-24-1989 by Ord. No. 89-168]
(28) A typical lot clearing plan indicating all areas to be cleared on each
lot as well as areas to be cleared within cartways and drainage
areas and easements. [Added 12-10-1990 by Ord. No. 90-205]
(29) Any endangered species of trees or trees listed on the Township
Tree Register shall be indicated on the plans.
§ 165-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-15
1:393

ARTICLE IV
Final Plat
[Amended 7-15-13 by Ord. No. 2013-03]
§ 165-16. Prior requirements.
Before consideration of a final subdivision, the applicant shall have installed
the improvements required under Article VI or, at the option of the Planning
Board, shall require the posting of adequate performance guaranties to
assure the installation of the required improvements in accordance with
Article VII. All improvements installed prior to final plat application shall
be inspected and certified by the Township Engineer in the same manner
as prescribed in Article VII and meeting the standards of Article VI. The
subdivider shall pay the inspection fees of the Engineer as outlined in
Article VII, § 165-45. Any improvements installed prior to final plat
application that do not meet or exceed township standards shall be added
to the performance guaranty.
§ 165-17. Purpose of submission.
A final plat and supporting drawings and documents for a proposed
subdivision constitute the complete development of the subdivision
proposal and become the basis for the construction of the subdivision
§ 165-18. Procedures for submission.
A. A final plat shall be submitted to the administrative officer within three
years after the date of preliminary approval or extension pursuant to
§ 165-14E(3) of this chapter. The final plat and all supporting drawings
and documents shall be submitted at least 10 days but no more than 14
days prior to the regular Planning Board meeting. [Amended
1-31-1977 by Ord. No. 77-34]
B. When applying to the Planning Board for final approval, the subdivider
shall carry out the following steps:
(1) Incorporate all changes or modifications required by the Planning
Board in the approval of the preliminary plat.
(2) Pay the required inspection fees per Article VII, § 165-45.
(3) Submit to the administrative officer the original tracing and 16
copies of the final plat and 17 copies of the application for final
approval. [Amended 3-20-07 by Ord. No. 2007-03]
(4) Submit three copies of deeds of dedication for all properties,
including street rights-of-way, which are offered to the township for
dedication.
(5) Submit a statement by the Township Engineer that he is in receipt
of a map showing all improvements in exact locations and
elevations, certifying the accuracy of the details of the plat,
§ 165-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-18
1:395
§ 165-19. Action by township.
identifying those portions already installed and those to be
installed and that the subdivider has complied with one or both of
the following:
(a) Installed all improvements in accordance with the
requirements of these regulations.
(b) Posted a performance guaranty in a form and amount
acceptable to the Governing Body, according to the provisions
of Article VII.
(6) Submit letters directed to the Chairman of the Planning Board and
signed by a responsible official of the lighting agency, water
company and of any other utility company or governmental
authority or district which provides accessory utility service and
has jurisdiction in the area, approving each proposed utility
installation design and stating who will construct the facility so that
the service will be available prior to occupancy.
C. Upon receipt of the necessary material from the applicant, the
administrative officer shall retain one copy each of the final plat and
application as well as the required fees and shall then immediately
forward the remaining copies to the Secretary of the Board.
D. Upon receipt of the material from the administrative officer, the
Secretary of the Planning Board shall retain one copy each of the final
plat and application and distribute the remaining eight copies of the
final plat and one copy of the completed application in the following
manner:
(1) The County Planning Board [two copies of final plat and one copy of
the completed application].
(2) The Township Engineer [one copy].
(3) The Township Board of Health [one copy].
(4) The Subdivision Committee [two copies].
(5) Such other township, county or state officials as directed by the
Planning Board.
A. Taking into consideration any action by the County Planning Board, the
Planning Board shall take formal action either approving or
disapproving the final plat application within 45 days of its complete
and proper submission to the administrative officer. If the Planning
Board approves the plat, a notation to that effect shall be made on each
plat and shall be signed by the Chairman and the Secretary of the
Planning Board.
§ 165-18 DENNIS CODE § 165-19
1:396
B. Failure of the Planning Board to act within 45 days or a mutually agreed
upon extension shall be deemed to be favorable approval, and the
Secretary of the Planning Board shall issue a certificate or letter to that
effect.
C. After approval by the Planning Board, copies of the signed plat shall be
furnished to each of the following within 10 days from the date of such
approval:
(1) The Township Clerk.
(2) The Township Engineer.
(3) The Planning Board.
(4) The Township Board of Health.
(5) The County Planning Board.
(6) The Construction Official or Zoning Officer.
(7) The Tax Assessor.
(8) The subdivider.
D. After approval by the Planning Board, the final plat shall be filed by the
applicant with the county recording officer within 95 days from the date
of such approval. No approved plat shall be accepted for filing by the
county recording officer unless it has been duly approved by the
Township Planning Board and the County Planning Board and signed by
the Chairman and Secretary of the Township Planning Board (or Acting
Chairman and Acting Secretary) and the County Planning Director or
his representative. In the event of failure to file within said 95 days, the
approval of the major subdivision shall expire, and any further
proceedings shall require the filing of a new plat. The Governing Body,
for good cause shown, may extend the time for filing for an additional
time period not to exceed 95 days. If approval has expired, a final plat
may be resubmitted to the Planning Board if it is done so within three
years of the date of preliminary plat approval. The applicant must
submit a sketch plat as in the first instance if three years have elapsed
since the date of preliminary plat approval. [Amended 1-31-1977 by
Ord. No. 77-34]
E. If the Planning Board, after consideration and discussion of the final
plat, determines that it is unacceptable, a notation shall be made by the
Chairman of the Board to that effect on the plat and a resolution
adopted setting forth the reasons for such rejection. One copy of the
plat and a resolution shall be returned to the subdivider within 10 days
of such determination.
F. Final approval of a subdivision shall confer upon the applicant the
following rights for a two-year period from the date of final approval:
[Amended 1-31-1977 by Ord. No. 77-34]
§ 165-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-19
1:397
§ 165-20. Details. [Added 8-9-1982 by Ord. No. 82-96; amended
4-24-1989 by Ord. No. 89-168]
(1) That the zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary
approval first granted and all other rights conferred upon the
developer, whether conditionally or otherwise, shall not be
changed.
(2) If the developer has followed the standards prescribed for final
approval and has duly recorded the final plat with the Cape May
County Clerk in accordance with Subsection D above, that the
Board may extend the period of protection for extensions of one
year each, not exceeding three such extensions.
G. It shall be unlawful to use or permit the use of any structure or part
thereof, either occupied by a new use or hereafter erected, altered,
converted or enlarged, wholly or in part, until a certificate of occupancy
shall have been issued by the Construction Official. It shall be the duty
of the Construction Official to issue a certificate of occupancy only
when he is satisfied that the structure or part thereof and the proposed
use conform to this chapter and all other applicable codes and
ordinances of Dennis Township. (See Article VII, § 165-48.)
A. The final plat shall be prepared at a scale of not less than one inch
equals 100 feet in accordance with the New Jersey Map Filing Law
(N.J.S.A. 46:23.9.9 to 23-9.16)70 and contain the following information:
(1) The date of submission, name and location of the subdivision and
the name of the owner.
(2) A graphic scale and reference meridian. At least one corner of the
subdivision shall be tied to New Jersey plane coordinate data with a
description on the plat as to how the bearings were determined,
provided that a grid coordinate control point is situated within a
one-mile distance of the proposed subdivision. [Amended
5-23-1977 by Ord. No. 77-42]
(3) Tract boundary lines, street right-of-way lines, street names,
easements and other rights-of-way, land to be dedicated to public
use, lot lines and other site lines, bearings or deflection angles and
radii, arcs and center angles of all curves.
(4) A designation of the purpose of any easement of land set aside for
public use and a notation of proposed use of any nonresidential
sites.
(5) Zoning boundaries and the zoning designation of all adjacent lands.
(6) Block and lot numbers in conformity with existing Tax Map
procedures.
70.Editor's Note: See now N.J.S.A. 46:26A, 46:26B, 46:26C.
§ 165-19 DENNIS CODE § 165-20
1:398
(7) Minimum building setback lines as specified in the Dennis
Township Zoning Ordinance.
(8) The location and description of monuments set and monuments to
be set.
B. The final plat shall be accompanied by the following documents:
(1) Certification from the Tax Collector that all taxes are paid to date.
(2) Certification that the applicant is the owner of the land or his
properly authorized agent or that the owner has given consent
under an option agreement.
(3) Cross-section and profile drawings of streets as approved by the
Township Engineer.
(4) Plans and profiles of storm and sanitary sewers and water mains as
approved by the Township Engineer.
(5) Within the Pinelands Area, the information required pursuant to
Article V.
§ 165-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-20
1:399

ARTICLE V
Special Procedures for Pinelands Area Development
[Added 8-9-1982 by Ord. No. 82-96; amended 4-24-1989 by Ord. No.
89-168; amended 7-15-13 by Ord. No. 2013-03]
§ 165-21. Application requirements for minor development.
A. Any application for approval of minor development shall include at least
the following information:
(1) The applicant's name and address and his interest in the subject
property.
(2) The owner's name and address, if different from the applicant's,
and the owner's signed consent to the filing of the application.
(3) The legal description, including block and lot designation and
street address, if any, of the subject property.
(4) A description of all existing uses of the subject property.
(5) A brief written statement generally describing the proposed
development.
(6) A United States Geological Survey Quadrangle Map, or copy
thereof, and a copy of the Municipal Tax Map sheet on which the
boundaries of the subject property and the Pinelands Management
Area designation and the zoning designation are shown.
(7) A plat or plan showing the location of all boundaries of the subject
property, the location of all proposed development and existing of
proposed facilities to provide water for the use and consumption of
occupants of all buildings and sanitary facilities which will serve
the proposed development. The following information shall be
included with respect to existing or proposed sanitary facilities:
(a) On-site treatment facilities: the location, size, type and
capacity of any proposed on-site wastewater treatment
facilities.
(b) Soil borings and percolation tests: If on-site sewage disposal is
proposed, results of soil borings and percolation tests in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 58:11-23 et seq., and the regulations
adopted pursuant thereto, at suitable location with a tract map
showing location, logs and elevations of all test holes, and
demonstrating that such facility is adequate to meet the water
quality standards contained in § 185-58 of Chapter 185,
Zoning.
(8) A location map, including the area extending at least 300 feet
beyond each boundary of the subject property showing ownership
boundary lines, the boundary of the proposed development, owners
§ 165-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-21
1:401
of holdings adjoining and adjacent to the subject property, existing
facilities, buildings and structures on the site, all proposed
development, wetlands, streams (including intermittent streams),
rivers, lakes and other water bodies and existing roads.
(9) A soils map, including a County Soils Survey which conforms to the
guidelines of the United States Department of Agriculture Soil
Conservation Service, showing the location of all proposed
development.
(10) A map showing existing vegetation, identifying predominant
vegetation types in the area and showing proposed landscaping of
the subject property, including the location of the tree line before
and after development and all areas to be disturbed as a result of
the proposed development.
(11) A certificate of filing from the Pinelands Commission issued
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.34 or, until January 14, 1991, evidence
of prior approval from the Pinelands Development Review Board or
the Pinelands Commission pursuant to the Interim Rules and
Regulations.
(12) When prior approval for the development has been granted by an
approval agency, evidence of Pinelands Commission review
pursuant to § 185-49E of Chapter 185, Zoning.
B. Any application for approval of major development, except for forestry
or resource extraction operations, shall include at least the following
information:
(1) The applicant's name and address and his interest in the subject
property.
(2) The owner's name and address, if different from the applicant's,
and the owner's signed consent to the filing of the application.
(3) The legal description, including block and lot designation and
street address, if any, of the subject property.
(4) A description of all existing uses of the subject property.
(5) A brief written statement generally describing the proposed
development and the market it is intended to serve, the number of
total units, the floor area of all units and the anticipated market
value of all units to be included in the proposed development.
(6) A written statement addressing each of the standards or guidelines
set forth in Subchapters 5 and 6 of this plan and stating specifically
how the proposed development meets each such standard or
guideline.
(7) A plat or plan showing the location of all boundaries of the subject
property, the location of all proposed development and existing or
§ 165-21 DENNIS CODE § 165-21
1:402
proposed facilities to provide water for the use and consumption
of occupants of all buildings and sanitary facilities which will serve
the proposed development. The following information shall be
included with respect to existing or proposed wastewater
treatment facilities:
(a) Sanitary sewer distribution: the location, size and direction of
flow of all existing and proposed sanitary sewer lines and
pumping stations serving the proposed development and all
existing and proposed connections to existing facilities.
(b) On-site treatment facilities: the location, size, type and
capacity of any proposed on-site wastewater treatment
facilities, including, except with respect to discharges into an
individual residential septic system, quantities, composition,
proposed pretreatment and ultimate means of disposal.
(c) Soil borings and percolation tests: if on-site sewage disposal is
proposed, results of soil borings and percolation tests in
accordance with the requirements of N.J.S.A. 58:11-23 et seq.
and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto, along with a
tract map showing the location, logs and elevations of all test
holes, indicating where groundwater was encountered, and
estimating the seasonal high water table.
(d) The proposed hours and days of operation and number of
employees of any nonresidential facility.
(8) A project site base map, at a scale of no less than one inch to 200
feet and including the areas extending at least 300 feet beyond
each boundary of the subject property, showing ownership
boundary lines, the boundary of the proposed development, owners
of holdings, if any, adjoining and adjacent to the subject property,
existing facilities, buildings and structures on the site, all proposed
development, wetlands, streams (including intermittent streams),
rivers, lakes and other water bodies and existing roads.
(9) A soils map, including a County Soils Survey in conformance with
the guidelines of the United States Department of Agriculture Soil
Conservation Service, at the same size and scale as the project site
base map, delineating all soil series at an appropriate level of detail
and, in sewered projects, sufficient soil borings to confirm the
accuracy of the soils map.
(10) A slope map, at the same size and scale as the project site base
map, indicating contour elevations at two-foot intervals.
(11) A resource capability map, at the same size and scale as the project
site base map, indicating the cumulative limitations to development
due to the standards and the guidelines contained in this plan. This
map should be prepared prior to any engineering, site layout or
design work.
§ 165-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-21
1:403
(12) A proposed development map, at the same size and scale as the
project site base map, showing areas of proposed development; the
location of surveyor's tape or other markers placed on the site
delineating the boundaries of the property; the number of
residential lots and other type of development in each general area;
all proposed lot lines; areas proposed to be retained as open space;
the applicable land use areas boundaries; the location of proposed
facilities such as dams and impoundments, public or private water
systems, storm drainage systems, public or private sewerage
systems, public utilities, soil erosion and sedimentation control
devices, industrial wastewater discharges and solid waste disposal
areas; sources of air pollution; the proposed primary road network;
all areas to be disturbed by construction activities; existing
vegetation, identifying the predominant vegetation types in the
area; and all vegetation which is to be removed or disturbed as a
result of the proposed development; and the tree line before and
after development.
(13) A map, at the same size and scale as the project site base map,
showing stormwater drainage patterns and calculations and the
applicant's proposed stormwater runoff management plan, which
shall contain results of all percolation tests and soil borings
performed in each recharge area, including the estimated seasonal
highwater table.
(14) Legal instruments evidencing the applicant's right, title or interest
in any Pinelands development credits and any existing or proposed
deed restrictions or easements relating to the subject parcel.
(15) A landscaping schedule and plan on a map, of the same size and
scale as the project site base map, identifying the species of plants
to be installed and the quantity and location of all plants proposed
to be planted, demonstrating that the landscaping will be carried
out within six months of the completion of construction and
demonstrating that the landscaping will stabilize soils.
(16) All public service infrastructure agreements, or other
documentation, evidencing the availability of electric, gas, water,
sewer and other necessary public service infrastructure.
(17) The cultural resources survey described in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6, Part XV.
(18) A list of all permits required for the proposed development from
county, municipal, state and federal agencies.
(19) A certificate of filing from the Pinelands Commission issued
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.34 or, until January 14, 1991, evidence
of prior approval from the Pinelands Development Review Board or
the Pinelands Commission pursuant to the Interim Rules and
Regulations.
§ 165-21 DENNIS CODE § 165-21
1:404
§ 165-22. Notices to Pinelands Commission. [Amended in entirety
11-13-18 by Ord. No. 2018-11]
(20) When prior approval for the development has been granted by an
approval agency, evidence of Pinelands Commission review
pursuant to § 185-49E of Chapter 185, Zoning.
A. Application submission and modifications. Written notification shall be
given by the Township, by email or regular mail, to the Pinelands
Commission within seven days after a determination is made by the
Township that an application for development in the Pinelands Area is
complete or if a determination is made by the Township approval
agency that the application has been modified. Such notice shall
contain:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The legal description and street address, if any, of the parcel that
the applicant proposes to develop.
(3) A brief description of the proposed development, including uses
and intensity of uses proposed.
(4) The application number of the Certificate of Filing issued by the
Pinelands Commission and the date on which it was issued.
(5) The date on which the application, or any change thereto, was filed
and any application number or other identifying number assigned
to the application by the approval agency.
(6) The approval agency with which the application or change thereto
was filed.
(7) The content of any change made to the application since it was filed
with the Commission, including a copy of any revised plans or
reports.
(8) The nature of the municipal approval or approvals being sought.
B. Meetings and hearings. Where a meeting, hearing or other formal
proceeding on an application for development approval in the Pinelands
Area is required, the applicant shall provide notice to the Pinelands
Commission by email, regular mail or delivery of the same to the
principal office of the Commission at least five days prior to such
meeting, hearing or other formal proceeding. Such notice shall contain
at least the following information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The application number of the Certificate of Filing issued by the
Pinelands Commission and the date on which it was issued.
§ 165-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-22
1:405
§ 165-23. Review by Pinelands Commission.
(3) The date, time and location of the meeting, hearing or other formal
proceeding.
(4) The name of the approval agency or representative thereof that will
be conducting the meeting, hearing or other formal proceeding.
(5) Any written reports or comments received by the approval agency
on the application for development that have not been previously
submitted to the Commission.
(6) The purpose for which the meeting, hearing or other formal
proceeding is to be held.
C. Notice of approvals and denials. The Pinelands Commission shall be
notified of all approvals and denials of development in the Pinelands
Area, whether the approval occurs by action or inaction of any approval
agency or an appeal of any agency's decision. The applicant shall,
within five days of the approval, give notice by email or regular mail to
the Pinelands Commission. Such notice shall contain the following
information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The legal description and street address, if any, of the parcel that
the applicant proposes to develop.
(3) The application number of the Certificate of Filing issued by the
Pinelands Commission and the date on which it was issued.
(4) The date on which the approval or denial was issued by the
approval agency.
(5) Any written reports or comments received by the approval agency
on the application for development that have not been previously
submitted to the Commission.
(6) Any revisions to the application not previously submitted to the
Commission.
(7) A copy of the resolution, permit or other documentation of the
approval or denial. If the application was approved, a copy of any
preliminary or final plan, plot or similar document that was
approved shall also be submitted.
A. Upon receipt by the Pinelands Commission of a notice of approval
pursuant to § 165-22C above, the application for development approval
shall be reviewed in accordance with the provisions in N.J.A.C.
7:50-4.37 through N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.42. The approval of the township shall
not be effective and no development shall be carried out prior to a
determination of whether the development approval will be reviewed by
the Commission. If the applicant is notified that the Commission will
§ 165-22 DENNIS CODE § 165-23
1:406
§ 165-24. Condition on prior approval of township.
Where a prior approval has been granted by an approval agency, no
subsequent approval of an application for development approval shall be
obtained until one of the following is satisfied:
§ 165-25. Effect of Commission decision on township approval.
If the Pinelands Commission disapproves an application for development
previously approved by an approval agency, such approval shall be revoked
by the approval agency within 30 days, and the agency shall thereafter
deny approval of the application. If the Commission approves the decision
of an approval agency subject to conditions, the approval agency which
had previously approved the application shall, within 30 days, modify its
approval to include all conditions imposed by the Commission and, if final
approval of the application is required, shall grant final approval only if the
application for approval demonstrates that the conditions specified by the
Commission have been met by the applicant.
§ 165-26. Participation of Commission in public hearings,
The Pinelands Commission may participate in a hearing held in the
township involving the development of land in the Pinelands Area pursuant
to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.36.
§ 165-27. Natural Resource Committee review.
All applications for major development maybe referred to the Natural
Resource Committee for review and comment.
review the application for development, no development shall be
carried out until such review has been completed.
B. Until January 14, 1991, approvals issued by the Pinelands Development
Review Board or the Pinelands Commission under the Interim Rules
and Regulations shall serve as the basis for Pinelands Commission
review of the local approval under this section.
C. Although the Pinelands Commission shall be notified of all denials, no
such denial actions are subject to further review and action by the
Pinelands Commission.
A. Notification is received from the Pinelands Commission that review of
the prior local approval is not required; or
B. Review of the prior local approval has been completed pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.37 through N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.42 and a final order
regarding the approval is received by the township from the Pinelands
Commission.
§ 165-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-27
1:407

ARTICLE VI
Improvements and Design Standards
[Amended 7-15-13 by Ord. No. 2013-03]
§ 165-28. Compliance required.
§ 165-29. Streets and highways. [Added 8-9-1982 by Ord. No. 82-96]
A. The subdivider shall comply with the following requirements and
principles of land subdivision and those requirements of the Zoning
Ordinance in the design of each subdivision or portion thereof.
[Amended 8-9-1982 by Ord. No. 82-96]
B. Prior to the granting of final approval, the subdivider shall have
installed or at the option of the Planning Board, shall have furnished
performance guaranties in accordance with Article VII of this chapter
for the ultimate installation or protection of the items required by this
article. See Article VII of this chapter.
C. The subdivision shall conform to design standards that will encourage
good development patterns encouraging a coordinated, well-planned
community with provisions for desirable services and circulation
facilities. The subdivision shall conform to the proposals and conditions
shown on the Official Map and the Master Plan.
A. Subdivisions shall be served by paved public streets, and all new streets
shall be graded and provided with an all-weather base and pavement
with an adequate crown in keeping with township specifications and
standards.
B. The arrangement of streets shall be such as to provide for the
appropriate continuous extension of existing, mapped or potential
streets and the orientation of lots and buildings to be constructed
thereon to benefit from solar access. [Amended 12-27-1982 by Ord.
No. 82-98]
C. No subdivision showing reserve strips controlling access to another
area, either developed or undeveloped, shall be approved except where
the control and disposal of land comprising such strips has been given
to the governing body after recommendation by the Planning Board.
D. Subdivisions that adjoin or include streets that do not conform to
widths as shown on the Master Plan, Official Map or the street width
requirements of this chapter shall dedicate additional width along one
or both sides of said road. If the subdivision is along one side only, 1/2 of
the required extra width shall be dedicated.
E. The pavement width of streets and the quality of surfacing and base
materials shall adhere to the minimum standards set forth by the
Township, County or State Engineers when said paving concerns roads
under their jurisdiction and where such standards exist.
§ 165-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-29
1:409
F. Street intersections.
(1) Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as is possible
and in no case shall be less than sixty degrees (60°).
(2) No more than two streets shall meet or intersect at any one point,
and the center lines of both intersecting streets shall pass through
a common point. Measuring from this common point, two
intersections shall be spaced at a minimum of 300 feet.
(3) The block corners at intersections shall be rounded at the curbline
with the street having the highest radius requirement as outlined
below, determining the minimum standards for all curblines:
(a) Arterials: 40 feet.
(b) Collectors: 35 feet.
(c) Local streets: 30 feet.
(4) Sight triangle easements shall be dedicated as follows. The area
bounded by the right-of-way lines and a straight line connecting
sight points on street center lines which are the following distances
from the intersection of the center lines.
(a) Where two arterial streets intersect, two overlapping sight
triangles shall be required, formed by 300 feet and 90 feet on
each arterial. These requirements shall also apply when a
county road and state highway intersect.
(b) Where two collector streets intersect, two overlapping sight
triangles shall be required, formed by 200 feet and 90 feet on
each collector. These requirements shall also apply when two
county roads intersect.
(c) Where two local roads intersect, 90 feet on both roads. At
intersections, involving a combination of roads, sight triangles
shall be designed according to the standards outlined above for
the respective roads.
G. Where streets have a reverse curve, a tangent of at least 100 feet in
length shall be required.
H. No street shall have a grade of less than one-half of one percent (1/2 of
1%), which shall be defined to mean a vertical rise of 0.5 foot for each
100 feet of horizontal distance.
I. All changes in grade where the grade is 1% or greater shall be
connected by vertical curves of sufficient radius to provide a smooth
transition and proper sight distance but not so great as to create
drainage problems. Sight distance shall be at least:
(1) One thousand feet for arterial streets.
§ 165-29 DENNIS CODE § 165-29
1:410
(2) Seven hundred fifty feet for all collector streets.
(3) Five hundred feet for local streets.
J. Continuous open driveways in excess of 15 feet in width resulting in the
elimination of curbing along township streets shall be prohibited.
K. No street shall have a name which will duplicate or so nearly duplicate
the name of an existing street that confusion results. The continuation
of an existing street shall have the same name. Curvilinear streets shall
change their names only at street intersections or in accordance with
§ 165-30 of this article. The Planning Board shall reserve the right to
approve or name streets within the proposed subdivisions.
L. The length, width or acreage of blocks shall be determined with due
regard to the limitations and opportunities of topography and shall be
such as to be sufficient to meet all the area, yard and parking
requirements for such particular uses as expressed in the Zoning
Ordinance as well as providing for convenient access, circulation
control and safety to street traffic.
M. Lot dimensions and area shall not be less than the requirements of the
Zoning Ordinance of the township, and insofar as is practical, side lot
lines shall be at right angles to straight streets and radial to curved
streets.
N. Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of existing streets,
lots shall begin at such new line. All setbacks shall be measured from
the street line, whether or not the extra width has been dedicated.
O. Street specifications.
(1) The minimum requirements of any new street shall be constructed
according to the specifications and procedures as set forth in the
New Jersey State Highway Department Standard Specifications,
current edition, with addenda, except where noted in Section
165-29.2.
(2) The base course shall consist of six inches of soil aggregate Type 2,
Class A or B, constructed according to State Highway
Specifications.
(3) The surface shall consist of two inches of bituminous concrete,
Type FABC-1, Mix 5, applied according to State Highway
Specifications.
(4) The work shall be inspected through the course of construction by
the Township Engineer or his duly authorized representative, who
shall be notified 48 hours before any work is started or continued.
P. Within the Pinelands Area, each subdivision of 25 or more lots shall
have two accessways.
§ 165-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-29.1
1:411
§ 165-29.1. Streets and highways in the R-3, R-10, B, M, C and all
Pinelands Districts.
§ 165-29.2. Streets and highways in the VC, VR, CR, CVC, CVR,
OVR, OVCC, OVC and OVCR Districts.
A. The right-of-way widths shall be measured from lot line to lot line.
Right-of-way width and pavement shall not be less than the following
unless indicated as such on the Master Plan or Official Map: [Amended
5-23-1977 by Ord. No. 77-42]
Type of Street
Right-of-Way
(feet)
Pavement
Width
(feet)
Maximum
Grade
(percent)
Arterial Collector 84 64 6
Primary 70 50 8
Secondary 58 38 8
Local 54 34 10
B. Subdivisions affecting or involving county roads shall adhere to the
design standards for such as set forth in the Subdivision Resolution of
the Cape May County Planning Board.
C. Culls-de-sac may be used to discourage through traffic. They shall be no
longer than 800 feet unless the applicant can prove compelling and
unique circumstances, in which case they may be extended to no more
than 1,000 feet in length. They shall provide a turnaround at the end of
a radius of not less than 50 feet measured from the curbline and
tangent whenever practicable to the right side of the street. The
minimum right-of-way at the turnaround shall be a radius of at least 58
feet. If a cul-de-sac is of a temporary nature, a similar turnaround shall
be provided and provisions made for future extension of the street and
reversion of the excess right-of-way to the adjoining properties.
[Amended 5-23-1977 by Ord. No. 77-42]
D. Subdivisions abutting arterial streets shall provide a marginal service
road or reverse frontage with a buffer strip for planting or some other
means of separation of through and local traffic as the Planning Board
may determine appropriate. Local streets shall not intersect collector
streets at intervals more frequently than 500 feet whenever practical in
the opinion of the Planning Board. Cul-de-sac or local streets shall not
intersect with arterial roads. Driveways to single-family dwellings shall
not open on arterial roads.
A. The following maps show the existing and proposed street typologies
within the Villages. The maps also show the location of existing and
proposed traffic lights, roundabouts, gateways and pedestrian
crossings. Proposed streets are recommendations, not requirements,
which shall be determined by the Township Engineer.
§ 165-29.1 DENNIS CODE § 165-29.2
1:412
§ 165-29.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-29.2
1:413
§ 165-29.2 DENNIS CODE § 165-29.2
1:414
B. The street right-of-way width shall be measured from lot line to lot line.
Right-of-way width, street design, landscape standards and street
furniture standards for the streets within the VC, VR, CR, CVC, CVR,
OVR, OVCC, OVC and OVCR District are as follows by street type:
(1) State Route 9
§ 165-29.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-29.2
1:415
(2) State Route 47
(3) State Route 83
§ 165-29.2 DENNIS CODE § 165-29.2
1:416
(4) County Road 668 (Main Street),608 (Kings Highway) and 628
(Corsons Tavern Road)
(5) County Road 610 (Dennisville Petersburg Road)
§ 165-29.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-29.2
1:417
(6) County Road 625 (Sea Isle Boulevard)
(7) Main Street — Dennisville
§ 165-29.2 DENNIS CODE § 165-29.2
1:418
(8) Boulevard
(9) Center Street
§ 165-29.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-29.2
1:419
(10) Hagen Road and Gravel Hole Road
(11) County Road 550 (Woodbine Boulevard) and 657 (Courthouse
Dennisville Road)
§ 165-29.2 DENNIS CODE § 165-29.2
1:420
(12) Residential Street
(13) Mixed-Use Alley
§ 165-29.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-29.2
1:421
(14) Residential Alley
(15) Other streets
(a) There are a number of other existing streets within the VC, VR,
CR, CVC, CVR, OVR, OVCC, OVC and OVCR Districts. These
remaining streets have very little potential of change and will
most likely only see limited infill development over time.
Therefore, general characteristics have been laid out for these
streets should grant money become available for the
installation of bikeway, planting strips or sidewalks in the
future. There are required components and encouraged
components should enough right-of-way exist to make these
components feasible:
C. Landscape standards.
(1) All street trees shall be planted at least two point five (2.5) feet
from the curb face.
(2) Trees required to be planted in planting beds shall be planted in a
bed measuring a minimum of four feet by eight feet. Tress in
§ 165-29.2 DENNIS CODE § 165-29.2
1:422
planting beds shall be supplemented by native, low-maintenance
plants.
(3) Trees required to be planted I grates shall be planted in a grate
measuring a minimum of five feet by five feet. Said tress shall be
planted in structural soil. Structural soil material is designed as
follows. The three components of the structural soil are mixed in
the following properties by weight: crushed stone — 100, clay loam
— 20, hydrogel — 0.03. Total moisture at mixing should be 10%
(AASHTO T-99 optimum moisture).
(4) Trees shall be planted at a minimum size of two point five (2.5) to
three inch caliper, bound and burlapped.
(5) Acceptable street trees include:
(a) Acer campestre Hedge Maple
(b) Acer rubrum "Armstrong" "Armstrong" Columnar Red
Maple
(c) Acer rubrum October Glory October Glory Red Maple
(d) Acer saccharum Bonfire Bonfire Sugar Maple
(e) Acer saccharum Goldspire Goldspire Sugar Maple
(f) Acer saccharum Green
Mountain
Green Mountain Sugar Maple
(g) Fraxinus americana Autumn
Purple
Autumn Purple White Ash
(h) Fraxinus americana
Greenspire
Greenspire White Ash
(i) Fraxinus pennsylvania
"Patmore"
"Patmore" Green Ash
(j) Nyssa sylvatica Black Gum or Sour Gum
(k) Platanus acerifolia
"Bloodgood"
"Bloodgood" London
Planetree
(l) Platanus occidentalis Sycamore
(m) Quercus bicolor Swamp White Oak
(n) Quercus imbricara Shingle Oak
(o) Quercus palustris Pin Oak
(p) Quercus phellos Willow Oak
(q) Taxodium distichum Baldcypress
(r) Tilia americana "Redmond" "Redmond" Linden
(s) Tilia cordata Greenspire Greenspire Littleleaf Linden
(t) Tilia tomentosa Green
Mountain
Green Mountain Silver Linden
(u) Ulmus americana "Princeton" "Princeton" Elm
§ 165-29.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-29.2
1:423
§ 165-30. Street name and traffic control signs.
(v) Zelkova serrata "Halka" "Halka" Zelkova
(w) Zelkova Serrata Serrata Zelkova
D. Lighting standards.
(1) Street lighting shall be no more than 15 feet in height.
(2) Street lighting fixtures shall be full cut off.
(3) Lighting shall provide a maintained average in the OVCC, OVC and
CVC District of one-half (0.5) foot-candle over the sidewalks and
maintained average of one (1.0) foot-candle over the street. In the
OVCR and CVR District, street lighting shall provide a maintained
average of point three (0.3) foot-candles over the sidewalks and
one foot-candle at intersections.
E. Street furniture standards.
(1) Benches should be located close to street trees so that they benefit
from summertime shading.
(2) Trash receptacles shall be off sufficient size and regularly emptied.
(3) Bike racks shall be placed so that the bike is parallel to the street
(long side parallel to the street).
(4) Where installed, newspaper stands shall be grouped to avoid
cluttering the sidewalk.
(5) All street furniture must maintain a five foot minimum clearance
area for safe circulation.
A. There shall be two metal street name signposts of steel installed at each
street intersection and at such places as noted below. The post shall be
two and one-half (2 1/2) inches in diameter and not less than 12 feet in
length. The post shall be set in concrete having a diameter of one foot
and a depth of at least three feet in the ground. The street signs shall be
metal and conform to existing signs as approved by the Township
Engineer. Street name signs shall be placed:
(1) At street intersections.
(2) When two roads intersecting at right angles are connected by a
curve.
(3) At the peak of the curve connecting two parallel streets when the
length of the streets exceeds the length of a loop.
B. Where traffic control signs are deemed necessary by the Planning
Board, subdivider or Township Engineer for township, county or state
highways, the proper township, county or state official shall be
§ 165-29.2 DENNIS CODE § 165-30
1:424
§ 165-31. Curbs, gutters and catch basins.
informed of the proposed installation in order that the proper agency
may consider the necessity of the installation at its own expense.
C. All street name and traffic control signs shall be installed free of visual
obstruction.
A. Zoning requirements. [Amended 10-10-1977 by Ord. No. 77-45]
(1) Curbs, gutters and catch basins shall be installed in the following
zoning districts as established in the Dennis Township Zoning
Ordinance:
VR Village Residential
VC Village Commercial
B Business
OVCC Ocean View Center Core
OVC Ocean View Center
OVCR Ocean View Center Residential
CVC Clermont Village Commercial
CVR Clermont Village Residential
CR Clermont Residential
OVR Ocean View Residential
(2) Catch basins may be required in R-3 (Rural Single-Family
Residential) Zoning Districts as established in the Dennis Township
Zoning Ordinance at the discretion of the Dennis Township
Planning Board upon the advice of the Dennis Township Engineer
after his review of the subdivision application as submitted.
B. Curbs, gutters and catch basins shall be adequate to handle the
maximum water runoff from tributary lands.
C. The following type of curb shall be constructed:
(1) Concrete walls shall be eight inches wide at their base and not less
than six inches wide at their top.
(2) Their height shall not be less than 18 inches, constructed to show a
vertical face above the roadway pavement of six inches.
(3) They shall be constructed by use of metal forms true to line and
grade.
(4) Open joints shall be provided at intervals of 10 feet and 1/2 inch
bituminous expansion joints every 20 feet.
§ 165-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-31
1:425
§ 165-32. Sidewalks.
(5) Block corners and curves shall be constructed on a true radius;
straight forms will not be permitted.
D. Concrete gutters not constructed integral with the curb shall be
constructed against the existing concrete wall-type curb and shall have
a width of not less than 18 inches and a depth of not less than eight
inches.
E. Combination concrete curbs and gutters shall be constructed on a base
of sand, cinders or broken stone six inches in depth and extending 12
inches beyond the rear face of the curb and 12 inches beyond the face
of the curb. The dimensions shall be a total width of 30 inches for curbs
and gutters. The dimensions of the particular parts shall be as follows:
(1) The top of the curb shall be six inches in width; the rear face of the
curb shall be 12 inches; at the gutter elevation the width of the
curb shall be seven inches; the curb face at the gutter shall be six
inches in depth; and the gutter at street face shall be six inches in
depth.
(2) All exposed edges shall be rounded with a radius of 3/4 to one inch.
(3) Transverse joints shall be 1/2 inch wide and shall be installed every
20 feet.
(4) Joints are to be filled with cellular compression material as
specified and shall be recessed 1/4 inch from face and top of curb.
(5) Joints in the gutters shall be filled with premoulded bituminous
joint filler 1/2 inch thick, recessed 1/2 inch from top of gutter and
sealed as specified.
F. The concrete to be used for curbs and gutters shall be Class B concrete
as specified in the New Jersey State Highway Specifications for Curbs
and Gutters.
G. The curb shall be laid in a workmanlike manner as directed and
approved by the Township Engineer.
H. The curb at all delivery openings shall be depressed at the front of the
curb to a point one and one-half (1 1/2) inches above the finished
pavement.
I. The rear top corner of this curb shall have a radius of one-fourth (l/4)
inch, and the front top corner shall have a radius of one and one-half
(1 1/2) inches.
J. Curb openings shall be in such width as shall be determined by the
Township Engineer but in no case more than 15 feet at the edge of the
pavement.
§ 165-31 DENNIS CODE § 165-32
1:426
§ 165-33. Topsoil.
No topsoil shall be removed from areas intended for lawn or open space.
Topsoil moved during the course of construction shall be redistributed
within the subdivision so as to provide at least four inches of cover to all
areas of the subdivision and shall be stabilized by seeding or planting.
§ 165-34. Monuments.
Monuments shall be installed in compliance with the requirements of
N.J.S.A. 46:23.9.11q (9).
§ 165-35. Drainage system.
A. Sidewalks may be required to be provided in the following zones in
accordance with the standards under Section 165-29.2 and in the R-3
Rural Single-Family Residential.
B. Where required, sidewalks shall be four feet wide and located within
the street right-of-way four feet from the curb face or as defined in
Section 165-29.2B.
C. The street right-of-way outside the cartway shall be graded to produce
a slope of 1/4 inch per foot, sloping towards the cartway. This slope
shall also be applied to the sidewalks.
A. A preliminary grading and drainage system plan shall be part of the
preliminary plat. It shall indicate, in accordance with the requirements
of Subsection B hereof, a proposal for an adequate system of drainage
structures to carry off and store or discharge the stormwater runoff and
natural drainage water which originates not only within the property
boundaries but also that which originates beyond property boundaries.
[Amended 8-9-1982 by Ord. No. 82-96]
B. Within the Pinelands Area, all development shall comply with the
stormwater management standards of Chapter 163, Article II.
[Amended 8-9-1982 by Ord. No. 82-96]
C. Within the Pinelands Area, all development shall comply with the water
quality standards of Section 185-58 of Chapter 185, Zoning. [Added
4-24-1989 by Ord. No. 89-168]
D. Drainage structures which are located on state or county highway
rights-of-way shall be approved by the State or County Highway
Engineer's office, and a letter from that office indicating such approval
shall be directed to the Chairman of the Planning Board and shall be
received prior to the final plat approval. Drainage structures proposed
on a brook or stream with a drainage area of 1/2 square mile [320
acres] or greater shall be approved by the New Jersey Division of Water
Policy and Supply, and a letter from that office shall be directed to the
Planning Board Chairman. Within the Pinelands Area, the location of
drainage structures near stream corridors shall adhere to the
§ 165-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-35
1:427
§ 165-36. Public utilities.
provisions of Article IV, District Regulations, of Chapter 185, Zoning.
[Amended 8-9-1982 by Ord. No. 82-96]
E. The public improvement and utility plans and profiles shall show the
final drainage plan and street profiles. They shall be prepared and
submitted with the final plat after the approval of the preliminary plat
and drainage plan.
F. No stormwater runoff or natural drainage water shall be so diverted as
to overload existing drainage systems or create flooding or the need for
additional drainage structures on other private properties or public
lands without proper and approved provisions being made for taking
care of these conditions.
G. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway,
channel or stream, there shall be provided drainage rights-of-way
conforming substantially to the lines of such watercourse or the
enlarged right-of-way considered necessary to handle expected
stormwater runoff in the future based on reasonable growth potential in
the township. This shall be offered for dedication to the township for
drainage purposes. Such rights-of-way shall be shown on the drainage
plan and shall be of sufficient width to include a fifteen-foot access strip
beyond the bank top on at least one side for access to the drainage
right-of-way.
H. Land subject to periodic or occasional flooding shall not be plotted for
residential occupancy nor for any other use which may endanger life or
property or aggravate the flood hazard.
I. These drains or culverts shall consist of sections of cast-iron reinforced
concrete pipe or asbestos-cement storm pipe. All pipe shall comply with
the requirements of the current New Jersey State Highway Department
Specifications governing materials.
J. The location, length, depth, grade, type and size of pipe shall be
installed as indicated on the approved plans except where unusual or
exceptional soil or other conditions are discovered at the time of
construction which are not provided for in the plans, in which case such
construction shall be determined by the Township Engineer. Trenches
shall be bridged at all street crossings, intersecting streets and public
and private entrances in such a manner that traffic will not be
interrupted.
K. The contractor shall have a sufficient quantity of timber and equipment
constantly on hand for planking, sheet piling, fencing or shoring and
adequate pumping apparatus to meet all requirements of construction
for use in case of accident or emergency.
§ 165-35 DENNIS CODE § 165-36
1:428
§ 165-37. Natural features and public lands. [Amended 12-10-1990
by Ord. No. 90-205; Added 3-28-1994 by Ord. No. 94-260]
A. All public water, fire hydrants, storm sewer and sanitary sewer mains
should be installed in accordance with the specifications of the
governmental authority or district which has jurisdiction in the area.
B. In large-scale developments, easements along rear property lines or
elsewhere for utility installation may be required. Such easements shall
be at least 20 feet wide and located in consultation with the companies
and municipal departments concerned.
C. A letter approving such a proposed installation and a statement as to
who will carry out the construction, signed by a responsible official of
the utility company or governmental authority or district which has
jurisdiction in the area, shall be directed to the Chairman of the
Planning Board and shall be received prior to the final plat approval.
D. For all major subdivisions, the applicant shall arrange with the serving
utility for electricity and telephone for the underground installation of
the utilities, distribution supply lines and service connections in
accordance with the provisions of the applicable standard terms and
conditions incorporated as part of its tariff as the same are on file with
the State of New Jersey Board of Public Utility Commissioners and shall
submit to the Planning Board prior to the granting of final approval a
written instrument from each serving utility which shall evidence full
compliance with the provisions of this subsection; provided, however,
that lots in such subdivisions which abut existing streets where
overhead electric or telephone distribution supply lines have
theretofore been installed on any portion of the street involved may be
supplied with electric and telephone service from such overhead lines,
but the service connections from the utilities' overhead lines shall be
installed underground.
E. An installation under this section to be performed by a serving utility
shall be exempt from the provisions of Article VII requiring
performance guaranties and inspection and certification by the
Township Engineer. Where natural foliage is not sufficient to provide
year-round screening of any utility apparatus appearing above ground,
the applicant shall provide sufficient live screening to conceal such
apparatus year-round. On any lot where, by reason of soil conditions,
rock formations, wooded area or other special condition of the land, the
applicant deems it a hardship to comply with the provisions of this
subsection, the applicant may apply to the Planning Board for an
exception from the terms of this subsection, in accordance with the
procedure and provisions of § 165-6 this chapter.
A. Natural features, such as trees, hilltops and views, natural terrain and
natural drainage lines shall be preserved whenever possible in
designing any subdivision containing such features. Open waters shall
be recognized as community assets.
§ 165-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-37
1:429
§ 165-38. Land uses and community facilities.
B. A conscious effort shall be made to preserve all worthwhile trees and
shrubs which exist on site. On individual lots or parcels, care shall be
taken to preserve selected trees to enhance the landscape treatment of
the development.
(1) All development within the township shall be designed to avoid
irreversible adverse impacts on the survival of populations of
threatened or endangered plants as listed on the Tree Register.
(2) Where feasible and appropriate, buffer areas surrounding
proposed development shall be revegetated with equivalent
numbers of plantings as listed on the Natural Revegetation List. A
planting schedule shall be provided for these plants for review and
approval by the Board.
(3) Where possible, existing cleared areas shall be used for
improvements, thereby reducing the amount of clearing required
on a site.
(4) Areas that are cleared during construction but which will not
contain permanent improvements shall be limited and shall be
revegetated with natural vegetation as indicated on the Natural
Revegetation List.
(5) Where appropriate, revegetation of existing on-site open areas
shall be required if more than 25% of a tract is cleared.
(6) Clearing standards.
(a) The clearing of trees from proposed building sites is permitted
within 15 feet of a building foundation. Selective clearing of
other than mature trees is permitted within 30 feet of a
building foundation. Clearing may extend into side and rear
yard setbacks; however, a natural buffer a minimum of 20 feet
in width shall be maintained between the edge of clearing and
the side or rear property line.
(b) Subdivisions which locate new road rights-of-way may call for
the removal of trees from within fifteen (15) feet of each side of
the planned paved surface.
(7) Within the Pinelands Area portion of the township, development
shall be done in accordance with the Pinelands Area development
procedures and standards § 185-54, Clearing of vegetation;
landscaping, and § 185-61, Fire management, of the Township
Code.
A. Proposed land uses shall conform to the Zoning Ordinance of the
township, the Master Plan, the Official Map and the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 165-37 DENNIS CODE § 165-38
1:430
§ 165-39. Streetlighting.
Streetlighting standards of a type supplied by the utility and of a type and
number approved by the Township Engineer may be required to be installed
at street intersections and along arterial, primary and secondary collector
streets. Wherever this chapter requires the installation of electric utility
installations underground, the applicant shall provide for the installation of
underground service for streetlighting.
§ 165-40. Water supply.
§ 165-41. Sanitary sewers and septic systems.
B. Subdivision designs shall indicate consideration for suitable protection
of different types of land uses and the segregation of vehicular and
pedestrian traffic incompatible with particular uses.
C. Where a proposed park, playground, school or other public use shown
in the Master Plan is located in whole or in part in a subdivision or
development, such use may be required to be reserved within the
subdivision or land development in accordance with current state
statutes.
A. The owner shall construct water mains in such a manner as to make
adequate water service available to each lot or dwelling unit within the
subdivision or development. The entire system shall be designed in
accordance with the requirements and standards of the land and/or
state agency having approval authority and shall be subject to their
approval.
B. The system shall also be designed with adequate capacity and sustained
pressure.
C. Where no public water is accessible, water shall be furnished by the
subdivider on an individual-lot basis. Water supply systems shall be
constructed in accords with Chapter 199 of the Laws of 1954, and the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection's standards for
the Construction of Water Supply Systems for Realty Improvements
(revised 1966).
A. The owner shall construct sanitary sewers in such a manner as to make
adequate sanitary sewage treatment available to each lot within the
subdivision.
B. The entire system shall be designed in accordance with the
requirements of the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection and shall be subject to its approval. [Amended 8-9-1982 by
Ord. No. 82-96]
C. If, at the time of final approval, public sanitary facilities are not
available to the subdivision or land development but will become
available within a period of five years from the date of recording, the
§ 165-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-41
1:431
owner shall be required to install or cause to be installed at his expense,
sanitary sewers and sewer laterals to the street line in accordance
with the requirements and standards of the New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection and shall cap all laterals. Review and
approval by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
shall be required. [Amended 8-9-1982 by Ord. No. 82-96]
D. If public sewage treatment facilities are not available, the owner shall
provide for on-lot sewage disposal according to the rules, regulations,
terms, definitions and conditions of the State Department of
Environmental Protection and of the Zoning Ordinance. [Amended
8-9-1982 by Ord. No. 82-96]
E. If any portion of the proposed subdivision has an elevation of 10 feet or
less above the mean sea level, the applicant shall submit the plans of
the proposed sewage facilities to the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Bureau of Water Pollution Control, for its
review and comments. No building permit shall be issued for
construction until the Planning Board Chairman has received approval
of the proposed sewage facility from the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection. Note: Areas upon which fill has been placed
shall be considered on the basis of their original contours as
determined from previous surveys, where possible, or United States
Geological Survey Topographic Maps.
§ 165-41 DENNIS CODE § 165-41
1:432
ARTICLE VII
Performance Guaranty; Inspections; Certificate of Occupancy
[Amended 7-15-13 by Ord. No. 2013-03]
§ 165-42. Purpose of guaranty; estimate.
§ 165-43. Approval of guaranty by Township Attorney.
§ 165-44. Bonding and cash requirements.
A. No final plat shall be approved by the Planning Board until the
satisfactory completion and performance of all such required
improvements have been certified to the Planning Board by the
Township Engineer, unless the subdivision owner shall have filed with
the municipality a performance guaranty sufficient in amount to cover
the cost of all such improvements in uncompleted portions thereof as
estimated by the Township Engineer and assuring the installation of
such uncompleted improvements on or before an agreed date provided
that the agreed date shall in no case exceed three years from the initial
filing of the performance guaranty with the township.
B. A performance guaranty estimate shall be prepared by the Township
Engineer setting forth all requirements for improvements as fixed by
the Planning Board and their estimated cost. The Governing Body shall
pass a resolution either approving or adjusting this performance
guaranty estimate and resolution to the subdivider for use in obtaining
and posting a performance guaranty.
C. The approved performance guaranty estimate shall fix the
requirements of maintenance of the utilities and improvements to be
installed and completed by the subdivider. A surety company or cash
bond meeting the requirements hereinabove set forth may be furnished
to secure the maintenance guaranty, or the performance bond may be
styled or amended to provide such security in reduced amount in
keeping with the requirements.
A. The subdivider shall present two copies of the performance guaranty in
an amount equal to the amount of the approved performance guaranty
estimate for approval as to form and execution by the Township
Attorney.
B. The Township Attorney shall notify the Secretary of the Planning Board
prior to the Planning Board meeting that the performance guaranty is
properly executed and can be added to the agenda.
A. The performance guaranty shall be the approved performance guaranty
estimate; and, as surety, a performance bond in which the subdivider
shall be principal, the bond to be provided by an acceptable surety
company licensed to do business in the State of New Jersey, or cash or a
certified check shall be deposited with the Township of Dennis by
payment to the Township Treasurer. The Township Treasurer shall issue
§ 165-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-44
1:433
§ 165-45. Inspections.
its receipt for such cash deposits and shall cause the same to be
deposited in a bank named by and at the risk of the subdivider in
the name of the Township of Dennis to be retained as security for
completion of all requirements and to be returned to the subdivider
on completion of all required work and expiration of the period of
maintenance guaranty or, in the event of default on the part of the
subdivider, to be used by the Township of Dennis to pay the cost
and expense of obtaining completion of all requirements. Every bond,
whether cash or surety, shall contain a clause to the effect that a
determination by the Township Engineer that the principal has
defaulted in the performance of his obligation shall be binding and
conclusive upon the surety and the principal.
B. Ten percent of the amount of the approved performance guaranty
estimate shall be deposited by the subdivider in cash with the Township
of Dennis. The remaining 90% may be in cash or surety bond. In the
event of default, the ten-percent fund herein mentioned shall be first
applied to the completion of the requirements, and the cash or the
surety bond shall thereafter be resorted to, if necessary, for the
completion of the requirements. The cash or surety bond may recite the
foregoing provisions. The Township Engineer's determination that the
principal has defaulted in his obligation shall be binding and conclusive
upon the principal.
A. All improvements and utility installations shall be inspected during the
time of their installations under the supervision of the Township
Engineer to ensure satisfactory completion. The cost of said inspection
shall be the responsibility of the subdivider, and he shall deposit with
the Township Treasurer for placement in a special trust fund account a
sum equal to 5% of the amount of the performance guaranty estimate of
the cost of public improvements to be built in the subdivision to be
applied to payment of inspection costs. If inspection costs exceed such
fund, the subdivider shall deposit with the Township Treasurer
additional sums upon notice from the Township Engineer. The Township
Treasurer shall return any balance of the inspection deposit to the
subdivider upon expiration of the maintenance bond, together with the
paid invoices for all expenses charged. [Amended 3-20-07 by Ord.
No. 2007-03]
B. In no case shall any paving work, including prime and seal coats, be
done without permission from the Township Engineer's office. At least
two days' notice shall be given to the Township Engineer's office prior
to any such construction, so that he or a qualified representative may
be present at the time the work is to be done.
C. The Township Engineer's office shall be notified after each of the
following phases of the work has been completed so that he or a
qualified representative may inspect the work:
§ 165-44 DENNIS CODE § 165-45
1:434
§ 165-46. Release of guaranty.
The Governing Body shall, by resolution, release or declare in default each
performance guaranty. Such performance guaranty shall remain in effect
until released by the Governing Body. The amount of the performance
guaranty may be reduced by the Governing Body by resolution when
portions of the required improvements have been installed and have been
(1) Road subgrade.
(2) Curb and gutter forms.
(3) Curbs and gutters.
(4) Road paving.
(5) Sidewalk forms.
(6) Sidewalks.
(7) Drainage pipes and other drainage structures before backfilling.
(8) Street name signs.
(9) Sanitary sewers and/or septic tanks.
(10) Monuments.
D. A final inspection of all improvements and utilities will be started within
10 days of notification by the subdivider to determine whether the work
is satisfactory and in agreement with the approved final plat drawings
and the township specifications. The general condition of the site shall
also be considered. Upon a satisfactory final inspection report, action
will be taken to release or declare in default the performance guaranty
covering such improvements and utilities.
E. Inspection by the Township of Dennis of the installation of
improvements and utilities by the subdivider shall not operate to
subject the Township of Dennis to liability for claims, suits or liability of
any kind that may at any time arise because of defects or negligence
during construction or at any time thereafter, it being recognized that
the responsibility to maintain safe conditions at all times during
construction and to provide proper utilities and improvements is upon
the subdivider and his contractors, if any.
F. After completing the construction of the public improvements covered
by the performance guaranty, the subdivider shall prepare a set of the
approved public improvement and utility plans and the profiles
amended to read "as constructed" and apply to the Township Engineer
for final inspection of the work. The Township Engineer shall report to
the Governing Body on the condition of the work and recommended
that the performance guaranty be released, extended or declared in
default.
§ 165-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-46
1:435
inspected and approved by the Township Engineer; provided, however, that
no such reduction shall be approved until the Township Engineer shall
have certified the estimated cost of completing any remaining required
improvements. If any improvements have not been installed in accordance
with the performance guaranty, the obligor and surety shall be liable
thereon to the township for the reasonable cost over and above the tenpercent
cash deposit on the improvements not installed, and, upon receipt
of the proceeds thereof, the township shall install such improvements. The
township shall also have all other remedies as may be lawfully available.
§ 165-47. Acceptance of improvements.
The approval of any plat under this chapter by the Planning Board or
Governing Body, or both, shall in no way be construed as acceptance of
any street or drainage system or any other improvement required by this
chapter, nor shall such plat approval obligate the township in any way to
maintain or exercise jurisdiction over such street or drainage system or
other improvement. No improvement shall be accepted by the governing
body unless and until all of the following conditions have been met:
§ 165-48. Certificate of occupancy.
Occupancy permits will be issued only when the installation of any curb,
all utilities, all functioning water supply and sewage treatment facilities,
all necessary storm drainage to ensure proper drainage of the lot and
surrounding land, rough grading of lots, base course for the driveway and
base course for the streets are installed to serve the lot and structure for
which the permit is requested. Streets, if installed prior to final approval
shall not be paved until all heavy construction is completed; shade trees
shall not be planted until all grading and earth moving is completed; and
seeding of grass areas shall be the last operation. The issuance of a
A. The Township Engineer shall have certified, in writing, that the
improvements are complete and that they comply with the
requirements of this chapter.
B. The final plat shall have been approved by the Planning Board.
C. The subdivider shall have filed with the governing body a maintenance
guaranty in an amount equal to not more than 15% of the cost of the
improvements or the cost of the original installation of the
improvements and shall run for a period of two years. The procedures
and requirements governing such maintenance guaranty shall be
identical with the procedures and requirements for a performance
guaranty set forth in § 165-42 of this article. The requirements for a
maintenance guaranty may be waived by the governing body only if the
Township Engineer has certified that the improvements have been in
continuous use for not less than two years from the date the Township
Engineer certified completion of such improvements in accordance with
the provisions of Subsection A above and that during this period the
subdivider has maintained the improvements in a satisfactory manner.
§ 165-46 DENNIS CODE § 165-48
1:436
certificate of occupancy will follow the procedures outlined in the Dennis
Township Zoning Ordinance.
§ 165-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-48
1:437

ARTICLE VIII
Penalty
[Amended 7-15-13 by Ord. No. 2013-03]
§ 165-49. Violations and penalties.
§ 165-50. (Reserved)
A. If, before final subdivision approval has been granted, any person
transfers or sells or agrees to transfer or sell except pursuant to an
agreement expressly conditioned on final subdivision approval, as
owner or agent, any land which forms a part of a subdivision for which
municipal approval is required by ordinance pursuant to this chapter,
such person shall be subject to a penalty not to exceed $1,000 dollars;
and each lot disposition so made may be deemed a separate violation.
[Amended 1-31-1977 by Ord. No. 77-34]
B. In addition to the foregoing, the township may institute and maintain a
civil action: [Amended 1-31-1977 by Ord. No. 77-34]
(1) For injunctive relief.
(2) To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to such
a contract or sale if a certificate of compliance has not been issued
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-56.
C. In any such action, the transferee, purchaser or grantee shall be
entitled to a lien upon the portion of the land from which the
subdivision was made that remains in the possession of the subdivider
or his assigns or successors to secure the return of any deposit made or
purchase price paid and also a reasonable search fee, survey expense
and title closing expense. Any such action must be brought within two
years, after the date of the recording of the instrument of transfer, sale
or conveyance of said land or within six years if unrecorded.
§ 165-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-50
1:439

ARTICLE IX
Site Plan Review
[Added 8-12-96 by Ord. No. 96-12; Amended 11-12-96 by Ord. No.
96-17; Amended 7-15-13 by Ord. No. 2013-03]
§ 165-51. General provisions.
A. Except as hereinafter provided, no building permit shall be issued for
any structure until a site plan has been reviewed and approved by the
Township of Dennis, except that:
(1) A building permit for a single-family detached dwelling unit and its
accessory building(s) on a lot, including customary accessory
buildings incidental to farms including farm markets shall not
require site plan approval.
(2) Any addition or alteration to an existing conforming nonresidential
structure which does not account for more than 10% additional
building coverage shall not require site plan approval if, in the
opinion of the Zoning Officer, such addition or alteration will not
create nuisance problems to adjacent land uses.
B. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until all terms of the
approved site plan have been met.
C. The owner or applicant shall submit 17 sets of plans to the
administrative officer at least 10 days but not more than 14 days prior
to the meeting at which discussion is desired, together with 17
completed copies of the application form. The administrative officer
shall immediately forward the plans to the Zoning Officer, who shall
preliminarily screen the submitted application for completeness of
information and forward said application to either the Planning Board
or Zoning Board of Adjustment in accordance with the respective
Board's authorities as stipulated in Article IX of this chapter. Should
action by both the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment be
required, the application shall be forwarded first to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment for variance action and then to the Planning Board for site
plan review if and when the Zoning Board of Adjustment has granted
approval to the elements of the plan under its authority. [Amended
3-20-07 by Ord. No. 2007-03]
D. Should the submitted plans be deemed incomplete by either the Zoning
Officer, Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may
be, the developer shall be notified within 45 days of the submission and
may thereafter submit an appropriately revised application to the
administrative officer as in the original case.
E. The applicant shall submit one copy of the application form plus two
copies of the site plan and all supporting documents and data to the
County Planning Board for its review and action in conformity with the
adopted Cape May County Site Plan Review Resolution. The County
§ 165-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-51
1:441
§ 165-52. Powers of Planning Board.
§ 165-53. Powers of Zoning Board of Adjustment.
The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to grant site plan approval to
the same extent and subject to the same restrictions as the Planning Board
when reviewing an application for approval of a use variance pursuant to
the Zoning Chapter.
§ 165-54. Preliminary approval.
Planning Board shall have 30 days from the receipt of the site plan to
report to the township. In the event of disapproval, such report shall
state the specific reasons therefor. If the County Planning Board fails
to report to the township within the 30 day period, said site plan shall
be deemed to be approved by the County Planning Board. Upon mutual
agreement between the County Planning Board and the township, with
approval of the applicant, the 30 day period may be extended for an
additional 30 day period; however, any such extension shall not extend
the time within which the township is required to act.
A. The Planning Board shall have the power to review and approve or deny
conditional uses or site plans simultaneously with review for
subdivision approval without the developer being required to make
further application. The longest time period for action by the Planning
Board, whether it is for subdivision, conditional use or site plan
approval, shall apply. Whenever approval of a conditional use is
requested by a developer pursuant to this section, public notice shall be
required in accordance with Section 165-57 of this chapter.
B. The Planning Board shall have the power to act in lieu of the Board of
Adjustment and subject to the same extent and restrictions as the Board
of Adjustment on the following matters. Whenever approval is
requested by a developer pursuant to this section, public notice shall be
required in accordance with Section 165-57 of this chapter. The
Planning Board shall have the power to:
(1) Grant variances, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60c from lot area, lot
dimension, setback and yard requirements, provided that relief
pursuant to this subsection from lot area requirements shall not be
granted for more than one lot.
(2) Direct, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34, the issuance of a permit for
a building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public
drainageway, flood-control basin or public area reserved pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32.
(3) Direct, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36, the issuance of a permit for
a building or structure not related to a street.
A. Procedure.
§ 165-51 DENNIS CODE § 165-54
1:442
(1) The Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case
may be, shall review the proposal, determine whether or not the
applicable standards provided by this article and the Zoning
Chapter have been observed, note objections to such parts of the
plans as do not meet the standards, make corrections and
recommendations for desired changes to effect compliance and be
satisfied that the site plan represents the most desirable alternative
for development of the site in compliance with this article and the
Zoning Chapter and, when satisfied that the site plan complies with
the requirements of those requirements, shall grant preliminary
approval.
(2) Upon the submission of a complete application for a site plan for 10
acres of land or less, the Planning Board shall grant or deny
preliminary approval within 45 days of the date of such submission,
or within such further time as may be consented to by the
developer. Upon the submission of a complete application for a site
plan of more than 10 acres or whenever an application includes a
request for relief pursuant to Section 165-52 of this article, the
Planning Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within
ninety- five (95) days of the date of such submission, or within such
further time as may be consented to by the developer. Otherwise,
the Planning Board shall be deemed to have granted preliminary
approval of the site plan.
(3) Upon the submission of a complete application for a site plan, the
Zoning Board of Adjustment shall grant or deny preliminary
approval within 120 days of the date of such submission or within
such further time as may be consented to by the developer.
(4) The Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case
may be, shall have the power to grant such exceptions from the
requirements for site plan approval as may be reasonable if the
literal enforcement of one or more provisions of this article or the
Zoning Chapter is impracticable or will exact undue hardship
because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question.
(5) Should minor revisions or additions to the plan be deemed
necessary, the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as
the case may be, may grant preliminary approval subject to
specified conditions. Should major revisions to the plan be deemed
necessary, the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as
the case may be, shall require that an amended plan be submitted
and proceeded upon as in the case of the original application for
preliminary approval.
B. Details required for preliminary approval.
(1) Each site plan submitted shall be at a scale of one inch equals fifty
feet (1" = 50') for a tract up to 40 acres in size; one inch equals one
hundred feet (1" = 100') for a tract between 40 and 150 acres; and
§ 165-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-54
1:443
one inch equals two hundred feet (1" = 200') for a tract 150
acres or more. The various elements of the site plan shall be
prepared by the professionals as required in N.J.A.C. 13:40-7.1
through 13:40-7.3, licensed to practice in the State of New Jersey,
submitted on one of four of the following standard sheet sizes:
eight and one-half by thirteen (8 1/2 by 13) inches, fifteen by
twenty-one (15 x 21) inches, twenty- four by thirty-six (24 x 36)
inches, thirty by forty-two (30 x 42) inches, and including the
following data. [If one sheet is not sufficient to contain the entire
territory, the map may be divided into sections to be shown on
separate sheets of equal sizes, with references on each sheet to the
adjoining sheets.]
(a) A certified outbounds and topographic survey prepared by a
land surveyor licensed in the State of New Jersey shall
accompany site plans and shall show the boundaries of the
parcel, proposed building setback lines, existing and proposed
lot lines and the limits of all proposed streets, recreation areas
and other property to be dedicated to public use or to common
open space.
(b) A North arrow.
(c) The date.
(d) The scale.
(e) The zone district(s) in which the lot(s) is (are) located.
(f) Existing and proposed streets and street names.
(g) Existing contour lines at two-foot intervals inside the tract and
within 50 feet of the tract's boundaries and the proposed
finished grades on site.
(h) Title of the plans.
(i) Existing and proposed streams and easements.
(j) The total building coverage in acres and percent of lot.
(k) The total number of parking spaces.
(l) All dimensions needed to confirm conformity to the Zoning
Chapter, such as but not limited to buildings, lot lines, parking
spaces, setbacks and yards.
(m) A key map, taken from the current Zoning Map, giving the
general location of the parcel to the remainder of the
municipality.
(n) The site in relation to all remaining lands in the applicant's
ownership.
§ 165-54 DENNIS CODE § 165-54
1:444
(o) A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan pursuant to
requirements of N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.
(2) Each site plan submitted to the township for approval shall have
the following information shown thereon or annexed thereto:
(a) The size, height, location and arrangement of all existing and
proposed buildings, structures and signs in accordance with
the requirements of this article and the Zoning Chapter,
including a rendering of a typical building and sign. Such plans
shall indicate those buildings to remain, the building design
and material(s) to be used, the proposed use(s) and the floor
plan(s). The location, arrangement and construction of
buildings shall be such as to provide for the maximum
conservation of energy and shall, to the extent practical,
promote the use of solar energy.
(b) Proposed circulation plans, including access streets, curbs,
aisles and lanes, easements, fire lanes, driveways, parking
spaces, loading areas, loading berths or docks, pedestrian
walks and all related facilities for the movement and storage of
goods, vehicles and persons on the site in accordance with
applicable requirements of this article and the Zoning Chapter,
including the location of lights, lighting standards and signs
and driveways within the tract and within 100 feet of the tract.
Sidewalks shall be provided from the primary building
entrances and exits along expected paths of pedestrian travel,
such as but not limited to access to parking lots, driveways,
other buildings on the site and across common yard spaces
between buildings where pedestrian traffic can be expected to
be concentrated. Plans shall be accompanied by cross sections
of streets, aisles, lanes and driveways which shall adhere to
applicable requirements of this article and the Zoning Chapter
and applicable design standards in the Subdivision Chapter.
(c) Existing and proposed wooded areas, vegetation types, buffer
areas and landscaping. The landscaping plan, including seeded
and/or sodded areas, grading, retaining walls, fencing, signs,
recreation areas, shrubbery, trees and buffer areas shall be in
accordance with applicable requirements of this article and the
Zoning Chapter and applicable design standards in the
Subdivision Chapter. These plans shall show the location and
type of any man-made improvements and the location, species
and caliper of plant material for all planted or landscaped
areas. For applications in the Pinelands Area, landscaping
plans shall incorporate the elements set forth in Section
185-54D of the Zoning Chapter. [Amended 2-24-97 by Ord.
No. 97-01]
(d) The proposed location of all drainage, sewage and water
facilities with proposed grades, sizes, capacities and types of
§ 165-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-54
1:445
materials to be used, including any drainage easements
acquired or required across adjoining properties. The method
of sewage and waste disposal and waste incineration, if any,
shall be shown, and percolation tests and test borings from
sufficient locations on the site to allow a determination of
adequacy by the Township Board of Health or Planning/Zoning
Board Engineer shall be included where septic tanks and
leaching fields are permitted and are proposed. Such plans
shall be reviewed by the Board of Health and Planning/Zoning
Board Engineer, as applicable, with recommendations to the
Board. Proposed lighting facilities shall be included, showing
the direction and reflection of the lighting. Whenever possible,
the developer shall arrange with the servicing utility for the
underground installation of the utilities' distribution and
supply lines and service connections. Lots which abut existing
streets where overhead electric or telephone distribution
supply lines and service connections have heretofore been
installed may be supplied with electric and telephone service
from these overhead lines, but any new service connections
from the utilities' overhead lines shall be installed
underground whenever possible. In cases where total
electrical and telephone load and service cannot be
determined in advance, such as industrial parks, shopping
centers, etc., perimeter utility poles may be used, but service
to building from poles shall be underground whenever
possible.
(e) A written description of the proposed operations of the
building(s), including:
[1] The number of employees or members of nonresidential
buildings.
[2] The proposed number of shifts to be worked and the
maximum number of employees on each shift.
[3] Expected truck and tractor-trailer traffic.
[4] The emission of noise, glare, air and water pollution.
[5] Safety hazards.
[6] Anticipated expansion plans incorporated in the building
design.
(f) All lands under the control of the State Department of
Environmental Protection and included in the Wetlands Act
and/or Coastal Area Facility Review Act shall be delineated;
and appropriate permits from the Department shall be
submitted to the Board prior to the granting of site plan
approval. Within the Pinelands Area, all wetlands, as defined in
this chapter, shall also be identified.
§ 165-54 DENNIS CODE § 165-54
1:446
(g) Within the Pinelands Area, any additional information that may
be required pursuant to Section 185-49 of the Zoning Chapter.
(h) For any proposed commercial uses fronting on a state highway,
a traffic impact study, to include anticipated traffic volumes,
capacity of existing and proposed roadways, traffic volume
impact from other sources, roadway network problems (e.g.,
unsafe intersections, turns and grades), and the need for traffic
signals and other improvements. The Board may require
similar traffic studies in connection with any proposed
development, commercial or residential, that, in the Board's
reasonable judgment, raises issues of traffic generation and
circulation that affect any of the purposes for which this article
or the Zoning Chapter was enacted.
(i) The Board may require an environmental impact study in
connection with any site plan application whose environmental
impact may, in the Board's reasonable judgment, affect any of
the purposes for which this article or the Zoning Chapter was
enacted (see § 185-41K). The impact statement shall include
the following information:
[1] An inventory of existing environmental conditions at the
project site and the adjacent region which shall describe
air quality, water quality and supply, hydrology, soils,
topography, vegetation, wildlife, aquatic organisms,
demography, land use, aesthetics, history and archeology.
[2] A listing of all licenses, permits or other approvals as
required by law and the status of each.
[3] An assessment of the probable impact of the project upon
the topics described in paragraph [1] above.
[4] A listing of adverse environmental impacts which cannot
be avoided both at the site and in the surrounding region.
[5] Steps taken to minimize adverse impacts during
construction and operation.
[6] Alternatives to all or part of the project with reasons for
their acceptability or nonacceptability.
[7] Fiscal impact study.
C. Effect of preliminary approval.
(1) Preliminary approval of a site plan shall confer upon the applicant
the following rights for a three year period from the date of the
preliminary approval:
(a) That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be changed, including but not
§ 165-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-54
1:447
§ 165-55. Final approval.
limited to use requirements; layout and design standards for
streets, curbs and sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions; and offtract
improvements.
(b) That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before
the expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or a
section or sections of the preliminary site plan.
(c) That the applicant may apply for and the Board may grant
extensions on such preliminary approval for additional periods
of at least one year, but not to exceed a total extension of two
years, provided that if the design standards have been revised
by article, such revised standards may govern.
(2) Within the Pinelands Area, the provisions of Section 185-49E of the
Zoning Chapter shall be supplemental hereto.
A. Procedure.
(1) The municipal authority (either the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment) which acted on the preliminary site plan shall
conduct final site plan review.
(2) The Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case
may be, shall review the proposal and consider all applicable
standards of this article and the Zoning Chapter, and any
conditions of preliminary approval which may have been stipulated
and, when satisfied that the site plan represents the most desirable
alternative for development of the site in compliance with these
requirements shall grant final approval.
(3) Final approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days after
submission of a complete application, or within such further time
as may be consented to by the applicant. Failure of either Board to
act within the period prescribed shall constitute final approval.
(4) No building permit shall be issued by the Construction Official for
any structure until the final site plan has been reviewed and
approved by the township and until receipt of a written report from
the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may
be, or the expiration of the 45 day time period, whichever comes
first. If no report is received during the specified time period, the
Construction Official may thereupon issue the permit. In the event
that the plan is disapproved, no building permit shall be issued.
(5) Within the Pinelands Area, the provisions of Section 185-49 of the
Zoning Chapter shall also apply.
B. Details required for final approval.
(1) All details stipulated in Section 165-54B above shall be included.
§ 165-54 DENNIS CODE § 165-55
1:448
§ 165-56. Public hearing.
(2) All additional details required at the time of preliminary approval
shall be submitted.
(3) Detailed architectural and engineering data, including:
(a) An architect's rendering of each building or a typical building
and sign showing front, side and rear elevations.
(b) Cross sections of streets, aisles, lanes and driveways which
shall adhere to applicable requirements of the Zoning Chapter
and applicable design standards in the Subdivision Ordinance.
(4) Within the Pinelands Area, any additional information that may be
required pursuant to Section 185-49 of the Zoning Chapter.
C. Effect of final approval.
(1) Final approval of a site plan shall confer upon the applicant the
following rights for a two year period from the date of final
approval:
(a) The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary
approval first granted and all other rights conferred upon the
developer, whether conditionally or otherwise, shall not be
changed.
(b) If the developer has followed the standards prescribed for final
approval, the Board may extend the period of protection for
extensions of one year each, not exceeding three such
extensions.
(2) Within the Pinelands Area, the provisions of Section 185-49 of the
Zoning Chapter shall be supplemental hereto.
(3) After site plan approval has been granted and prior to issuing a
building permit, the applicant shall tender the township a fee, in
cash or certified check, based on the Township Engineer's
estimated cost for on-site improvements which directly or
indirectly affect public streets and lands within the township and
off-site improvements, including but not limited to streets, curbs,
aisles, lanes, driveways, parking spaces, loading areas, lighting,
sidewalks, walls, fences, storm drainage, sanitary sewerage and
water, grading and landscaping, the purpose for said fee being
designated to cover costs for inspection of the improvements. All
such fees shall be placed in an escrow account by the township and
shall be equivalent to 2% of the estimated cost for the designated
improvements, as determined by the Township Engineer, provided
that the minimum deposit shall be $200 dollars.
§ 165-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-56
1:449
§ 165-57. Public notice of hearing.
A. The Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be,
shall hold a hearing on each application for development. Each Board
shall make the rules governing such hearings.
B. Any maps and documents for which approval is sought at a hearing
shall be on file and available for public inspection at least 10 days
before the date of the hearing during normal business hours in the
office of the Township Clerk. The applicant may produce other
documents, records or testimony at the hearing to substantiate or
clarify or supplement the previously filed maps and documents.
C. The officer presiding at the hearing or such persons as he may
designate shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
evidence, including witnesses and documents presented by the parties,
and the provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law, P.L.
1953, c. 38 (N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
D. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding
officer, and the right of cross-examination shall be permitted to all
interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if
not represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to
reasonable limitations as to time and number of witnesses.
E. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the hearing, but
the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious
evidence.
F. The Pinelands Commission may participate in a hearing held by the
township involving the development of land in the Pinelands Area
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.26.
A. Public notice of a hearing shall be given for:
(1) Any request for a variance.
(2) Any request for a conditional use approval.
(3) Any request for the issuance of a permit.
(4) Any preliminary site plan approval containing one or more of the
aforesaid requests.
(5) An applicant may elect to submit a separate application for a
variance, conditional use approval or request for issuance of permit
as noted above and a subsequent application for preliminary site
plan approval. Further, the Planning Board or Zoning Board may
elect to grant an approval for a variance, conditional use or
issuance of a permit and not act on a submitted preliminary site
plan because of changes necessitated by the other type of approval
§ 165-56 DENNIS CODE § 165-57
1:450
granted or for any other appropriate reason. In all such cases,
public notice of the subsequent hearing relating to preliminary site
plan approval shall be required notwithstanding the subsequent
separate submission of an application for site plan approval.
[Added 4-26-99 by Ord. No. 99-07]
B. The Secretary of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as
the case may be, shall notify the applicant at least two weeks prior to
the public hearing at which the application will be discussed. Notice of
a hearing requiring public notice shall be given by the applicant at least
10 days prior to the date of the hearing:
(1) By publication in the official newspaper of the municipality, if there
is one, or in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality.
(2) To all owners of real property as shown on the current tax duplicate
located within 200 feet in all directions of the property which is the
subject of the hearing, which notice shall be given by serving a
copy thereof on the property owner, as shown on the current tax
duplicate, or his agent in charge of the property, or by mailing a
copy thereof, by certified mail, to the property owner at his address
as shown on said current tax duplicate. It is not required that a
return receipt be obtained. Notice is deemed complete upon
mailing (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-14).
(3) To a partnership owner by service upon any partner or to a
corporate owner by service upon its president, a vice president, a
secretary or other person authorized by appointment or by law to
accept service on behalf of the corporation.
(4) To the Municipal Clerk of any adjoining municipality or
municipalities when the property involved is located within 200
feet of said adjoining municipality or municipalities, which notice
shall be given by personal service or certified mail.
(5) (Reserved for Future Use)
(6) To the Commissioner of Transportation of the State of New Jersey
when the property abuts a state highway.
(7) To the State Planning Commission when the hearing involves an
application for development of property which exceeds 150 acres
or 500 dwelling units, in which case the notice shall include a copy
of any maps or documents to be on file with the Township Clerk.
(8) Within the Pinelands Area, to the Pinelands Commission when the
application is subject to the provisions of Section 185-49 of the
Zoning Chapter. Such notice shall contain at least the following
information:
(a) The name and address of the applicant.
§ 165-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-57
1:451
§ 165-58. Requirements within Pinelands Area.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, site plan applications,
reviews and approvals shall adhere to the requirements of Section 185-49
of the Zoning Chapter.
§ 165-59. Minor site plans.
(b) The docket number of the certificate of filing, if any, issued by
the Pinelands Commission and the date on which it was issued.
(c) The date, time and location of the meeting, hearing or other
formal proceeding.
(d) The name of the approval agency or representative thereof
which will be conducting the meeting, hearing or other formal
proceeding.
(e) Any written reports or comments received by the approval
agency on the application for development which have not
been previously submitted to the Pinelands Commission.
(f) The purpose for which the meeting, hearing or other formal
proceeding is to be held.
C. Upon the written request of an applicant, the Township Tax Assessor
shall, within seven days, make and certify a list, from said current tax
duplicates, of names and addresses of owners within Dennis Township
to whom the applicant is required to give notice. The applicant shall be
charged $10 dollars for said list and shall be entitled to rely upon the
information contained in such list, and failure to give notice to any
owner not on the list shall not invalidate any hearing or proceeding.
Additionally, the applicant shall be responsible for giving proper notice
to all property owners, pursuant to Subsection B(2) above, who do not
reside in Dennis Township.
D. The applicant shall file an affidavit of proof of service with the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be.
E. The notice shall state the date, time and place of the hearing and the
nature of the matters to be considered, an identification of the property
proposed for development by street address, if any, or by reference to
lot and block numbers as shown on the current tax duplicate in the
Municipal Tax Assessor's office and the location and times at which any
maps or documents for which approval is sought are available for
inspection.
A. Waiver of site plan application. The Planning Board and/or Zoning
Board may waive the requirements for site plan approval where there is
a change in use or occupancy, and minimal construction or
improvements. The waiver may be granted only upon a resolution by
the Planning Board and/or Zoning Board finding that the use will not
§ 165-57 DENNIS CODE § 165-59
1:452
affect existing drainage, traffic circulation, relationship of buildings
to each other, landscaping, buffering, lighting, parking requirements
and other considerations of site plan approval, and that the existing
facilities do not require upgraded or additional site improvements. The
application for a waiver of site plan shall include a discussion of the
prior use of the site, the proposed use, and its impact. The waiver can
be granted only at a public meeting. Notice under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12
shall not be required for a waiver application.
B. Any site plan which proposes building alterations or expansions which
do not increase the gross floor area of the structure by more than 30%,
proposed the addition of five or fewer parking spaces, does not involve
any planned development or any new street or extension of any off-tract
improvement and contains the information reasonably required in order
to make an informed determination as to whether the requirements
established by ordinance for approval as a minor site plan have been
met shall qualify as a minor site plan. In addition, any application for
development which entails the moving of a building or buildings over,
along or across highways, streets, roads, lanes and/or alleys of the
Township of Dennis for placement on a lot in the Township of Dennis,
unless the same shall qualify as a manufactured home within the
definition contained in N.J.S.A. 54:4-1.4d, shall qualify as a minor site
plan.
C. Plan information.
(1) All minor site plans shall include all applicable information
required in Subsection A and the requirements of Section 165-54B
as determined by the Board's professional.
(2) Minor site plans involving the moving of buildings over, along or
across highways, streets, roads, lanes and/or alleys in the Township
of Dennis as specified in Subsection A above shall, in addition to the
information required in this article, provide the following:
(a) The highways, streets and alleys over, along or across which
the building is proposed to be moved.
(b) The proposed date and time for the moving of said house.
(c) The name and address of the person who shall perform the
moving of the building.
(d) A statement as to whether the building to be moved shall be
utilized as the primary residence of the applicant.
D. Notice. Minor site plans for house moving as set forth herein shall
provide notice of the hearing therefor at least 10 days prior to the day
of said hearing, in the following manner:
(1) By publication in the official newspaper of the municipality, if there
is one, or in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality.
§ 165-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-59
1:453
§ 165-60. Applicability.
Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to exempt from site plan review
any development resulting from the moving of any building or buildings
over, along or across highways, streets, roads, lanes and/or alleys of the
Township of Dennis for placement on any lot in the Township of Dennis
unless the same qualifies as a manufactured home as defined in N.J.S.A.
54:4-1.4d.
§ 165-61. Site plan review; inspection and performance guaranty;
variance and conditional use permit.
Every application for a site plan review or request for a variance shall be
accompanied by a check payable to the Township of Dennis in accordance
with the following schedule:
(2) To all owners of real property as shown on the current tax duplicate
located within 1,000 feet in all directions of the property which is
the subject of the hearing. This requirement shall be deemed
satisfied by notice to the condominium association in the case of
any unit owner whose unit has a unit above or below it or horizontal
property regime in the case of any co-owner whose apartment has
an apartment above or below it. This notice shall be given by
serving a copy thereof on the property or by mailing a copy thereof,
by certified mail, to the property owner at his address as shown on
the current tax duplicate. It is not required that a return receipt be
obtained. Notice is deemed complete upon mailing (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-14).
A. Site plan review.
(1) Each applicant at the time of submission shall pay an application
fee as provided in Article II of Chapter 98, Fees.
(2) In addition, each applicant shall deposit, in cash or certified check,
an escrow fee as provided in Article II of Chapter 98, Fees, with the
Chief Financial Officer, to cover the costs of professional services
and review, including engineering and legal or other incidental
expenses connected with processing, reviewing and checking all
materials.
(3) Where there shall be more than one tenant on a lot, the fee shall be
based on the percentage cost devoted to that tenant's use.
(4) Sums not utilized in the review process shall be returned to the
applicant. If additional sums are deemed necessary, the applicant
shall be notified of the required additional amount and shall add
such sum to the escrow.
B. Inspection fees and performance guaranty.
§ 165-59 DENNIS CODE § 165-61
1:454
§ 165-62. Certified court reporter.
If an applicant desires a certified court reporter, the cost of taking testimony
and transcribing it and providing a copy of the transcript to the township
(1) After site plan approval has been granted and prior to issuing a
building permit, the applicant shall tender the township a fee, in
cash or certified check, based on the Township Engineer's
estimated cost for on-site improvements which directly or
indirectly affect public streets and lands within the township and
off-site improvements, including but not limited to streets, curbs,
aisles, lanes, driveways, parking spaces, loading areas, lighting,
sidewalks, walls, fences, storm drainage, sanitary sewerage and
water, grading and landscaping, the purpose for said fee being
designated to cover costs for inspection of the improvements. All
such fees shall be placed in an escrow account by the township and
shall be equivalent to 5% of the estimated cost for the designated
improvements, as determined by the Township Engineer, provided
that the minimum deposit shall be $500 dollars. [Amended
3-20-07 by Ord. No. 2007-03]
(2) Where there shall be more than one tenant on a lot, the fee shall be
based on the percentage cost devoted to that tenant's use.
(3) Sums not utilized in the inspection process shall be returned to the
applicant. If additional sums are deemed necessary, the applicant
shall be notified of the required additional amount and shall add
such sum to the escrow.
(4) All of the above improvements shall be subject to inspection and
approved by the Township Engineer, who shall be notified by the
applicant at least 48 hours prior to the start of construction. No
underground installation subgrade and/or stages of paving or other
work done in stages shall be poured, covered, backfilled or
removed until inspected and improved. Electrical, gas and
telephone utilities' distribution lines are exempt from this
inspection requirement.
(5) A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until all the required
improvements have been installed and approved in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter or until a performance guaranty
acceptable to the Governing Body, in a form guaranteeing
completion of the remaining improvements within one year and
approved by the Township Attorney and in an amount determined
to be sufficient to assure completion of all the remaining
improvement(s), is in hand.
C. Requests for variances. Each application for a use variance or
conditional use permit shall be accompanied by an application and
escrow fee as provided in Article II of Chapter 98, Fees.
§ 165-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-62
1:455
shall be at the expense of the applicant, who shall also arrange for the
reporter's attendance.
§ 165-62 DENNIS CODE § 165-62
1:456
Chapter 168
TAXATION
§ 165-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-62
1:457

ARTICLE I
Personal Property Exemption
[Adopted 4-19-1961 as Ord. No. 3-61]
§ 168-1. Exemption granted.
All tangible household personal property and personal effects located within
the Township of Dennis shall not be assessed and taxed.
§ 168-2. Applicability.
This Article shall apply to taxes on tangible household personal property
and personal effects due and payable in the year 1962 and thereafter so
long as this Article shall be in effect and shall not affect the obligation,
lien or duty to pay any taxes, interest or penalties which have accrued or
may accrue by virtue of any assessment made which may be made with
respect to taxes levied for any year prior to the year 1962; nor shall this
Article affect the legal authority to assess and collect taxes which may be
or have been due and payable prior to January 1, 1962, together with such
interest and penalties as would have accrued thereon under any provisions
of law amended or repealed hereby, nor shall this Article invalidate any
assessments or affect any proceedings for the enforcement thereof pending
upon the effective date of this Article or upon January 1, 1962, or during the
period between said dates.
§ 168-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-2
1:459

ARTICLE II
Payment Prior to Issuance of Licenses and Permits
[Adopted 4-24-1989 as Ord. No. 89-169]
§ 168-3. Payment required.
§ 168-4. Proof of payment.
Sufficient proof of payment of such taxes shall be a receipt from the
Township Tax Collector or any other properly authenticated document from
the Township Tax Collector declaring that the local real property taxes for
the property in question are current.
A. Any applicant for a permit, license, approval or relief used or usable in
connection with a designated parcel of real property located in the
Township of Dennis shall submit proof with such application that all real
estate tax installments assessed and payable against such real property
have been paid in accordance with N.J.S.A. 54:4-66.
B. No permit, license, approval or relief used or usable in connection with
a designated parcel of real property located in the Township of Dennis
shall be issued by any board, body, officer or employee of the Township
of Dennis unless all real estate tax installments assessed and payable
against such real property have been paid in accordance with N.J.S.A.
54:4-66.
§ 168-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-4
1:461

ARTICLE III
Payment Prior to Payment of Claims for Fire Loss
[Adopted 7-13-1992 as Ord. No. 92-233]
§ 168-5. Payment required from insurance company.
§ 168-6. Interpretation.
The provisions of this Article are intended to be interpreted in conjunction
with N.J.S.A. 17:36-8 through N.J.S.A. 17:36-13, and the provisions of said
statutes are herein incorporated by reference.
A. Conditions prerequisite to payment.
(1) No insurance company authorized to issue fire insurance policies in
the State of New Jersey which issues or renews any fire insurance
policy after the adoption of this Article and the filing of same with
the State Commissioner of Insurance shall pay any claims for fire in
excess of $2,500 on any real property within the Township of
Dennis unless or until such time as:
(a) Anticipated demolition costs and all taxes and assessments and
all other municipal liens or charges due shall have been paid in
full;
(b) All taxes and assessments and all other municipal liens or
charges due and payable to the Township of Dennis appearing
on the efficient certification of search for municipal liens shall
have been paid in full; or
(c) The municipality submits to the insurance company a copy of a
resolution adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 17:36-11.
(2) If the demolition has not yet occurred on the date of receipt by the
municipality, the insured shall provide an estimate of the costs of
demolition. The insurer on notice to the insured shall pay the
anticipated cost of demolition to the municipality, which shall hold
the funds in an interest-bearing escrow account pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 17:36-8.
B. If an appeal is taken on the amount of any lien or charge, other than an
appeal on the assessed valuation of real property, the insurance
company shall issue a draft payable to the court of record, pursuant to
NJ.S.A. 17:36-10, in an amount totaling 75% of the full amount of the
lien or charge being contested, and the insurance company shall issue a
draft payable to the municipality for the remaining 25% of the lien or
charge being contested, with the full amount paid by the insurance
company to the court and municipality not to exceed the proceed
payable under its insurance policy, at which time such moneys and all
interest be disbursed in accordance with the final order or judgment of
the court.
§ 168-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-6
1:463
Chapter 172
TRAILERS AND TRAILER PARKS
§ 168-6 DENNIS CODE § 168-6
1:464
ARTICLE I
Trailers
[Adopted 6-28-1965 as Ord. No. 65-4]
§ 172-1. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TRAILER — Includes any device or unit commonly known as a "trailer,"
"house trailer," "trailer coach," "mobile home," "camp car" or similar unit
used or capable of being used for living, sleeping or business purposes
by one or more persons and equipped with or capable of being equipped
with wheels or similar devices used for transporting said unit from place to
place, whether said unit is self-propelled or otherwise; and also includes any
unit which at any time heretofore was manufactured or designed for any of
said purposes or intended to be used for any of said purposes.
§ 172-2. Parking.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a trailer for any period exceeding
two hours on any public street or highway within the Township of Dennis
or on any private premises within said township, except for the purpose of
repair or storage, and during such repair or storage, it shall be unlawful to
have any utility connection to said trailer, and it shall be unlawful for any
person to occupy said trailer.
§ 172-3. Removal of wheels; affixment,
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or cause to have removed
the wheels or similar transporting device from any trailer; and it shall be
unlawful to permanently affix any trailer to the ground or to a foundation or
footing in a manner which would prevent ready relocation of said trailer.71
§ 172-3.1. Emergency situations. [Added 2-24-1992 by Ord. No.
92-225]
For other than declared emergencies pursuant to New Jersey and/ or federal
statutes, it shall be unlawful for any person to use a trailer for purposes of
habitation except as provided hereunder.
A. In the event that a homeowner is displaced from his single-family
dwelling because the same has suffered damage equal to or in excess of
75% of the entire structure, then, and in that case only, said homeowner
may make application to the Construction Official for a permit to inhabit
a temporary trailer. Such application must be accompanied by the
following.
71.Editor's Note: Former Section 4, which provided penalties for violations and which
immediately followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I. For current penalty provisions, see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
§ 1-9.
§ 172-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-3.1
1:465
§ 172-3.2. Penalties. [Added 2-24-1992 by Ord. No. 92-225]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any term or provision
of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500 or
imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or both. For purposes of this chapter,
each twenty-four-hour period during which the violation exists shall
constitute a separate and distinct violation of this chapter.
(1) Evidence that the applicant is the owner of the land in question;
(2) A description of the land on which the trailer is to be placed;
(3) Evidence that the preexisting single-family dwelling unit suffered
damage of 75% or more;
(4) Proof that said damage has rendered the dwelling uninhabitable;
(5) Proof that the homeowner resided therein prior to the damage;
(6) Proof that the applicant intends to reconstruct a single-family
dwelling upon said lands;
(7) Evidence of the availability of an adequate water supply and sewer
and drainage facilities at such location; and
(8) An application for a building permit for the reconstruction of said
single-family dwelling.
B. Upon receipt of said application, the Construction Official shall verify
the veracity of the statements contained in said application. Upon
verification of the truth of the statements made in the application, the
Construction Official shall issue a temporary trailer permit to the
applicant. Said permit shall be valid for a term of one month and may be
renewed five times. Prior to each said renewal, the Construction Official
shall investigate and determine what progress, if any, the homeowner
has made in reconstructing his single-family dwelling. In the event that
the Construction Official determines that the homeowner is not taking
appropriate steps to reconstruct his single-family dwelling, the
Construction Official shall void said permit. In the event that the
homeowner continues to maintain said temporary trailer on the
premises, he shall be subject to the penalty provisions of § 172-3.2 of
this Code. The homeowner shall pay a fee of $25 per month for each
month during which he maintains the said temporary trailer on said
premises.
§ 172-3.1 DENNIS CODE § 172-3.2
1:466
ARTICLE II
Trailer Parks
[Adopted 7-25-1966 as Ord. No. 66-2]
§ 172-4. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OPERATING A TRAILER PARK — Any person, firm or corporation who either
owns the land upon which said facilities are located or operates or assists
in the operation of said facilities is conducting the business of "operating a
trailer park."
TRAILER — Any one of the devices commonly known as "house trailer,"
"mobile home," "office trailer" or other similar designation.
TRAILER PARK — Any tract of land where facilities are provided for the use
and/or occupancy of trailers.
§ 172-5. Parks prohibited.
No person, firm or corporation shall carry on the business of operating a
trailer park within the Township of Dennis, either for profit or otherwise.72
72.Editor's Note: Former Section IV, which provided penalties for violations, and former
Sections VI through XVI, as added 8-13-1973 by Ord. No. 73-9, which provided for existing
licensed trailer park and which followed this section, were deleted at time of adoption of
Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. For current penalty provisions, see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, § 1-9.
§ 172-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-5
1:467
Chapter 176
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
A comprehensive revision of the traffic regulations of the Township
of Dennis was under review by the New Jersey Department of
Transportation at the time of completion of this volume. Upon
approval by the Department of Transportation and adoption by the
municipality, the Traffic Ordinance will be inserted here.
Chapter 177
VEHICLES; HANDICAPPED PARING
§ 177-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish in certain areas that are public or
quasi-public and open to the public or to which the public is invited spaces
where parking shall be prohibited in areas designated as handicapped
spaces for use by persons who have been issued special vehicle
identification card by the Division of Motor Vehicles. No other person or
persons shall be permitted to park in these spaces.
§ 177-2. Statutory authority.
§ 177-3. Designation of spaces.
As shown in the attached Schedule A,73 those areas shall be designated
as handicapped parking spaces and shall be so marked by signs and
conformance with the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
for Streets and Highways, and said schedule is made part of this chapter.
§ 177-4. Notice.
A. This chapter is enacted in accordance with N.J.S.A. 34:4-197, which
does confer upon the Township of Dennis the right to establish
designated restricted parking spaces for handicapped persons who
have been issued special vehicle identification card by the Division of
Motor Vehicles.
B. In addition, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.5, any municipality may by
ordinance establish restricted parking spaces in front of residences,
schools, hospitals and other public buildings and in shopping and
business districts for use by persons who have been issued special
vehicle identification cards by the Division of Motor Vehicles.
A. Notice of this chapter will be effective by placing its provisions on signs
according to specifications contained in the current Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198.
73.Editor's Note: Schedule A is on file in the Township Clerk's office.
§ 172-5 DENNIS CODE § 177-4
1:468
§ 177-5. Enforcement; removal of vehicle by request.
§ 177-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person parking a motor vehicle in a restricted parking space without
a special vehicle identification card shall be liable to a fine of $100 for the
first offense and for subsequent offenses a fine of at least $100 and up to 90
days' community service on such terms and in such form as the court shall
deem appropriate, or any combination thereof.
§ 177-7. Repealer when effective.
All ordinances or parts or ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed, and this chapter shall take effect immediately upon final passage
and publication as required by law.
Chapter 178
VEHICLES, JUNKED OR ABANDONED
§ 178-1. Definitions.
B. In addition to the specifications in the Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices, any sign erected before and after the effective date of
this amendatory and supplementary act to notify the public that parking
in a space is reserved for the handicapped shall also state the penalty
set forth in § 177-6 pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, Subdivision (3)c,
which may be imposed for a violation.
A. Upon receipt of a certified letter from the Township Engineer
designating handicapped spaces and the designated handicapped
spaces listed in the attached Schedule A,74 the New Jersey State Police
shall enforce parking restrictions on all designated handicapped
parking spaces in the Township of Dennis.
B. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-207.7, an eligible handicapped person may
request a law enforcement officer to arrange for the removal and
storage of a motor vehicle unlawfully parked in a handicapped parking
space or zone which is restricted for use by a handicapped person. It
shall be the obligation of the owner of the motor vehicle to pay the
reasonable costs for the removal and for any storage which may result
from the removal.
A. Terms defined. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
JUNK VEHICLE — Includes:
(1) Any motor vehicle which is mechanically inoperable.
74.Editor's Note: Schedule A in on file in the Township Clerk's office.
§ 177-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 178-1
1:469
§ 178-2. Abandonment restricted.76
Except as provided in Sections 178-3 and 178-4, it shall be unlawful for
any person, firm or corporation, either as owner of any private lands or
as occupant lessee, tenant or agent of the owner of any private lands or
as trespasser or other user of private lands, with or without permission,
or in any other capacity whatsoever, to store, deposit, place, maintain,
accumulate, leave or park or permit to be stored, deposited, placed,
maintained, accumulated, left or parked on any private lands or public lands
or highways within the Township of Dennis any junk vehicle for a period of
48 hours.77
§ 178-3. Vehicle junkyards.
Nothing contained herein shall prohibit a motor vehicle junkyard operating
under a valid, current state license and not violating any other ordinance
of the township from storing, maintaining or accumulating junk vehicles in
the normal course of business; provided, however, that any junk vehicles
so stored, maintained or accumulated must be in an enclosure completely
surrounded by a solid fence or wall at least three feet taller than the highest
junk vehicle or accumulated junk vehicles and in any event of a minimum
height of seven feet, with necessary solid gates.
§ 178-4. Storage by service stations, repair shops and garages.
Any motor vehicle or motor-drawn vehicle which does not carry a
current registration or which lacks one or more tires.
(2)
(3) Any streetcar.
Any railroad car which is mechanically inoperable or which is not
on a railroad track connected to other railroad tracks in active use.
(4)
B. Statutory definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, the terms "motor
vehicle" and "motor-drawn vehicle" shall be defined as they are defined
in the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Law (N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et seq.), as said
law now exists or may hereafter be amended. Said definitions are
presently as follows:
MOTOR-DRAWN VEHICLE — Includes trailers, semitrailers or any
other type of vehicle drawn by a motor-driven vehicle.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Includes all vehicles propelled otherwise than
by muscular power, excepting such vehicles as run only upon rails or
tracks and motorized bicycles.75
75.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
76.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
77.Editor's Note: Former Section IV, which designated the municipal landfill as the only
approved location for the disposal of junked vehicles and which immediately followed this
section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 178-1 DENNIS CODE § 178-4
1:470
A. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit a gasoline service station, a
motor vehicle repair shop or a motor vehicle garage which is not
violating any other ordinance of this township from storing, maintaining
or accumulating junk vehicles in the normal course of business,
provided, however, that unless said junk vehicles are contained within a
completely enclosed and roofed building, not more than three junk
vehicles may be stored, maintained or accumulated at any one time,
and no junk vehicle may be stored, maintained or accumulated for a
period in excess of 45 days.
B. Junk vehicles stored, maintained or accumulated within a completely
enclosed and roofed building on premises operated as a gasoline
service station, a motor vehicle repair shop or a motor vehicle garage
may be stored, maintained or accumulated in any quantity for any
period of time.
C. The Township Committee is hereby authorized to grant permission to a
gasoline service station, a motor vehicle repair shop or a motor vehicle
garage to store, maintain or accumulate junk vehicles in excess of
three, but in no event to exceed 20, on suitable premises upon
compliance with the following provisions:
(1) The applicant shall make written application to the Township Clerk
for such permission and in his application shall give the full name
and address of the owner and operator of the business and the full
name and address of the owner of the premises intended to be used
and the number of junk vehicles which he is seeking permission to
store, which number shall not exceed 20.
(2) The Construction Official shall inspect the proposed premises and
make a written report to the Township Committee as to the
suitability of said premises for the proposed use. In determining
said suitability, he shall give consideration to:78
(a) The degree of residential development in the immediate area.
(b) The conspicuousness of the proposed location with respect to
highway traffic, pedestrian traffic and nearby residential and
commercial buildings.
(c) Whether or not the premises are fenced or landscaped in such
a manner as to conceal or partially conceal the junk vehicles
from view.
(d) The present volume of the applicant's business in junk vehicles.
(e) The degree and necessity of public service rendered by the
applicant.
78.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions. Art I.
§ 178-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 178-4
1:471
§ 178-5. Legislative declaration and intent.
Junk vehicles, as hereinabove defined, are hereby declared to be filth, trash
and debris, within the meaning of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.13 et seq., as said law
now exists or may hereafter be amended; and this section and Sections
178-6 and 178-7 of this chapter are adopted pursuant to the authority of the
same.
§ 178-6. Removal by township.80
Upon 10 days' written notice being given to the record owner and the
occupant of any private lands in the township directing that junk vehicles
be removed, if said junk vehicles are not removed, the Code Enforcement
Officer, Construction Official or the duly appointed Health Officer may
proceed to remove or direct the removal of the same.
§ 178-7. Costs to become lien.
Upon said junk vehicles' being removed by or under the direction of one
of the officers designated in Section 178-6 hereof, said officer shall certify
the cost thereof to the governing body, which shall examine the certificate
and, if found correct, shall cause the cost as shown thereon to be charged
against said lands. The amount so charged shall forthwith become a lien
upon such lands and shall be added to and become and form part of the
taxes next to be assessed and levied upon such lands, the same to bear
interest at the same rate as taxes, and shall be collected and enforced by
the same officers and in the same manner as taxes.81
(f) Such other standards and factors as may reasonably bear upon
the public health and welfare.
(3) Upon receiving the written report of the Construction Official, the
Township Committee may, by resolution, grant the requested
permission or any modification thereof and may add such
conditions to the granting of its permission as are reasonably
necessary to the protection of the public health and welfare. Such
permission may be withdrawn, by resolution of the Township
Committee, upon 60 days' written notice to the applicants.79
(4) The Township Committee may, by resolution, provide for the
imposition of a fee for such permission.
79.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions. Art I.
80.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
81.Editor's Note: Former Section XII, which provided penalties for offenses and which
followed this Section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I. For current penalty provisions, see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Section
1-9.
§ 178-4 DENNIS CODE § 178-8
1:472
§ 178-8. Violations and penalties. [Added 3-22-99 by Ord. No.
99-05]
Any person, corporation, or other entity who shall violate Chapter 178 of
this Code shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than one
hundred ($100) nor more than $1,000, to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 90 days, to a period of community service not exceeding 90 days
or to any combination of these penalties.
Chapter 179
VEHICLES, STORAGE ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
§ 179-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter.
FENCE and/or FENCED IN AREA — The area within an enclosed six foot
fence, the interior of which shall not be visible from any public area.
STORE and/or STORED — The keeping of a motor vehicle upon any land
and premises, public or private, for a period of more than 10 days.
§ 179-2. Prohibited unless garaged or fenced in.
It shall be unlawful for any person to store, or to permit, cause or suffer
to be stored upon any lands or premises any motor vehicle which is not
capable of being presently used or operated or any motor vehicle not
bearing current registration plates or a current state inspection sticker,
unless such motor vehicle is garaged or stored within a fenced in area.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to a motor vehicle or vehicles
located on the lands and premises of a licensed new or used automobile
dealer or bona fide service station operator where such motor vehicle or
vehicles are stored thereon for a period of 30 days or less for maintenance
or repairs, or to motor vehicles stored on lands utilized for township
storage.
§ 179-3. Determination of operation.
Any motor vehicle which is not capable of being used or operated is hereby
deemed to be a motor vehicle which cannot be moved under its own power
from place to place on a public highway.
§ 179-4. Evidence of noncompliance.
If a motor vehicle is stored upon lands and premises, public or private, for
a period of not less than 10 days, the storage will be prima facie evidence
that the motor vehicle is not capable of being presently used or operated.
§ 178-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 179-5
1:473
§ 179-5. Defendant involved.
In prosecutions under this section the owner of the motor vehicle involved
or the owner of the lands and premises upon which the motor vehicle is
stored, or the lessee of the lands and premises upon which the motor vehicle
is stored may be a defendant and each of them in any one case may be made
a defendant.
§ 179-6. Disrepaired vehicles.
All vehicles which are in such a state of disrepair that the cost of repair
exceeds the value of the vehicle or major parts are missing or the majority
of the glass is broken and/or the vehicle would be classed as junk by a
reasonable person, shall be deemed to be in violation of this section. The
Code Enforcement Official of the Township of Dennis shall give owners of
the aforementioned types of vehicle a 30 day warning to remove, fence in or
garage said vehicle.
§ 179-7. Grace period.
All unregistered vehicles, unlicensed classic vehicles, unlicensed operable
vehicles and unlicensed vehicles in the process of being restored or
repaired where there is evidence of actual work apparent on the vehicle,
shall be given a 30 day warning to garage or fence in the vehicle. However,
during this "30 day grace period" said vehicle must be placed in the least
conspicuous place on the property if not parked in the driveway. In any
event, any unlicensed vehicle may not be parked in the front yard or forward
of the front of the building if parked in the side yard of the property. The
number of vehicles stored shall not exceed two.
§ 179-8. Jurisdiction.
The Municipal Court of the Township of Dennis, County of Cape May, State
of New Jersey shall have jurisdiction to hear any complaint for violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 179-9. Enforcement.
The Code Enforcement Official of the Township of Dennis, the constables
of the Township of Dennis and the New Jersey State Police shall have the
authority to issue summons for violation of this chapter.
§ 179-10. Penalties.
For a first offense of violating any of the provisions of this chapter, a
defendant shall be subject to a fine of not more than $200. For a second
offense, the defendant shall receive a fine of not less than $200 nor more
than $500. For a third offense, the defendant shall face a fine of not less
than $500 nor more than $1,000 and a period of community service of not
less than 10 days nor more than 30 days. An individual need not be charged
as a subsequent offender in order to be convicted as a subsequent offender.
§ 179-5 DENNIS CODE § 179-10
1:474
Each separate vehicle on the property which violates this section would
constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 185
ZONING
§ 179-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 179-10
1:475

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Amended 7-15-13 by Ord. No. 2013-03]
§ 185-1. Title.
§ 185-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a pattern for the use of land and
buildings in the Township of Dennis, based on the latest updated Master
Plan for the Township of Dennis and enacted in order to promote and to
protect the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare
of the people. This chapter is intended to:
A. The title of this chapter is as follows: "A Comprehensive Ordinance
Regulating and Limiting the Uses of Land and the Uses and Locations of
Buildings and Structures; Regulating and Restricting the Height and
Bulk of Buildings and Structures and Determining the Area of Yards,
Courts and Other Open Spaces; Regulating and Restricting the Density
of Population; Dividing the Township of Dennis into Districts for such
Purposes; Adopting a Map of said Township Showing Boundaries and
the Classification of such Districts; Establishing a Board of Adjustment;
and Prescribing Penalties for the Violation of its Provisions."
B. Short title. The short form by which this chapter may be known shall be
the "Zoning Ordinance of the Township of Dennis."
A. Regulate the use and development of land within zoning districts.
B. Secure safety from fire and other dangers.
C. Provide adequate light, air and open space.
D. Promote orderly development.
E. Avoid undue concentration of population.
F. Prevent the overcrowding of land or buildings by regulating the
intensity of uses and the location of buildings.
G. Establish standards of development.
H. Limit congestion in the street.
I. Prohibit incompatible uses.
J. Regulate the alteration of existing buildings.
K. Protect against hazards.
L. Conserve the taxable value of land and preserve open space and natural
features.
§ 185-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-2
1:477
§ 185-3. Interpretation.
The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements.
Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction that is imposed or required
by other provisions of law or by other rules or regulations or resolutions, the
provisions of this chapter shall control. Where other laws, rules, regulations
or resolutions require greater restrictions than are imposed or required
by this chapter, the provisions of such other laws, rules, regulations or
restrictions shall control.
§ 185-4. Prohibited uses.
M. Promote orderly development of the Pinelands Area so as to preserve
and protect the significant and unique natural, ecological, agricultural,
archaeological, historic, scenic, cultural and recreational resources of
the Pinelands.
N. Implement the goals and objectives of the Pinelands Comprehensive
Management Plan.
O. Preserve the historical resources of the township and preserve the
environmental resources of the township.
P. Preserve and protect the potable water supply of the community.
A. All uses not expressly permitted in this chapter are prohibited.
B. In addition, the following uses are specifically prohibited in all districts:
(1) Trailer parks.
(2) Incinerators.
(3) Landfills.
(4) Junkyards.
(5) The use of land for the dumping or disposal of toxic or hazardous
wastes or sludge materials.
(6) Commercial resource extraction, specifically including sand mining
and commercial water removal.
(7) The manufacture of explosives, volatile chemicals, or any use which
significantly presents a similar risk, hazard, or nuisance as the
manufacture of explosives or volatile chemicals. Uses believed to
significantly present a similar risk, hazard or nuisance include, but
are not limited to, the following: [Added 6-4-07 by Ord. No.
2007-09]
(a) Acetylene gas manufacture and/or storage of more than one
cylinder of 10 cubic feet.
§ 185-2 DENNIS CODE § 185-4
1:478
§ 185-5. Time of compliance.
All requirements shall be met at the time of erection, enlargement,
alteration, moving or change in use of the principal use and shall apply to
the entire structure or structures whether or not the entire structure or
structures were involved in the erection, enlargement, alteration, moving or
change in use.
(b) Acid manufacture (hydrochloric, nitric, acrid, sulfuric, sulfonic,
carbolic).
(c) Ammonia, bleaching powder or chlorine manufacture.
(d) Arsenal.
(e) Asphalt manufacture.
(f) Oil refining.
§ 185-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-5
1:479

ARTICLE II
Definitions
[Amended 7-15-13 by Ord. No. 2013-03]
§ 185-6. Word usage; statutory definitions.
§ 185-7. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain phrases and words are defined as
follows: (P) shall indicate applicability to Pinelands Districts only.
ACCESSORY BUILDING, STRUCTURE OR USE — A building, structure or
use which is customarily associated with and is subordinate in area, extent
and purpose and incidental to the principal building, structure or use and
which is located on the same lot therewith. An "accessory building" attached
to the principal building shall comply in all respects with the requirements
applicable to the principal building.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — Shall be the Clerk Typist assigned to work
in the Construction Office.
(P) AGRICULTURAL COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — A retail sales
establishment primarily intended to sell agricultural products produced
in the Pinelands. An "agricultural commercial establishment" may not be
associated directly with a farm; however, it does not include supermarkets,
convenience stores, restaurants and other establishments which
coincidentally sell agricultural products, nor does it include agricultural
production facilities such as a farm itself, nor facilities which are solely
processing facilities.
(P) AGRICULTURAL EMPLOYEE HOUSING — Residential dwellings for the
seasonal use of employees of an agricultural or horticultural use which,
because of their character or location, are not to be used for permanent
housekeeping units and which are otherwise accessory to a principal use of
the lot for agriculture.
(P) AGRICULTURAL OR HORTICULTURAL PURPOSE OR USE — Any
production of plants or animals useful to man, including but not limited
to forage or sod crops; grains and feed crops; dairy animals and dairy
A. Words used in the present tense include the future; words used in the
singular number include the plural number, and vice versa; the word
"used" shall include "arranged, designed, constructed, altered,
converted, rented, leased or intended-to be used"; the word "lot"
includes the words "plots," "premises" and "tract"; the word "building"
includes the words "structure," "dwelling" and "residence"; the word
"shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
B. Any word or term not defined herein shall be used with a meaning of
standard usage. Moreover, whenever a term used in this chapter which
is defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., such term is intended to have the
meaning as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., as currently amended,
unless specifically defined to the contrary in this chapter.
§ 185-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-7
1:481
products; poultry and poultry products; livestock, including beef cattle,
sheep, swine, horses, ponies, mules or goats, and including the breeding
and grazing of any or all of such animals; bees and apiary products; fur
animals; trees and forest products; fruits of all kinds, including grapes,
nuts and berries; vegetables; nursery, floral, ornamental and greenhouse
products; or any land devoted to and meeting the requirements and
qualifications for payments or other compensation pursuant to a soil
conservation program under an agency of the federal government.
(P) AGRICULTURAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment, the
purpose of which is the sale of goods, commodities or services that support
active farm operations.
ALTERATIONS OR ADDITIONS, STRUCTURAL — Any changes in or
additions to the supporting members of a building, such as walls, columns,
beams, girders, posts or piers, or in the dimensions or configurations of the
roof of exterior walls.
(P) ALTERNATE DESIGN PILOT PROGRAM TREATMENT SYSTEM — An
individual or community on site waste water treatment system that has
the capability of providing a high level of treatment including a significant
reduction in the level of total nitrogen in the wastewater and that has been
approved by the Pinelands Commission for participation in the alternate
design wastewater treatment systems pilot program pursuant to N.J.A.C.
7:50-10.23(b). Detailed plans and specifications for each authorized
technology are available at the principal office of the Pinelands
Commission.[Amended 11-13-18 by Ord. No. 2018-11]
(P) ANIMALS, THREATENED OR ENDANGERED — Those animals specified
in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.32.
ANTIQUE SHOPS — Retail sales of antique furniture, household collectable
items, paintings, and items normally associated with residential living. No
stripping or refinishing of antique furniture is permitted onsite except in
designated commercial use districts.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form and all
accompanying documents required by this chapter for approval of
subdivision plat, site plan, planned development, conditional use, zoning
variance or direction of the issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq., or N.J.S.A. 13:18A-1 et seq.
(P) APPROVAL AGENCY — Any board, body or other authority within the
township with the authority to approve subdivisions, site plans, building
permits or other applications for approval of development.
(P) ARTIFICIAL REGENERATION — The establishment of tree cover
through direct or supplemental seeding or planting.
ARTIST STUDIO — A place where there is the practice of fine arts including
painting, sculpting, or music.
BASEMENT — A story having more than 25% of its clear height below the
average finished contract grade along the outside walls of the building.
§ 185-7 DENNIS CODE § 185-7
1:482
BASE PANEL — The area of a building between the windows and the
ground.
(P) BEDDING — A silvicultural practice involving the preparation of land
before planting in the form of small mounds so as to concentrate topsoil and
elevate the root zone of seedlings above temporary standing water.
BILLBOARD — Any structure or portion thereof on which lettered or
pictorial matter is displayed for advertising purposes other than that on a
building or its grounds, giving the name and occupation of the user of the
premises the nature of the business conducted therein; except that in the
Pinelands Area any sign advertising agricultural commercial establishments
shall not be considered a "billboard."
BOATEL — A marina-based motel offering temporary overnight
accommodations exclusively to the boating public.
BOOK SHOP — A place where there is the presentation of books,
magazines, periodicals, etc., for sale or viewing by the general public. A
book shop may include paper or hard bound documents.
(P) BROADCAST SCARIFICATION — A silvicultural practice involving the
dragging of cut trees or other objects across a parcel to remove or reduce
above-ground shrub cover, debris, leaf litter and humus without disturbance
to mineral soil horizons and associated roots.
BUFFER AREA — An area of the property to be developed which is set
aside for the sole purpose of the establishment of planting material or
the combination of planting material with land contouring to provide an
impenetrable barrier to light and sound.
BUILD-TO-LINE — A setback dimension, the location along which a building
façade must be placed.
BUILDING — A structure or extension or addition thereto having a roof
supported by such things as columns, posts, piers or walls and intended for
the shelter, business, housing or enclosing of persons, animals or property.
(P) BUILDING — Any structure or extension thereof or addition thereto,
either temporary or permanent, having a roof supported by such things
as columns, posts, piers or walls and intended for the shelter, business,
housing or enclosing of persons, animals or property.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The square footage or other area measurement
by which all buildings occupy a lot as measured on a horizontal plane
around the periphery of the foundations, and including the area under
the roof of any structure supported by columns but not having walls, as
measured around the outside of the outermost extremities as the roof above
the columns.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The height of a building shall be measured from the
point from the mean elevation of the finished grade five feet away from the
foundation along the side(s) of the building facing a street or to the street
line, whichever is closer to the foundation. On a corner lot, the height shall
be measured on the street having the greatest slope. In all cases where
§ 185-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-7
1:483
this chapter provides for height limitations by reference to a specified
height and a specified number of stories, the intent is to limit height to the
specified maximum footage and the specified number of stories within said
footage.
CAMPER — A camper shall be as defined in N.J.A.C. 8:22 as amended.
CAMPGROUND, IMPROVED — A tract of land at least 40 acres in area
used for camping, including the renting of tents and camping vehicles,
temporarily located onsite, established, maintained and operated as an
area for the temporary seasonal living quarters for children or adults for
recreation, education or vacation purposes. The density of campgrounds
shall not exceed five units per acre in the Non-Pinelands Area or six units
per acre in the Pinelands Area.
CAMPGROUND, PRIMITIVE — The same meaning as CAMPGROUNDS,
IMPROVED except that there are no utility hookups on site. Each individual
area designated as a sleeping facility shall be a minimum of 10,000 square
feet in area and a minimum of 100 feet in width and depth.
(P) CAMPSITE — A place used or suitable for camping, on which temporary
shelter such as a tent or camper may be placed and occupied on a
temporary and seasonal basis.
(P) CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS — An approval of the Planning
Board pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.156.
(P) CERTIFICATE OF FILING — A certificate issued by the Pinelands
Commission pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.34 that a complete application for
development has been filed.
(P) CLEARCUTTING — A silvicultural practice involving removal of an
entire forest stand in one cutting for purposes of regeneration either
obtained artificially, by natural seed or from advanced regeneration.
Clearcutting typically results in the removal of all woody vegetation from
a parcel in preparation for the establishment of new trees; however, some
trees may be left on the parcel.
CLUSTER SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — A
development technique based on a gross dwelling unit density for the entire
tract in the zoning district in which it is located and allowing the lot sizes
for detached dwellings to be reduced or individual segments to have higher
densities so long as the gross density is not exceeded.
(P) COMMISSION — The Pinelands Commission, created pursuant to
Section 5 of the Pinelands Protection Act.
COMMON PROPERTY — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water or
a combination of land and water, together with the improvements thereon,
designed and intended for the ownership, use and enjoyment shared by the
residents and owners of the development. "Common property" may contain
such complementary structures and improvements as are necessary and
appropriate for the benefit of the residents and owners of the development.
§ 185-7 DENNIS CODE § 185-7
1:484
(P) COMPREHENSIVE MANAGEMENT PLAN — The plan adopted by the
Pinelands Commission pursuant to the Pinelands Protection Act as
amended, and contained in N.J.A.C. 7:50.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district only
upon a showing that such use in a specified location will comply with
the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such use as
contained in this chapter and upon the issuance of an authorization therefor
by the Planning Board.
(P) CONTIGUOUS LAND — Land which is connected or adjacent to other
land so as to permit the land to be used as a functional unit, provided
that separation by lot lines, streams, roads, rights-of-way, and easements
shall not affect the contiguity of land unless a substantial physical barrier
is created which prevents the land from being used as a functional
unit.[Amended 2-24-97 by Ord. No. 97-01]
(P) COPPICING — A silvicultural practice involving the production of forest
stands from vegetative sprouting by the trees that are harvested (stump
sprouts, root suckers, and naturally rooted layers). Coppicing typically
involves short rotations with dense stands of short trees.
COUNTY — The County of Cape May.
CRAFT SHOP — An area primarily utilized for the sale and display of
homemade, nonmanufactured objects or material utilized in the making of
said objects.
(P) DAY — For purposes of computing time limits, a calendar day.
(P) DENSITY — The average number of housing units per unit of land,
except that in the Pinelands Area, "density" shall be calculated on the
basis of gross average, including platted rights of way, within the deeded
premises.
(P) DEVELOPMENT — The change of, or enlargement of, any use or
disturbance of any land, the performance of any building or mining
operation, the division of land into two or more parcels and the creation or
termination of rights of access or riparian rights, including but not limited
to:
A. A change in type of use of a structure or land.
A reconstruction, alteration of the size or material change in the
external appearance of a structure or land.
B.
A material increase in the intensity of use of land, such as an increase
in the number of businesses, manufacturing establishments, offices or
dwelling units in a structure or on land.
C.
The commencement of resource extraction, drilling or excavation on a
parcel of land.
D.
E. The commencement of forestry activities.
§ 185-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-7
1:485
(P) DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL — Any approval to develop which is granted
by an approval agency, including appeal to the governing body, except for
certificates of occupancy and variances which do not otherwise include
issuance of a construction permit, subdivision or site plan approval.
(P) DEVELOPMENT, MAJOR — Any division of land into five or more lots;
any construction or expansion of any housing development of five or more
dwelling units; any construction or expansion of any commercial or
industrial use or structure on a site of more than three acres; or any
grading, clearing or disturbance or an area in excess of 5,000 square feet
for other than agricultural or horticultural purposes.
(P) DEVELOPMENT, MINOR — All development other than major
development.
(P) DISKING — A silvicultural practice involving the drawing of one or more
heavy, round, concave, sharpened, freely rotating steel disks across a site
for the purposes of cutting through soil and roots or cutting and turning a
furrow over an area.
(P) DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land
by drains, grading or other means, including control of runoff to minimize
erosion and sedimentation during and after construction or development
and means necessary for water supply preservation or prevention or
alleviation of flooding.
(P) DRUM CHOPPING — A silvicultural practice involving the drawing of
a large cylindrical drum with cutting blades mounted parallel to its axis
across a site to break up slash, crush scrubby vegetation prior to burning or
planting or to chop up and disturb the organic turf and roots in the upper
foot of soil.
(P) DWELLING — Any structure or portion thereof which is designed or
used for residential purposes.
DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY — A building physically detached from other
buildings or portions of buildings which is occupied or intended to be
occupied for residence purposes by one sanitary and general living
facilities.
DWELLING UNIT — A room or series of connected rooms containing living,
cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities for one housekeeping unit. The
"dwelling unit" shall be self-contained and shall not require the use of
outside stairs, common hallways, passing through another dwelling unit or
F. The demolition of a structure or removal of trees.
G. The deposit of refuse, solid or liquid waste or fill on a parcel of land.
In connection with the use of land, the making of any material change
in noise levels, thermal conditions or emissions of waste material.
H.
The alteration, either physically or chemically, of a shore, bank or
floodplain, seacoast, river, stream, lake, pond, wetlands or artificial
body of water.
I.
§ 185-7 DENNIS CODE § 185-7
1:486
other indirect route(s) to get to any portion of the "dwelling unit," nor shall
there be shared facilities with another housekeeping unit.
(P) ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION LINES — All electric lines other than electric
transmission lines.
(P) ELECTRIC TRANSMISSION LINES — Electric lines which are part of an
electric company's transmission and subtransmission system, which provide
a direct connection between a generating station or substation of the utility
company and another substation of the utility company, substation of or
interconnection point with another interconnecting utility company or a
substation of a highload customer of the utility.
ENCROACHMENT — Any structural element (canopy, awning, sign, deck,
porch, etc.) that extends horizontally from the building into a right-of-way
or setback; measured from the building façade outward.
(P) ENLARGEMENT — An addition to the floor area of an existing building,
an increase in the size of any other existing structure or an increase in that
portion of a tract of land occupied by an existing use.
(P) EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments
by water, wind, ice or gravity.
FACADE — The vertical surface of a building that faces a street.
(P) FAMILY — One or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption
or guardianship, or any number of persons not so related, occupying a
dwelling unit and living as a single housekeeping unit.
FARM —
(P) FIRE HAZARD — The classification of a parcel of land in accord with the
following:
Hazard Vegetation Type
Low Atlantic white cedar
Hardwood swamp
Moderate Non-pine barrens forest
Principal uses: a lot of at least five acres with 300 feet of lot frontage
used for the growing and harvesting of crops and the raising and
breeding of certain animals, including truck farms, fruit farms,
nurseries and greenhouses, dairies and livestock produce. One owner
occupied single family dwelling may be permitted on any farm in
addition to the permitted accessory uses as defined under paragraph B.
following.
A.
Accessory uses: buildings incidental to the farm operation, such as
tenant houses (outside the Pinelands Area), greenhouses, or buildings
for housing seasonal workers for the farm's own use; barns, packing,
grading and storage buildings for produce raised on the premises;
buildings for keeping of poultry and permitted livestock; and garages
for the keeping of equipment and trucks used in farm operations.
B.
§ 185-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-7
1:487
Prescribed burned areas
High Pine barrens forest, including mature forms of pine, pineoak
or oak-pine
Extreme Immature or dwarf forms of pine-oak or oak-pine; all classes
of pine-shrub oak and pine-lowland
FIRST FLOOR AREA — The residential portion of a dwelling unit, excluding
basements, garages, carports and breezeways, measured by using the
outside dimensions of the residential portion of the building. For a splitlevel,
bi-level or tri-level dwelling, the area shall be considered to be the
sum of the areas of two adjoining levels, excluding basements and garages,
provided that both levels are connected by permanent built-in stairs in the
interior of the building.
(P) FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT — The changing of the
characteristics and interactions of fish and wildlife populations and their
habitats in order to promote, protect and enhance the ecological integrity
of those populations.
FLAG LOT — A lot which meets the area and dimensional requirement of
this chapter, except lot frontage, which may be reduced to permit utilization
of lands with limited road frontage.
FLOOD PLAIN — See Section 105-4 of Chapter 105, Flood Damage
Prevention.
(P) FORESTRY — The planting, cultivating and harvesting of trees for
the production of wood products, including firewood or for forest health.
It includes such practices as reforestation, site preparation and other
silvicultural practices, including but not limited to artificial regeneration,
bedding, broadcast scarification, clearcutting, coppicing, disking, drum
chopping, group selection, individual selection, natural regeneration, root
raking, seed tree cut, shelterwood cut and thinning. For purposes of this
Chapter, the following activities shall not be defined as forestry:
Removal of trees located on a parcel of land one acre or less on which
a dwelling has been constructed;
A.
Horticultural activities involving the planting, cultivating or harvesting
of nursery stock or Christmas trees;
B.
Removal of trees necessitated by the development of the parcel as
otherwise authorized by this Chapter;
C.
Removal of trees necessary for the maintenance of utility or public
rights-of-way;
D.
Removal or planting of trees for the personal use of the parcel owner;
and
E.
F. Removal of trees for public safety.
§ 185-7 DENNIS CODE § 185-7
1:488
(P) FOREST STAND — A uniform group of trees of similar species,
composition, size, age and similar forest structure.
FRONTAGE: FORECOURT — Where the majority of the building façade is
located at the build-to-line, while a small portion is set back, creating a
small open space. This space could be used as an entry, shared garden
space, passive lawn or as a plaza. For residential uses, a low all or hedge
can be placed along the build-to-line to define public versus private space.
See the drawings below for a visual description.
Section View\Plan View
FRONTAGE: RESIDENTIAL PORCH — Where the primary street façade of
the building is setback from the build-to-line. An elevated porch is located
between the building façade and the build-to-line. Stairs from the porch can
lead directly to the sidewalk or can be side-loaded. See the drawings and
photograph below for a visual description.
Section View\Plan View
Photographic Example:
FRONTAGE: RESIDENTIAL STOOP — Where the primary street façade is
set back from the build-to-line. An elevated stoop is located between the
building façade and the build-to-line. Stairs from the stoop can lead directly
to the sidewalk or can be side-loaded. See the drawings and photograph
below for a visual description.
§ 185-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-7
1:489
Section View\Plan View
Photographic Example:
FRONTAGE: SHOPFRONT — Where the primary street façade is at or near
the build-to-line. Awnings, canopies and/or signs may extend out above the
sidewalk. This frontage type is only appropriate for areas that have retail
and services on the first floor. See the drawings and photograph below for a
visual description.
Section View\Plan View
Photographic Example:
FRONTAGE TYPE — The type of façade that is permitted on a primary street
(front yard).
GOLF COURSE, MAJOR — An area of 50 or more contiguous acres
containing a full size, professional golf course at least nine holes in length,
not less than par three each, together with the necessary accessory uses
and structures such as clubhouses, golf club lodges and dining and
refreshment facilities, provided that the operation of such is incidental and
subordinate to the operation of the golf course.
GOLF COURSE, MINIATURE — A golf course primarily for family
entertainment containing a minimum of 18 but not more than 36 holes. An
associated office for the golf course operation and custard/ice cream and
beverage stand for the patrons of the golf course are permitted accessory
uses in a single onsite building. No onsite cooking of foods is permitted.
§ 185-7 DENNIS CODE § 185-7
1:490
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The area measured by using the outside dimension
of the building, excluding the area of a garage, attic, open porch or patio.
Only those floor areas which have a ceiling height of eight feet or more and
those areas used for storage space in nonresidential uses shall be included
in the "gross floor area."
(P) GROUP SELECTION — A silvicultural practice whereby a group of trees
is periodically selected to be removed from a large area so that age and size
classes of the reproduction are mixed.
(P) HABITAT — The natural environment of an individual animal or plant,
population or community.
HALF-STORY — A space under a sloping roof that has the line of
intersection of the roof and the wall face not more than three feet above the
floor level and in which space the possible floor are with head room of five
feet or less occupies at least 40% of the total floor area of the story directly
beneath.
(P) HISTORIC RESOURCE — Any site, building, area, district, structure
or object important in American history or prehistory, architecture,
archaeology and culture at the national, state, county, regional or local
level.[Amended 2-24-97 by Ord. No. 97-01]
HOME BUSINESS — A business conducted entirely within a single family
owner occupied dwelling or an associated accessory building, where the
business is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the lot for
residential purposes.
HOME OCCUPATION — An occupation conducted entirely within a single
family owner occupied dwelling unit, which occupation is clearly incidental
and secondary to the use of the lot for residential purposes. Such
occupations shall be conducted solely by the residents of the detached
dwelling, and provided also that:
No more than 450 square feet of the single family dwelling shall be used
for such purpose.
A.
The gross floor area for the residence shall remain at least as large as
that required in Article IV for a detached dwelling.
B.
C. No display of products shall be visible from the street.
D. The residential character of the lot and building shall not be changed.
E. No occupational sounds shall be audible outside the building.
No equipment shall be used which will cause interference with radio
and television reception in neighboring residences.
F.
The home occupation does not reduce the parking or yard requirements
of the detached dwelling. Not more than one commercially registered
vehicle attributable to the home occupation may be parked on the
premises. No vehicles utilized by the home occupation shall be parked
on the street.
G.
§ 185-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-7
1:491
HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION — An incorporated non-profit organization
operating in age-restricted residential development under recorded land
agreements through which:
HOTEL — An establishment providing transient sleeping accommodations
with all rooms having access to an interior hallway; the facility provides
additional services, such as restaurants, meeting rooms and/or recreational
facilities.
HOUSEKEEPING UNIT — One or more persons living together in one
dwelling unit on a nonseasonal basis and sharing living, sleeping, cooking
and sanitary facilities on a non-profit basis.
(P) HYDROPHYTE — Any plant growing in water or in substrate that is at
least periodically deficient in oxygen as a result of excessive water content.
(P) IMMEDIATE FAMILY — Those persons related by blood or legal
relationship in the following manner: spouses, domestic partners, greatgrandparents,
grandparents, great-grandchildren, grandchildren, parents,
sons, daughters, brothers and sisters, aunts and uncles, nephews, nieces
and first cousins.[Amended 2-24-97 by Ord. No. 97-01; 11-13-18 by
Ord. No. 2018-11]
(P) IMPERMEABLE SURFACE — Any surface which does not permit fluids
to pass through or penetrate its pores or spaces, typically having a
maximum permeability for water of 10-7 cm/second at the maximum
anticipated hydrostatic pressure. The term "impermeable" is equivalent in
meaning.
(P) IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any surface that has been compacted or
covered with a layer of material so that it prevents, impedes or slows
infiltration or absorption of fluid, including stormwater directly into the
ground, and results in either reduced groundwater recharge or increased
stormwater runoff sufficient to be classified as impervious in Urban Areas
by the United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources
Conservation Service Title 210 - Engineering, 210-3-1 - Small Watershed
Hydrology (WINTR-55) Version 1.0. Such surfaces may have varying
degrees of permeability.
H. Signage shall be in accordance with Section 185-43 of this chapter.
In businesses conducted in accessory buildings, the building must be
architecturally compatible with the main structure.
I.
A. Each owner is automatically a member.
Each occupied dwelling unit is automatically subject to a charge for
a proportionate share of the expenses for the organization's activities
and maintenance, including any maintenance costs levied against the
association by the township.
B.
C. Each owner and tenant has the right to use the common property.
§ 185-7 DENNIS CODE § 185-7
1:492
(P) INDIVIDUAL SELECTION — A silvicultural practice whereby single
trees are periodically selected to be removed from a large area so that age
and size classes of the reproduction are mixed.
INN — An establishment providing transient sleeping accommodations,
which is smaller in overall size and number of rooms than a hotel or motel.
(P) INSTITUTIONAL USE — Any land used for the following public or
private purposes: educational facilities, including universities, colleges,
elementary and secondary and vocational schools, kindergartens and
nurseries; cultural facilities such as libraries, galleries, museums, concert
halls, theaters and the like; hospitals, including such educational, clinical,
research and convalescent facilities as are integral to the operation of the
hospital; medical and health service facilities, including nursing homes,
supervised residential institutions, rehabilitation therapy centers and public
health facilities; churches; cemeteries; public office buildings; and other
similar facilities.
INTERESTED PARTY — In a criminal or quasi-criminal proceeding, any
citizen of the State of New Jersey; in the case of a civil proceeding in any
court or in an administrative proceeding before a municipal agency, any
person, whether residing within or without the municipality, whose right to
use, acquire or enjoy property is or may be affected by any action taken
under this chapter or whose right to use, acquire or enjoy property under
this chapter or under any other law of this state or of the United States has
been denied, violated or infringed by any action or a failure to act under
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-l et seq.
(P) INTERIM RULES AND REGULATIONS — The regulation adopted by the
Pinelands Commission pursuant to the Pinelands Protection Act to govern
the review of applications from the adoption of the regulations until the
Pinelands Comprehensive Management Plan took effect on January 14,
1981. These regulations were formerly codified as N.J.A.C. 7:1G-1 et seq.
(P) LAND — Includes the surface and subsurface of the earth as well as
improvements and fixtures on, above or below the surface and any water
found thereon.
(P) LANDFILL — Sites, including open dumps, where solid waste, liquid and
dry sewage sludge and liquid and dry chemical waste are disposed of by
land application with or without the use of management practices or soil
covering. For the purposes of this chapter, solid waste transfer stations shall
not be considered "landfills."
(P) LANDSCAPING — The installation of plant material or seed as a part of
development.
LOADING SPACE — An off-street space or berth on the same lot with a
building or group of buildings for the temporary parking of a commercial
vehicle while loading or unloading.
(P) LOCAL COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — An antenna and any support
structure, together with any accessory facilities, which complies with the
standards in N.J.A.C. 7:50-5.4 and which is intended to serve a limited,
§ 185-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-7
1:493
localized audience through point to point communication, including cellular
telephone cells, paging systems and dispatch communications. It does not
include radio or television broadcasting facilities or microwave
transmitters.[Added 2-24-97 by Ord. No. 97-01]
LOT — Any parcel of land separated from other parcels or portions as
by a subdivision plat or deed of record, survey map or by metes and
bounds, except that no portion of a street right of way shall be included in
calculating the "lot" boundaries or areas.
LOT AREA — The area contained within the legally described property lines
of a lot, not including any portion of a street right of way, existing or to be
dedicated.
LOT CORNER — A lot having two or more of its property lines abutting two
or more existing or proposed streets.
LOT DEPTH — The shortest horizontal distance between the front lot line
and a line drawn parallel to the front lot line through the midpoint of the
rear lot line. In the case of corner lots, the rear lot line shall be the property
line parallel to designated front lot line.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE — Any line forming a portion of the exterior boundary of a lot and
the same line as the street line for that portion of a lot abutting a street.
LOT WIDTH — The straight and horizontal distance between side lot lines
at setback points on each side line measured and equal distance back from
the street line. The minimum "lot width" shall be measured at the minimum
required building setback line. Where side lot lines are not parallel, the
minimum "lot width" at the street line shall not be less than 75% of the
minimum "lot width" for the zoning district in which the lot is located.
"Lot frontage" shall be the same as the lot width, except that in curved
alignments with an outside radius of 500 feet or less, the minimum distance
between the side lot lines measured along the street shall not be less than
75% of the required minimum lot width.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A unit of housing which:
1. Consists of one or more transportable sections which are
substantially constructed off site and, if more than one section, are
joined together onsite; and
2. Is built on a permanent foundation; and
3. Is designed to be used, when connected to all required utilities, as a
dwelling unit on a permanent foundation; and
§ 185-7 DENNIS CODE § 185-7
1:494
4. Is manufactured in accordance with the standards promulgated
for a manufactured home by the Secretary of the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to the
"National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety
Standards Act of 1974" Pub.L. 93-383 (42 U.S.C. 5401 et seq.)
and the standards promulgated for a manufactured home by the
Commissioner of the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs
pursuant to the "State Uniform Construction Code Act," P.L. 1975,
c.217 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.) For purposes of this chapter,
travel trailers, campers and camper trailers are not considered
"manufactured homes."
MATURE TREE — Any woody perennial having a diameter greater than 24
inches at any point or a height in excess of 30 feet.
METHADONE CLINIC — A clinic which has been legally established to
provide outpatient methadone maintenance services by dispensing
methadone (DOLOPHINE), a schedule II opioid analgesic, to those who
abuse heroin and other opioids. A methadone clinic shall be deemed to
be a business or commercial operation or functional equivalent thereof
and shall not be construed, for zoning purposes, as ancillary or adjunct
to a doctor's professional office. The siting of a methadone clinic within a
municipality shall be limited to zones designated for business or commercial
use. Methadone clinics are not permitted in any zone that provides for
residential or mixed residential/ business and mixed/commercial
uses.[Added 4-10-18 by Ord. No. 2018-01]
MIXED-USE — A building containing more than one use.
MOTEL — An establishment providing transient sleeping accommodations
with a majority of all rooms having direct access to the outside without the
necessity of passing through the main lobby of the building.
MULTI-FAMILY HOUSING — A building containing two or more dwelling
units.
(P) NATURAL REGENERATION — The establishment of a plant or plant age
class from natural seeding, sprouting, suckering or layering.
(P) NATURAL RESOURCE COMMITTEE — A municipal advisory body
created by the Dennis Township Committee in 2012.
NATURAL REVEGETATION LIST — Plantings recommended by the
Township of Dennis Natural Resource Committee that have best adapted to
the climate, soil and topography of the Township of Dennis. A list of such
plantings shall be on file for use and guidance of persons presenting plans
for revegetation.
(P) NAVIGABLE WATERS — Water capable of being transversed by pleasure
craft.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot, the area, dimension or location of which
was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter but
§ 185-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-7
1:495
which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it
is located by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure, the size, dimension or
location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment
of this chapter but which fails to conform to the requirements of the
zoning district in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or
amendment.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use or activity which was lawful prior to the
adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter but which fails to conform
to the requirements of the zoning district in which it located by reason of
such adoption, revision or amendment.
OFFICE — A room or groups of rooms used for conducting the affairs
of a business, profession, service, industry, or government and generally
furnished with desks, tables, files and communication equipment.
OUTDOOR STORAGE — The keeping, in an unenclosed area, of any goods,
junk, material, merchandise or vehicles in the same place for more than
twenty-four hours.
(P) PARCEL — Any quantity of land, consisting of one or more lots, that
is capable of being described with such definiteness that its location and
boundaries may be established.[Amended 2-24-97 by Ord. No. 97-01]
PARKING SPACE — An area of not less than nine feet wide by 18 feet in
length, either within a structure or in the open, for the parking of motor
vehicles, exclusive of driveways, access drives, fire lanes and public rightsof-
way, except that nothing shall prohibit private driveways for detached
dwelling units from being considered off-street parking areas, provided
that no portion of such private driveway within the right-of-way line of the
street intersected by such driveway shall be considered off-street parking
space. The area is intended to be sufficient to accommodate the exterior
extremities of the vehicles, whether in addition thereto wheel blocks are
installed within this area to prevent the bumper from overhanging at one
end of the "parking space." The width and length of each space shall
be measured perpendicular to each other regardless of the angle of the
"parking space" to the access aisle or driveway.
PARKING STRUCTURE — A multi-story structure (also called a parking
garage or parking deck) that is designed specifically for automobile parking
and where there are a number of floors or levels.
PEDESTRIAN-SCALED LIGHTING — Lighting that is no greater than 15
feet in height.
(P) PERMEABILITY — The rate at which water moves through a unit area of
soil, rock, or other material at hydraulic gradient of one.
PERMITTED USE — Any use of land or building as permitted by this
chapter.
§ 185-7 DENNIS CODE § 185-7
1:496
(P) PERSON — An individual, corporation, public agency, business trust,
partnership, association, two or more persons having a joint or common
interest or any other legal entity.
PERSONAL SERVICES — Establishment primarily engaged in providing
services involving care of a person or his or her personal goods or apparel
(examples include health club, laundry, beauty shop).
(P) PINELANDS AREA — The area designated as such in the Pineland
Protection Act, N.J.S.A. 13:18A-1 et seq., as amended.
(P) PINELANDS DEVELOPMENT REVIEW BOARD — The agency
responsible from February 8, 1979, until June 28, 1979, for review of
and action on applications for development in the Pinelands Area which
required approvals of other state agencies, except where the Pinelands
Commission acted on applications during that time period.
(P) PINELANDS NATIVE FOREST TYPE — See N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.43.
(P) PINELANDS PROTECTION ACT — N.J.S.A. 13:18A-1 et seq.
(P) PINELANDS RESOURCE-RELATED USE — Any use which is based on
resources which are indigenous to the Pinelands, including but not limited
to forest products, berry agriculture and sand, gravel, clay or limonite.
(P) PLANTS, THREATENED OR ENDANGERED — A Pinelands plant species
whose survival worldwide, nationwide or in the state is in jeopardy.
PREFERRED TREES — Trees recommended by the New Jersey Bureau of
Forest Management as best adapted to the climate, soil and topography of
the Township of Dennis. A list of such trees shall be kept on file with the
Township Clerk.
PRIMARY STREET — Refers to the street directly abutting the front yard of
a parcel. The primary street is the lot's street address.
PRINCIPAL USE — The main purpose for which a lot or building is used.
Only one principal use may be permitted per property unless otherwise
permitted in the district.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — An office primarily utilized for the enactment of
administrative duties in a practice duly licensed by the State of New Jersey;
such as medicine, architecture, engineering, surveying, law, accounting, or
real estate.
PUBLIC PURPOSE USES — The use of land or buildings by the governing
body of the Township of Dennis or any officially created authority or agency
thereof.
(P) PUBLIC PURPOSE USE — The use of land or buildings by the Governing
Body of the township or any officially created authority or agency thereof.
(P) PUBLIC SERVICE INFRASTRUCTURE — Sewer service, gas, electricity,
water, telephone, cable television and other public utilities developed
linearly, roads and streets and other similar services provided or maintained
by any public or private entity.
§ 185-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-7
1:497
(P) RECOMMENDED MANAGEMENT PRACTICE — The management
program which employs the most efficient use of available technology,
natural, human and economic resources.
(P) RECORD TREE — The largest tree of a particular species in New Jersey
based on its circumference at four and one-half (4.5) feet above ground
level. A listing of the largest known tree of each species and its location is
maintained at the principal offices of the Commission.[Added 2-24-97 by
Ord. No. 97-01]
(P) RECREATIONAL FACILITY, INTENSIVE — Any recreational facility
which does not satisfy the definition of "low-intensive recreational facility,"
including but not limited to golf courses, marinas, amusement parks, hotels
and motels.
(P) RECREATIONAL FACILITY, LOW INTENSIVE — A facility or area which
complies with the standards in N.J.A.C. 7:50-5, Part III, utilizes and depends
on the natural environment of the Pinelands and requires no significant
modifications of that environment other than to provide access, and which
has an insignificant impact on surrounding uses or on the environmental
integrity of the area. It permits such low intensity uses as hiking, hunting,
trapping, fishing, canoeing, nature study, orienteering, horseback riding
and bicycling.[Amended 2-24-97 by Ord. No. 97-01]
RESIDENTIAL AGRICULTURE — The production, principally for home use
or consumption, of plants, animals or their products, and for sale to others
where such sales are incidental, including but not limited to, gardening,
fruit production, and poultry and livestock products for household use only,
and livestock boarding and breeding.
RESIDENTIAL HEALTH CARE FACILITY — A facility licensed and/or
regulated by the New Jersey Department of Health or the Department of
Community Affairs, that provides food, shelter, supervised health care and
related services to four or more persons 18 years of age or older who are
unrelated to the owner or administrator.
(P) RESOURCE EXTRACTION — The dredging, digging, extraction, mining,
and quarrying of sand, gravel, clay or limonite for commercial purposes,
not including, however, the private or agricultural extraction and use of
extracted material by a landowner.
(P) RESOURCE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM PLAN — A plan, prepared in
accordance with the United States Department of Agriculture, Natural
Resources Conservation Service New Jersey Field Office Technical Guide,
dated June 2005. Such plans shall prescribe needed land treatment and
related conservation and natural resources management measures,
including forest management practices, for the conservation, protection and
development of natural resources, the maintenance and enhancement of
agricultural or horticultural productivity, and the control and prevention of
non-point source pollution; and establish criteria for resource sustainability
of soil, water, air, plants and animals.
RESTAURANT — Any establishment, however designated, at which food is
sold for consumption on the premises. However, a snack bar or refreshment
§ 185-7 DENNIS CODE § 185-7
1:498
stand at a public or community swimming pool, playground, golf course
(major or miniature), playfield or park, operated solely by the agency or
group operating the recreation facility and for the convenience of, and
restricted solely to, patrons of the recreational facility, shall not be deemed
a "restaurant".
RETAIL — Establishments engaged in selling goods or merchandise to
the general public for personal or household consumption and rendering
services incidental to the sale of such goods.
(P) ROOT RAKING — A silvicultural practice involving the drawing of a set
of tines, mounted on the front or trailed behind a tractor, over an area to
thoroughly disturb tree and vegetation roots and/or to collect stumps and
slash.
(P) SEASONAL HIGH WATER TABLE — The level below the natural ground
surface to which water seasonally rises in the soil in most years.
SECONDARY STREET — Occurs on corner lots, being the street that is
considered subordinate to the primary street.
SECRETARY TO THE PLANNING AND ZONING BOARDS — A part-time
employee who shall be responsible to maintain minutes of all meetings held
in accordance with the Open Public Meetings Act.
(P) SEED TREE CUT — A silvicultural practice involving the removal of old
forest stand in one cutting, except for a small number of trees left singly, in
small groups or narrow strips, as a source of seed for natural regeneration.
SERVICE STATION — Lands and buildings providing for the sale of truck
and automotive fuel, lubricants and automotive accessories. Maintenance
and minor repairs for motor vehicles may be provided, but no body repairs
or painting or the extended storage of inoperable or wrecked vehicles shall
be permitted.
SERVICES — Establishments primarily engaged in providing assistance,
as opposed to products, to individuals, businesses, industry, government
and other enterprises (examples include legal, engineering, educational
services).
SETBACK LINE — A line drawn parallel with a street line or lot line and
drawn through the point of a building nearest to the street line or lot line.
The term "required setback" means a line that is established a minimum
horizontal distance from the street line of the lot line and beyond which a
building or part of a building is not permitted to extend toward the street
line or lot line.
SHARED PARKING — Parking spaces that are assigned to more than one
use.
(P) SHELTERWOOD CUT — A silvicultural practice involving the
establishment of a new, essentially even-aged forest stand from release,
typically in a series of cuttings, of new trees started under the old forest
stand. A shelterwood cut involves the establishment of the new forest stand
before the old forest stand is removed.
§ 185-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-7
1:499
SIGN — Any building, structure or portion thereof on which any
announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, illustration or insignia
is used to advertise or promote the interest of any person or product when
the same is placed in view of the general public. "Signs" do not include
the flag or emblem of any nation, organization of nations, state, city or any
fraternal, religious or civic organization; merchandise, pictures or models of
products or services incorporated in a window display; works of art which in
no way identify a product; or scoreboards located on athletic fields. "Sign"
shall also include "portable sign."
SITE PLAN REVIEW — The examination of the specific development plans
for a lot. Wherever the term "site plan approval" is used in this chapter, it
shall be understood to mean a requirement that the site plan be reviewed
and approved by the Dennis Township Planning or Zoning Board.
SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — A wind energy system, as defined herein
that which is used to generate electricity; and has a nameplate capacity of
100 kilowatts or less.[Added 5-5-09 by Ord. No. 2009-01]
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A solar energy system and all associated
equipment which converts solar energy into a usable electrical energy,
heats water or produces hot air or other similar function through the use of
solar panels.[Added 5-5-09 by Ord. No. 2009-01]
SOLAR PANELS — A structure containing one or more receptive cells, the
purpose of which is to convert solar energy into usable electrical energy by
way of a solar energy system.[Added 5-5-09 by Ord. No. 2009-01]
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the next floor above it or, if there is no floor above
it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. For the
purpose of this chapter, the interior of the roof shall not be considered
a ceiling. A "half story" is the area under a pitched roof at the top of a
building, the floor of which is at least four feet but no more than six feet
below the plate.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive
or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway or
which is shown upon a plat theretofore approved pursuant to law or which
is approved by official action as provided by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. or
which is shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the
county recording officer prior to the appointment of the Planning Board
and the grant to such Board of the power to review plats, and includes the
land between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may
comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking areas and
other areas within the street lines.
STREET LINE — The edge of the existing or future street right-of-way,
whichever would result in the widest right-of-way, as shown on the adopted
Master Plan or Official Map, forming the dividing line between the street
and a lot.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed, assembled or erected which requires
location on the ground or attachment to something having such location
§ 185-7 DENNIS CODE § 185-7
1:500
on the ground, including buildings, fences, tanks, towers, signs, advertising
devices, swimming pools and tennis courts.
(P) SUBMERGED LAND — Those lands which are inundated with water
throughout the year.
SWIMMING POOL, PORTABLE — Portable pools shall not be subject to
the requirements of Article V and are those pools which are not otherwise
permanently installed; do not require water filtration, circulation, and
purification; do not exceed a water surface area of 100 square feet; and do
not require braces or supports.
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL — Includes an artificially
constructed pool, whether located above or below the ground, having a
depth of more than 18 inches and/or a water surface of 100 square feet
or more; designed and maintained for swimming and bathing purposes by
an individual for use by members of his household and guests; and which
is located on a lot as an accessory use to a detached dwelling; and shall
include all buildings, structures, equipment and appurtenances thereto.
(P) THINNING — A silvicultural practice involving the removal of competing
trees to favor certain species, sizes and qualities of trees.
TOWNHOUSE — A one-family dwelling in a row of at least three such units
in which each unit has its own front and rear access to the outside, no unit
is located over another unit, and each unit is separated from any other unit
by one or more vertical common fire-resistant walls.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Dennis, Cape May County, New Jersey.
TRACT — An area of land composed of one or more lots adjacent to one
another, having sufficient dimensions and area to make one parcel of land
meeting the requirements of this chapter for the use(s) intended. The
original land area may be divided by one existing public street and still be
considered one "tract," provided that the street is not an arterial or collector
road and that a linear distance equal to more than 75% of the frontage of
the side of the street having the larger street frontage lies opposite and
equivalent linear distance of street frontage on the other side of the street.
TREE — Any woody perennial having a diameter greater than two and onehalf
(2 1/2) inches, measured at a point four and one-half (4 1/2) feet above
the ground.
TREE REGISTER — A list of trees within the township which are of special
significance and are therefore worthy of protection by virtue of their size,
age, type, history or relationship to historical or cultural events. A list of
such trees shall be kept on file for use and guidance of persons presenting
plans for development in wooded areas.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — A unit where two families live, the unit could
be split horizontally with the units side by side or vertically with the units
stacked on one another.
(P) UTILITY DISTRIBUTION LINES — Lines, conduits or pipes located in
a street, road, alley or easement through which natural gas, electricity,
§ 185-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-7
1:501
telephone, cable television, water, sewage or stormwater discharge is
distributed to or from service lines extending from the served area. Utility
distribution lines do not include electric transmission lines.[Amended
2-24-97 by Ord. No. 97-01]
(P) VEGETATION — Any plant material, including grasses, shrubs and trees.
(P) WETLANDS — The meaning ascribed to the word in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.4.
WETLANDS BUFFER — An area left in its natural state between
developable uplands and designated wetlands, the depth of which is
designated by the N.J.D.E.P.E. based on the quality of wetlands.
(P) WETLANDS, COASTAL — The meaning ascribed to the words in N.J.A.C.
7:50-6.5.
WETLANDS, FRESHWATER — Any land certified by the N.J.D.E.P.E. Bureau
of Wetlands to be wetlands in accordance with the Freshwater Wetlands
Protection Act of July 1, 1987, as currently amended.
(P) WETLANDS, INLAND — The meaning ascribed to the words in N.J.A.C.
7:50-6.5.
WETLANDS, SALTWATER — Tidal wetlands along the Atlantic Ocean and
Delaware Bay as delineated on official maps as listed under N.J.A.C. 7:7-2.2.
(P) WETLANDS MANAGEMENT — The establishment of a characteristic
wetland or the removal of exotic species or Phragmites from a wetland
in accordance with the standards of N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.10. For purposes of
this definition, exotic species are those that are not indigenous to North
America.
(P) WETLAND SOILS — Those soils designated as very poorly drained
or poorly drained by the Soil Conservation Service of the United States
Department of Agriculture, including but not limited to Atsion, Bayboro,
Berryland, Colemantown, Elkton, Keansburg, Leon, Muck, Othello,
Pocomoke, St. Johns and Freshwater Marsh and Tidal Marsh soil types.
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — A wind turbine and all associated equipment
including any base, blade, foundation, nacelle, rotor, tower, transformer,
vane, wire, inverter, batteries or other component necessary to fully utilize
the wind generator.[Added 5-5-09 by Ord. No. 2009-01]
WIND TURBINE — Equipment that converts energy from the wind into
electricity. This term includes the rotor, blades and associated mechanical
and electrical conversion components necessary to generate, store and/or
transfer energy.[Added 5-5-09 by Ord. No. 2009-01]
YARD, FRONT — An open space extending across the full width of the lot
and lying between the street line and the closest point of any building on the
lot. The depth of the "front yard" shall be measured horizontally and at right
angles to either a straight street line or the tangent lines of curved street
lines. The minimum required "front yard" shall be the same as the required
setback. The minimum front yard setback as required by the zoning district
shall be met on all property lines abutting streets.
§ 185-7 DENNIS CODE § 185-7
1:502
YARD, REAR — An open space extending across the full width of the lot and
lying between the rear lot line and the closest point of the principal building
on the lot. The depth of the "rear yard" shall be measured horizontally and
at right angles to either a straight rear lot line or the tangent of curved
rear lot lines. The minimum required "rear yard" shall be the same as the
required setback.
YARD, SIDE — An open space extending from the front yard to the rear yard
and lying between each side lot line and the closest point of the principal
building on the lot. The width of the required "side yard" shall be measured
horizontally and at right angles to either a straight line or the tangent lines
of curved side lot lines.
ZONING OFFICER — Includes both the Zoning Officer and/or the
Construction Official.
§ 185-8. (Reserved)
§ 185-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-8
1:503

ARTICLE III
Districts; Map; Boundaries
[Amended 7-15-13 by Ord. No. 2013-03]
§ 185-9. Enumeration of districts. [Amended 6-22-1998 by Ord. No.
98-04]
For the purpose of this chapter, the Township of Dennis is hereby divided
into 19 districts, four of which exist exclusively in the Pinelands Area.
Within the Pinelands Area, these districts are consistent with the Pinelands
Management Areas set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:50, Subchapter 5.
Symbol District Name
R-3 R-3 Rural Single Family Residential
R-10 R-10 Low Density Single Family Residential
VR Village Residential
VC Village Commercial
CR Clermont Residential
CVC Clermont Village Center
CVR Clermont Village Residential
OVR Ocean View Residential
OVCC Ocean View Center Core
OVC Ocean View Center
OVCR Ocean View Center Residential
B Business
M Marina
C Conservation
Cape May Tributaries and Bays East Overlay
Pinelands
A Airport Hazard
PV Pinelands Village
PR Rural Development
PF8 Moderate Density Forest
PF25 Low-Density Forest
§ 185-10. Zoning map.82 [Amended 1-12-1998 by Ord. No. 97-18;
3-31-99 by Ord. No. 99-06; 8-8-06 by Ord. No. 2006-11; 12-20-07 by
Ord. No. 2007-01; 4-1-08 by Ord. No. 2008-05; 7-15-13 by Ord. No.
2013-03; 3-26-19 by Ord. No. 2019-01]
82.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 185-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-10
1:505
§ 185-11. Interpretation of boundaries.
Zoning district boundary lines are intended to follow street center lines,
railroad and utility rights-of-way, streams and lot or property lines as they
exist on lots of record at the time of enactment of this chapter unless
otherwise indicated by dimensions on the Zoning Map. Any dimensions
shown shall be measured horizontally and, when measured from a street,
shall be measured from the street right-of-way line even if the center line
of that street is used for the location of a zoning district line. The exact
location of any disputed zoning district boundary line shall be determined
by the Board of Adjustment. The zoning standards, controls and
designations apply to every structure, lot, use and development within
A. The boundaries of these zoning districts are established on the Zoning
Map adopted by the Mayor and Committee dated February 28, 1997
and as amended on November 24, 1997, February 22, 1999 and on
February 15, 2005, August 8, 2006, February 20, 2007 and the map
dated April, 2013, as adopted by Ord. No. 2013-03, which accompanies
this ordinance and is on file in the office of the Township Clerk and is
hereby made a part of this chapter.
In addition, Sections 1 and 2 of Ordinance No. 90-194, adopted 8-13-90,
provided as follows:
"Section 1. Amendments to the Zoning Map delineating Airport Hazard
Zones as plotted by the Municipal Engineer, as required by the Air
Safety and Hazardous Zoning Act of 1983, and hereby approved.
Section 2. The Township Committee of the Township of Dennis hereby
adopts by reference and attachment the standards of the Air Safety and
Hazardous Zoning Act of 1983, codified at N.J.A.C. 16:62-1.1 et seq. and
incorporates said standards as part of the Township Master Plan and
Zoning Ordinances."
B. Amendments:
(1) [Amended 3-26-19 by Ord. No. 2019-01]
FROM PV to PF25
Block 22, Lots 22, 24, 25
Block 57, Lots 13, 14
Block 31, Lot 25
Block 32, Lots 1, 2,3,5,6
FROM PF25 to PV
Block 31, Lots 5.02 and I 3
FROM PV to PF8
Block 22, lot 27
§ 185-10 DENNIS CODE § 185-11
1:506
every district, and the district lines extend vertically in both directions from
ground level.
§ 185-12. Alteration of district boundaries of lots in single
ownership.
A. Where a zoning district boundary line divides a lot other than by
following a stream or street, any use permitted in either district may be
extended not more than 20 feet into the adjacent district. A use
permitted in the zoning district so extended shall thereafter be a
permitted use in the extended area. A zoning district line, however,
shall be altered only once by utilizing this section of the chapter, after
which the lot use shall be governed by the regulations of the zoning
district in which it is located after the zoning district boundary line
adjustment.
B. Where a zoning district boundary line divides a lot as a result of an
approximately plotted state freshwater wetlands boundary, the upland
zoning district shall be extended to the field established and state
verified wetlands boundary. The zone shall not be continued beyond a
lot property line without application to the Township Zoning Board of
Adjustment with proper field survey locationing and state certification
of wetlands lines.
§ 185-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-12
1:507

ARTICLE IV
District Regulations
[Amended 7-15-13 by Ord. No. 2013-03]
§ 185-13. Compliance required.
No building shall hereafter be used, erected, altered, converted, enlarged,
added to, moved or reduced, wholly or in part, nor shall any land be
designed, used or physically altered for any purpose or in any manner
except in conformity with this chapter. Where a lot is formed from part of
a lot already occupied by a building, such subdivision shall be effected in
such a manner as not to impair any of the requirements of this chapter
with respect to the existing building and all yards and other open space
in connection therewith and so that all resulting lots have adequate
dimensions consistent with the requirements of the zoning district in which
they are located and so that all lots have frontage on an improved state,
county, or municipal street.
No subdivision of vacant land shall hereafter be approved when said vacant
land adjoins existing lots, in common ownership with said vacant lands,
not in current conformance with minimum lot area standards without first
bringing said existing lot into conformance with current minimum
standards for lot area.
See Schedules A and B, Area and Yard Requirements for Zone Districts,
included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 185-14. R-3 Rural Single Family Residential development purpose.
A. Purpose.
(1) The purpose of the R-3 District is to provide for continued moderate
density residential development in rural portions of the township
that have established a prevailing residential development
character.
B. Principal permitted uses on the land and in buildings in the R-3 Districts
shall be as follows:
(1) Farms.
(2) Detached single family dwelling units.
(3) Public playgrounds, conservation areas, parks and public purpose
uses.
(4) Churches and/or cemeteries.
(5) Golf courses.
(6) (Reserved for Future Use.)
§ 185-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-14
1:509
(7) Improved campgrounds existing as of December 31, 1992 and
having been legally licensed by the township in 1992, as a
conditional use.
(8) Cluster single-family residential developments as a conditional use.
See Section 185-73 for standards.
(9) Public and private (not for profit) elementary, middle, and/or high
schools shall be a conditional use. (See Section 185-73 for
standards.)
C. Accessory uses permitted in the R-3 District shall be as follows:
(1) Private residential swimming pools.
(2) Private residential tool sheds not to exceed 15 feet in height and
not more than 200 square feet in area.
(3) Travel trailers and campers to be parked or stored only and located
in rear or side yards only. Their dimensions shall not be counted in
determining total building coverage, and they shall not be used for
temporary or permanent living quarters while situated on a lot.
(4) Off-street parking for residential uses.
(5) Residential garages for vehicular and other storage but containing
no living space or elements.
(6) Signs.
(7) Fences and walls.
(8) Residential agriculture.
(9) Home occupations, subject to the restrictions in Section 185-7.
(10) Temporary construction trailers and one sign not exceeding 32
square feet, advertising the prime contractor(s), architect,
financing institution and similar data for the period of construction
beginning with the issuance of a building permit and ending with
the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or one year, whichever is
less, provided that said trailer(s) and sign are on the site where
construction is taking place and set back at least 15 feet from
street and lot lines.
(11) Camper sales at the site of any campground, provided that no
portion of the sales area is located within any required buffer zone
and all portions of the sales area are set back at least 200 feet from
any public road.
(12) Small wind energy systems and solar energy systems in accordance
with the standards in Section 185-73D(22). [Added 5-5-09 by
Ord. No. 2009-01]
§ 185-14 DENNIS CODE § 185-14
1:510
D. Maximum building height. No building shall exceed 30 feet in height
and 2.5 stories, except that churches shall not exceed 55 feet in height.
E. Minimum area and yard requirements in the R-3 District shall be as
follows:
Requirement Single Family Churches and/
or Cemeteries
Golf Courses
Principal
Building
Lot Area 3 ac. 60,000 sq.ft. 50 ac.
Lot Frontage 150 ft. 200 ft. 600 ft.
Lot Width 150 ft. 200 ft. 600 ft.
Lot Depth 300 ft. 200 ft. 1,000 ft.
Side Yard, each 35 ft. 50 ft. 200 ft.
Front Yard 100 ft. 50 ft. 200 ft.
Rear Yard 100 ft. 50 ft. 200 ft.
Accessory
Buildings
Side Yard,
each
35 ft. 10 ft. 50 ft.
Rear Yard 35 ft. 40 ft. 50 ft.
Distance to
Principal
Structure
20 ft. 40 ft. 50 ft.
Maximum
Coverage
Impervious 15% 30% 5%
Principal
Building
10% 10% 1%
Accessory
Buildings
2% 2% 0.5%
Farm Use/Acc.
Bldg.
10%
F. Lot size averaging. Lot size averaging is permitted in the R-3 District
for single family residential lots, as follows:
(1) The total number of lots permitted shall be calculated by deducting
the area devoted to any streets and dividing the remaining area of
the parcel to be developed by three acres. In the calculation of the
number of lots, the developer may utilize any designated
freshwater wetlands as part of the remaining area.
§ 185-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-14
1:511
§ 185-15. R-10 Low Density Single Family Residential District.
(2) Minimum area and yard requirements for lots reduced in size by lot
size averaging shall be as follows:
Requirement Single Family
Principal Building
Lot Area 60,000 sq.ft.
Lot Frontage 175 ft.
Lot Width 175 ft.
Lot Depth 250 ft.
Side Yard, each 30 ft.
Front Yard 75 ft.
Rear Yard 75 ft.
Accessory Building
Side Yard 15 ft.
Rear Yard 15 ft.
Distance to Principal
Building 20 ft.
Maximum Coverage
Impervious 15%
Principal Building 10%
Accessory Building 2%
(3) In any application utilizing the lot size averaging technique, no
more than 50% of the lots may have an area of less than three
acres, and no more than 20% of the lots may be of the minimum
area.
G. Lot areas. For lots containing freshwater wetlands and wetlands buffers
under R-3 Rural Single Family and R-3 Rural Single Family lot size
averaging, the minimum upland lot area, including buffer, shall be
40,000 square feet.
A. Purpose. The R-10 District requires a minimum of 10 acres per home.
The purpose of the R-10 District is to provide for limited low density,
residential development in areas between developable uplands and the
marsh dominated lowlands of the Conservation (C) District. The R-10
District generally occupies intermediate elevations in the terrain.
Limited residential development in these environmentally sensitive
areas will serve as a buffer between the wetlands and upland areas of
higher development intensity.
§ 185-14 DENNIS CODE § 185-15
1:512
B. Principal permitted uses on the land and in buildings in the R-10
District shall be as follows:
(1) Farms.
(2) Detached single family dwelling units.
(3) Public playgrounds, conservation areas, parks and public purpose
uses.
(4) Churches and/or cemeteries.
(5) (Reserved for Future Use.)
(6) (Reserved for Future Use.)
(7) Cluster single-family residential developments as a conditional use.
See Section 185-73 for standards.
(8) Public and private (not for profit) elementary, middle, and/or high
schools shall be a conditional use. (See Section 185-73 for
standards.)
C. Accessory uses permitted in the R-10 District shall be as follows:
(1) Private residential swimming pools.
(2) Private residential tool sheds not to exceed 15 feet in height and
not more than 200 square feet in area.
(3) Travel trailers and campers to be parked or stored only and located
in rear or side yards only. Their dimensions shall not be counted in
determining total building coverage, and they shall not be used for
temporary or permanent living quarters while situated on a lot.
(4) Off-street parking and private garages.
(5) Signs.
(6) Fences and walls.
(7) Residential agriculture.
(8) Home occupations, subject to the restrictions in Section 185-7.
(9) Temporary construction trailers and one sign exceeding 32 square
feet, advertising the prime contractor, subcontractor(s), architect,
financing institution and similar data for the period of construction
beginning with the issuance of a building permit and ending with
the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or one year, whichever is
less, provided that said trailer(s) and sign are on the site where
construction is taking place and set back at least 15 feet from
street and lot lines.
§ 185-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-15
1:513
§ 185-16. VR Village Residential District.
(10) Camper sales at the site of any campground, provided that no
portion of the sales area is located within any required buffer zone
and all portions of the sales area are set back at least 200 feet from
any public road.
(11) Small wind energy systems and solar energy systems in accordance
with the standards in Section 185-73D(22) [Added 5-5-09 by Ord.
No. 2009-01]
D. Maximum building height. No building shall exceed 30 feet in height
and 2.5 stories, except that churches shall not exceed 55 feet in height
and except as allowed in Section 185-72.
E. Area and yard requirements in the R-10 District shall be as follows:
Requirement Single Family Churches and/or
Cemeteries
Principal Building
Lot Area 10 ac. 60,000 sq.ft.
Lot Frontage 200 ft. 200 ft.
Lot Width 200 ft. 200 ft.
Lot Depth 400 ft. 200 ft.
Side Yard, each 50 ft. 50 ft.
Front Yard 100 ft. 50 ft.
Rear Yard 100 ft. 50 ft.
Accessory Buildings
Side Yard, each 50 ft. 10 ft.
Rear Yard 50 ft. 40 ft.
Distance to Principal
Structure
20 ft. 40 ft.
Maximum Coverage
Impervious 7% 30%
Principal Building 5% 10%
Nonagricultural
Accessory Bldg.
1% 2%
Agricultural
Accessory Building
10%
F. Gross floor area. The minimum gross floor area for single-family
detached dwellings shall be 1,000 square feet.
§ 185-15 DENNIS CODE § 185-16
1:514
A. Purpose. The purpose of the VR District is to help preserve the charm of
the earliest villages of the township, recognizing their unique historic
basis, architectural character, limited lot size and special needs for
developmental standards.
B. Principal permitted uses on the land and in buildings in the VR District
shall be as follows:
C. Accessory uses permitted in the VR District shall be as follows:
(1) Private residential in-ground and above-ground swimming pools.
(2) Garages, excluding commercial vehicles, limited to one story in
height.
(3) Travel trailers and campers located in rear and side yards only.
(4) Off-street parking.
(5) Signs in accordance with the standards in Section 185-43.
(6) Fences and walls in accordance with the standards in Section
185-33.
(7) Residential agriculture.
(8) Home businesses, as a conditional accessory use, only in
Dennisville.
(9) Small wind energy systems and solar energy systems in accordance
with the standards in Section 185-73D(22). [Added 5-5-09 by
Ord. No. 2009-01]
(10) Decks, patios, terraces, etc.
(11) Outdoor storage.
(12) Tool and storage sheds.
D. Building area and yard requirements in the VR District shall be as
follows:
§ 185-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-16
1:515
§ 185-17. VC Village Commercial.
Red line = property line
E. Parking and encroachment requirements as well as permitted frontage
types within the VR District shall be as follows:
Red line = property line
F. Architectural requirements within the VR District shall follow the
standards in Section 185-32.4.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the VC (Village Commercial District) is to
provide an opportunity for appropriate development in commercial
zones along Route 47 in Dennisville and South Dennis, Route 83 in
South Dennis and at the crossroads of County Route 628 and 608 in
South Seaville. The zone is intended to allow commercial development
that is compatible with the historic and architectural character within
these areas.
§ 185-16 DENNIS CODE § 185-17
1:516
B. Principal uses permitted on the land and in the buildings in the VC
District shall be as follows:83
C. Accessory uses permitted in the VC District shall be as follows:
(1) Off-street parking.
(2) Off-street loading.
(3) Garages for commercial vehicles, limited to one story in height.
(4) Temporary construction trailer.
(5) Fences and walls in accordance with the standards in Section
185-33.
(6) Signs in accordance with the standards in Section 185-43D.
(7) Trash receptacles.
(8) Small wind energy systems and solar energy systems in accordance
with the standards in Section 185-73D(22).
(9) Parks, plazas, courtyards and playgrounds.
(10) Street furnishings, planters, street lights.
(11) Sidewalk cafes associated with restaurants.
(12) Decks, patios, terraces, etc.
(13) Home businesses, as a conditional accessory use.
D. Building area and yard requirements in the VC District shall be as
follows:
Red line = property
83.Editor's Note: Automobile repair and service included gas station.
§ 185-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-17
1:517
§ 185-18. CR Clermont Residential District.
E. Parking and encroachment requirements as well as permitted frontage
types within the VC District shall be as follows:
Red line = property line
F. Architectural requirements within the VC District shall follow the
standards in Section 185-32.2.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the CR District is to recognize is to recognize
existing residential development patterns within Clermont. The CR
District will work to retain the character of these residential areas and
promote infill development that is appropriate with the scale and
context of the existing homes.
B. Principal uses permitted on the land and in the buildings in the CR
District shall be as follows:
C. Accessory uses permitted in the CR district shall be as follows:
§ 185-17 DENNIS CODE § 185-18
1:518
(1) Off-street parking.
(2) Travel trailers and campers located in the rear or side yard.
(3) Private residential swimming pools.
(4) Residential garages with no living space, limited to one story in
height.
(5) Temporary construction trailers.
(6) Parks, plazas, courtyards and playgrounds.
(7) Signs in accordance with the standards in Section 185-43.
(8) Fences and walls in accordance with the standards in Section
185-33.
(9) Decks, patios, terraces, etc.
(10) Residential agriculture.
(11) Small wind energy systems and solar energy systems in accordance
with the standards in Section 185-73D(22).
(12) Outdoor storage.
(13) Tool and storage sheds. Structure shall not exceed 15 feet in height
and shall not be larger than 150 square feet in floor area.
D. Building area and yard requirements in the CR District shall be as
follows:
Red line = property line
§ 185-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-18
1:519
§ 185-19. CVC Clermont Village Center District.
E. Parking and encroachment requirements as well as permitted frontage
types within the CR District shall be as follows:
Red line = property line
A. Purpose. The purpose of the CVC District is to promote a mixture of
commercial, office and residential land uses within a compact,
pedestrian-friendly village. This zone requires active ground floor uses,
such as shops and personal service establishments on the first floor.
Meanwhile, office and residential dwelling units are permitted on upper
floors. This district is intended to promote compact development
through the use of community wastewater treatment facilities.
B. Principal uses permitted on the land and in the buildings in the CVC
District shall be as follows:84
84.Editor's Note: Automobile repair and service included gas station.
§ 185-18 DENNIS CODE § 185-19
1:520
C. Accessory uses permitted in the CVC District shall be as follows:
(1) Off-street parking.
(2) Off-street loading.
(3) Parks, plazas, courtyards and playgrounds.
(4) Garages for commercial vehicles, limited to one story in height.
(5) Temporary construction trailers.
(6) Street furnishings, planters, street lights.
(7) Sidewalk cafes associated with restaurants.
(8) Fences and walls in accordance with the standards in Section
185-33.
(9) Decks, patios, terraces, etc.
(10) Signs in accordance with the standards in Section 185-43C.
(11) Trash receptacles.
(12) Parking decks and structures.
D. Area and yard requirements for the CVC District shall be as follows:
§ 185-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-19
1:521
Red line = property
E. Parking and encroachment requirements as well as permitted frontage
types within the CVC District shall be as follows:
Red line = property line
§ 185-19 DENNIS CODE § 185-19
1:522
§ 185-20. CVR Clermont Village Residential District.
F. Architectural requirements within the CVC District shall follow the
standards in Section 185-32.2.
G. Open space and park requirements within the CVC District shall follow
the standards in Section 185-48.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the CVR District is to promote new, medium
density residential development within Clermont. This district will
permit a variety of housing typologies and expand housing options
within Dennis Township.
B. Principal uses permitted on the land and in the buildings in the CVR
District shall be as follows:
C. Accessory uses permitted in the CVR District shall be as follows:
(1) Off-street parking.
(2) Private residential swimming pools, except on lots with an area of
less than 35,000 square feet.
(3) Residential garages with no living space, limited to one story in
height.
(4) Temporary construction trailers.
(5) Trash receptacles.
(6) Signs in accordance with the standards in Section 185-43.
(7) Parks, plazas, courtyards and playgrounds.
(8) Fences and walls in accordance with the standards in Section
185-33.
§ 185-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-20
1:523
(9) Solar energy systems in accordance with the standards in Section
185-73D(22).
(10) Tool and storage sheds. Structure shall not exceed 15 feet in height
and shall not be larger than 150 square feet in floor area.
(11) Outdoor storage.
D. Area and yard requirements for the CVR District shall be as follows:
Red line = property line; Blue line = hypothetical townhome unit lines
E. Parking and encroachment requirements as well as permitted frontage
types within the CVR District shall be as follows:
Red line = property line; Blue line = hypothetical townhome unit lines
§ 185-20 DENNIS CODE § 185-20
1:524
§ 185-21. OVR Ocean View Residential District.
F. Architectural requirements within the CVR District shall follow the
standards in Section 185-32.3.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the OVR District is to recognize existing
residential development patterns within Ocean View where on-site
sewage disposal systems are currently provided. The OVR District will
work to retain the current character of these residential neighborhoods
and promote infill development that is appropriate with the scale and
context of the existing homes. Existing residential lots, which are
undersized, shall be grandfathered.
B. Principal permitted uses on the land and in buildings in the OVR
District shall be as follows:
C. Accessory uses permitted in the OVR District shall be as follows:
(1) Off-street parking.
(2) Travel trailers and campers located in the rear or side yard.
(3) Private residential swimming pools.
(4) Residential garages with no living space, limited to one story in
height.
(5) Temporary construction trailers.
(6) Signs in accordance with the standards in Section 185-43.
(7) Fences and walls in accordance with the standards in Section
185-33.
(8) Decks, patios, terraces, etc.
(9) Residential agriculture.
§ 185-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-21
1:525
(10) Small wind energy systems and solar energy systems in accordance
with the standards in Section 185-73D (22).
(11) Outdoor storage.
(12) Tool and storage sheds. Structure shall not exceed 15 feet in height
and shall not be larger than 150 square feet in floor area.
D. Area and yard requirements for the OVR District shall be as follows:
Red line = property line
E. Parking and encroachment requirements as well as permitted frontage
types within the OVR District shall be as follows:
Red line = property line
§ 185-21 DENNIS CODE § 185-21
1:526
§ 185-22. OVCC Ocean View Center Core District.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the OVCC District is to promote a desirable
mix of commercial, office, civic and residential land uses within a
vibrant, pedestrian-friendly Village Center environment with an
emphasis on uses that serve community needs. The OVCC District
should work to encourage pedestrian flow through the area by
generally permitting stores, shops and personal service establishment
on the ground floor of buildings and on the upper floors offices and
residential dwelling units. Additionally, the OVCC District permits
stand-along residential buildings as a conditional use as part of a
planned development. The OVCC District is intended to promote a more
dense development through the use of privately constructed and
maintained wastewater treatment facilities.
B. Principal permitted uses on the land and in buildings in the OVCC
District shall be as follows: 85
C. Accessory uses permitted in the OVCC District shall be as follows:
(1) Off-street parking.
(2) Off-street loading.
(3) Parking decks and structures.
(4) Parks, plazas, courtyards and playgrounds.
(5) Garages for commercial vehicles, limited to one story in height.
85.Editor's Note: Automobile repair and service included gas station.
§ 185-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-22
1:527
(6) Temporary construction trailers.
(7) Street furnishings, planters, street lights.
(8) Sidewalk cafes associated with a restaurant.
(9) Fences and walls in accordance with the standards in Section
185-33.
(10) Decks, patios, terraces, etc.
(11) Signs in accordance with the standards in Section 185-43C.
(12) Trash receptacles.
D. Area and yard requirements for the OVCC District shall be as follows:
Red line = property line
E. Parking and encroachment requirements as well as permitted frontage
types within the OVCC District shall be as follows:
§ 185-22 DENNIS CODE § 185-22
1:528
§ 185-23. OVC Ocean View Center District.
Red line = property line
F. Architectural requirements within OVCC District shall follow the
standards in Section 185-32.2.
G. Open space and park requirements within the OVCC District shall
follow the standards in Section 185-48.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the OVC District is to promote a desirable mix
of commercial, office, civic and residential land uses within a vibrant,
pedestrian-friendly Village Center environment with an emphasis on
uses that serve community needs. The OVC District should work to
encourage pedestrian flow through the area by generally permitting
stores, shops and personal service establishment on the ground floor of
buildings and on the upper floors offices and residential dwelling units.
The OVC District is intended to promote a more dense development
through the use of privately constructed and maintained wastewater
treatment facilities.
B. Principal permitted uses on the land and in buildings in the OVC
District shall be as follows:86
86.Editor's Note: Automobile repair and service included gas station.
§ 185-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-23
1:529
C. Accessory uses permitted in the OVC District shall be as follows:
(1) Off-street parking.
(2) Off-street loading.
(3) Parking decks and structures.
(4) Parks, plazas, courtyards and playgrounds.
(5) Garages for commercial vehicles, limited to one story in height.
(6) Temporary construction trailers.
(7) Street furnishings, planters, street lights.
(8) Sidewalk cafes associated with a restaurant.
(9) Fences and walls in accordance with the standards in Section
185-33.
(10) Decks, patios, terraces, etc.
(11) Signs in accordance with the standards in Section 185-43C.
(12) Trash receptacles.
D. Area and yard requirements for the OVC District shall be as follows:
§ 185-23 DENNIS CODE § 185-23
1:530
Red line = property
E. Parking and encroachment requirements as well as permitted frontage
types within the OVC District shall be as follows:
Red line = property line
§ 185-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-23
1:531
§ 185-24. OVCR Ocean View Center Residential District.
F. Architectural requirements within the OVC District shall follow the
standards in Section 185-32.2.
G. Open space and park requirements within the OVC District shall follow
the standards in Section 185-48.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the OVCR District is to promote new, medium
density residential development within Ocean View. This district will
promote a variety of housing typologies and housing options within
Dennis Township.
B. Principal permitted uses on the land and in buildings in the OVCR
District shall be as follows:
C. Accessory uses permitted in the OVCR District shall be as follows:
(1) Off-street parking.
(2) Trash receptacles.
(3) Signs in accordance with the standards in Section 185-43.
(4) Parks, plazas, courtyards and playgrounds.
(5) Fences and walls in accordance with the standards in Section
185-33.
(6) Deck, patios, terraces, etc.
(7) Solar energy systems in accordance with the standards in Section
185-73D(22).
(8) Private swimming pools, except for lots with an area less than
35,000 square feet.
§ 185-23 DENNIS CODE § 185-24
1:532
(9) Temporary construction trailers.
(10) Tool and storage sheds. Structure shall not exceed 15 feet in height
and shall not be larger than 150 square feet in floor area.
(11) Residential garages with no living space, limited to one story in
height.
(12) Outdoor storage.
D. Area and yard requirements for the OVCR District shall be as follows:
Red line = property line; Blue line = hypothetical townhome unit lines
E. Parking and encroachment requirements as well as permitted frontage
types within the OVCR District shall be as follows:
§ 185-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-24
1:533
§ 185-25. B-Business District.
Red line = property line; Blue line = hypothetical townhome unit lines
F. Architectural requirements within the OVCR District shall follow the
standards in Section 185-32.3.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Business District is to provide locations
within the township where business industrial complexes may be
developed. The standards are intended to avoid visual intrusions and
performance nuisances upon adjacent residences or residential zones.
The visual impact of this district on the traveling public shall be
minimal; signage should be tasteful and low to the ground; parked
vehicles should be shielded from the road. Uses in this district should
be free from objectionable odors, fumes, dirt, vibration and noise.
B. Principal permitted uses. Principal permitted uses on the land and in
the buildings within the B District shall be as follows:
(1) Offices and office buildings.
(2) Farm machinery sales, service, and rental.
(3) Earthmoving equipment sales, service, and rental.
(4) Contractors' yards and equipment storage.
(5) Auto repair shops and car sales.
(6) Boat sales, service and storage.
§ 185-24 DENNIS CODE § 185-25
1:534
(7) Warehousing/distribution center.
(8) Product assembly and fabrication.
(9) Lumber yard.
(10) Government offices and public works facilities.
(11) Public utility facilities as conditional uses. See Section 185-73 for
standards.
(12) Gasoline service stations, as conditional uses, subject to the
standards of Section 185-73.
C. Accessory uses. Accessory uses permitted in the B District shall be as
follows:
(1) Administrative offices.
(2) Out-of-door storage (with proper screening).
(3) Motor vehicle and equipment storage garages.
(4) Off-street parking.
(5) Fences and signs.
(6) Small wind energy systems and solar energy systems in accordance
with the standards in Section 185-73D(22). [Added 5-5-09 by
Ord. No. 2009-01]
D. Maximum building height. No principal or accessory buildings shall
exceed 35 feet. Accessory buildings shall be limited to one story only.
E. Area and yard requirements in the B District shall be as follows:
Requirement Individual Uses in District
Principal building
Minimum Lot Area 60,000 sq.ft.
Minimum Lot Frontage 150 ft.
Minimum Lot Width 150 ft.
Minimum Lot Depth 200 ft.
Minimum Side Yard 25 ft.
Minimum Front Yard 75 ft.
Minimum Rear Yard 50 ft.
Accessory Building
Minimum Side Yard 25 ft.
Minimum Rear Yard 25 ft.
§ 185-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-25
1:535
Requirement Individual Uses in District
Minimum Distance to Other
Building
30 ft.
Maximum Coverage
Impervious 50%
Principal Building 35%
Accessory Building 10%
NOTES:
The maximum building coverage for the principal building(s) may
increase by a square footage amount equal to that square footage
of the building(s) used for inside parking and/or loading, provided
that in no case shall the maximum building coverage for the principal
building(s) exceed 50%.
F. General requirements.
(1) Any principal building may contain more than one use or
organization. Any lot may contain more than one principal
structure, provided that each principal structure is located in a
manner which will allow the possibility of subdividing the lot in a
manner that each structure and resulting lot would conform to the
zoning and subdivision regulations, including frontage on a public
street.
(2) At least the first 50 feet adjacent to any street line and 30 feet
adjacent to any lot line shall not be used for parking, shall be
planted and maintained in lawn area or ground cover or landscaped
with evergreen shrubbery and shall be separated from the parking
area by poured concrete or Belgian blocking curbing.
(3) (Reserved) [Repealed 12-18-07 by Ord. No. 2007-14]
(4) All buildings shall be compatibly designed, whether constructed at
one time or in stages over a period of time. All building walls facing
any street or residential district line shall be suitably finished for
aesthetic purposes, which shall not include unpainted or painted
cinder block or concrete block walls.
(5) All portions of the property not utilized by buildings or paved
surfaces shall be landscaped utilizing combinations such as
landscaped fencing shrubbery, lawn area, ground cover, rock
formations, contours, existing foliage and the planting of conifers
and/or deciduous trees native to the area in order to either
maintain or reestablish the tone or the vegetation in the area and
lessen the visual impact of the structures and paved areas. The
established grades on any site shall be planted for both aesthetic
and drainage purposes. The grading plan, drainage facilities and
§ 185-25 DENNIS CODE § 185-25
1:536
§ 185-26. PV Pinelands Village Districts.
landscaping shall be coordinated to prevent erosion and silting
as well as assuring that the capacity of any natural or manmade
drainage system is sufficient to handle the water generated and
anticipated both from the site and contributing upstream areas.
G. Minimum off-street loading.
(1) Each activity shall provide for off-street loading and unloading with
adequate ingress and egress from streets and shall provide such
areas at the side or rear of the building. Each space shall be at least
fifteen by forty (15 x 40) feet, and one space shall be provided for
every 8,000 square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof in
each building. There shall be no loading or unloading from the
street.
(2) Loading area requirements may be met by combining the floor
areas of several activities taking place under one roof and applying
the above ratios.
(3) There shall be at least one trash and garbage pickup location
provided by each building, which shall be separated from the
parking spaces by either a location within the building or in a
pickup location outside the building, which shall be a steel-like
totally enclosed container located in a manner to be obscured from
view from parking areas, streets and adjacent residential uses of
zoning districts by a fence, wall, planting or combination of the
three. If located within the building, the doorway may serve both
the loading and trash/garbage functions. If a container is used for
trash/garbage functions and is located outside the building, it may
be located adjacent to or within the general loading area(s),
provided that the container in no way interferes with or restricts
loading and unloading functions.
A. Purpose. The Pinelands Villages, identified in N.J.A.C. 7:50, include
Belleplain, Eldora, North Dennis and Dennisville. Pinelands Village
Zones provide for infill development and will continue to serve as the
nuclei for residential expansion in the Pinelands Area. The unique
historic character which is found in these villages is considered a
valuable asset to the area, and preservation and reinforcement of these
features is deemed to be in the public interest as well as serving to
maintain and/or enhance real estate values in these areas.
B. Principal permitted uses on the land and in buildings in the PV District
shall be as follows:
(1) Detached dwelling units.
(2) Public playgrounds, conservation areas, parks and public purpose
uses.
§ 185-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-26
1:537
(3) Churches.
(4) Public and private day schools of elementary and/or high school
grade not operated for profit.
C. Accessory uses permitted in the PV District shall be as follows:
(1) Private residential swimming pools. (See § 185-44 for standards.)
(2) Private residential tool sheds not to exceed 15 feet in height.
(3) Travel trailers and campers to be parked or stored only and located
in rear and side yards only. Their dimensions shall not be counted
in determining total building coverage, and they shall not be used
for temporary or permanent living quarters while situated on the
lot.
(4) Off-street parking and private garages.
(5) Signs.
(6) Fences and walls.
(7) Residential agriculture, provided that all requirements of this
chapter are met.
(8) Home occupations.
(9) Small wind energy systems and solar energy systems in accordance
with the standards in Section 185-73D(22). [Added 5-5-09 by
Ord. No. 2009-01]
D. Maximum building height. No building shall exceed 30 feet in height
and 2.5 stories, except that churches shall not exceed 55 feet in height
and except further as allowed in Section 185-72.
E. Area and yard requirements in the PV District shall be as follows:
Requirement Detached Dwellings and
Churches
Principal Building
Minimum Lot Area 3.2 acres
Minimum Lot Frontage 100 ft.
Minimum Lot Width 100 ft.
Minimum Lot Depth 250 ft.(1)
Minimum Side Yard 15 ft.
Minimum Front Yard 200 ft.
Minimum Rear Yard 50 ft.
Accessory Building
§ 185-26 DENNIS CODE § 185-26
1:538
§ 185-27. PR Rural Development Districts.
Requirement Detached Dwellings and
Churches
Minimum Distance to Side Line 10 ft.
Minimum Distance to Rear Line 10 ft.
Minimum Distance to Other
Buildings
10 ft.
Maximum Coverage
Principal Building 5%
Accessory Building 1%
NOTES:
(1) May be reduced to the average setback of the five closest principal
buildings.
F. Gross floor area. The minimum gross floor area shall be 1,000 square
feet for single-family dwellings.
A. Purpose. The Rural Development Zone is intended to recognize that
portion of the township within the Pinelands Area which is slightly
modified by existing development and which may be suitable for limited
future development subject to strict environmental performance
standards. This zone represents a balance between environment and
development values intermediate between the forest zones and
Pinelands Villages.
B. Principal permitted uses on land and in buildings in the PR District shall
be as follows:
(1) Farms.
(2) Detached dwelling units provided that clustering of the permitted
dwellings shall be required in accordance with § 185-70.1
whenever two or more units are proposed as part of a residential
development.
(3) Public playgrounds, conservation areas, parks and public purpose
uses.
(4) Churches and/or cemeteries.
(5) Golf courses.
(6) Public and private day schools of elementary and/ or high school
grade not operated for profit.
§ 185-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-27
1:539
(7) Detached single-family dwellings on lots of a minimum of 3.2 acres,
in accordance with the provisions of Section 185-67. [Amended
2-24-97 by Ord. No. 97-01]
(8) Detached single-family dwellings on lots of a minimum of one acre
in accordance with the provisions of Section 185-68 or Section
185-69. [Added 2-24-97 by Ord. No. 97-01]
(9) Non-clustered single-family residential development as a
conditional use. See Section 185-73D(24) for standards.
C. Accessory uses permitted in the PR District shall be as follows:
(1) Private residential swimming pools. (See Section 185-44 for
standards)
(2) Private residential tool sheds not to exceed 15 feet in height.
(3) Travel trailers and campers to be parked or stored only and located
in rear or side yards only. Their dimensions shall not be counted in
determining total building coverage, and they shall not be used for
temporary or permanent living quarters while situated on a lot.
(4) Off-street parking and private garages.
(5) Signs.
(6) Fences and walls.
(7) Residential agriculture.
(8) Home occupations.
(9) Temporary construction trailers and one sign not exceeding 100
square feet, advertising the prime contractor, subcontractor(s),
architect, financing institution and similar data for the period of
construction beginning with the issuance of a building permit and
concluding with the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or one
year, whichever is less, provided that said trailer(s) and sign are on
the site where construction is taking place and set back at least 15
feet from street and lot lines.
(10) Small wind energy systems and solar energy systems in accordance
with the standards in Section 185-73D(22). [Added 5-5-09 by
Ord. No. 2009-01]
D. Maximum building height. No building shall exceed 30 feet in height
and 2.5 stories, except that churches shall not exceed 55 feet in height
and except further as allowed in Section 185-72.
E. Area and yard requirements in PR Districts shall be as follows:
§ 185-27 DENNIS CODE § 185-27
1:540
§ 185-28. PF8 Moderate-Density Forest and PF25 Low-Density
Forest Districts.
Requirement Detached
Dwellings and
Churches
Clustered
Detached
Dwellings
Principal Building
Minimum Lot Area(1) 5 acres 1.0(2) acre
Minimum Lot Frontage 150(3) ft. 100 feet
Minimum Lot Width 150 ft. 100 feet
Minimum Lot Depth 200 ft. 150 feet
Minimum Side Yard 30 ft. 30 feet
Minimum Front Yard 200(4) ft. 50 feet
Minimum Rear Yard 75 ft. 60 feet
Accessory Building
Minimum Distance to
Side Line
30 ft. 20 feet
Minimum Distance to
Rear Line
30 ft. 20 feet
Minimum Distance to
Other Building
20 ft. 10 feet
Maximum Coverage
Principal Building 3% 5%
Accessory Building 1% 2%
NOTES:
(1) Notwithstanding the minimum lot areas set forth herein, no
such minimum lot area for nonresidential use within the PR
Zone shall be less than that needed to meet the water quality
standards of Section 185-58B(4), whether or not the lot may be
served by a centralized sewer treatment or collection system.
(2) In accordance with Section 185-70.1.
(3) May be reduced to 50 feet for five acre flag lot.
(4) May be reduced to 100 feet in agricultural acres or where
environmental limitations require reduction. This requirement
does not apply to those roads which provide for internal
circulation within residentially developed areas.
F. Gross floor area. The minimum gross floor area shall be 1,000 square
feet for single-family dwellings.
§ 185-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-28
1:541
A. Purpose. The purpose of the forest zones is to protect undistributed
forested portions of the protection area which support characteristic
Pinelands plant and animal species. The areas are an essential element
of the Pinelands environment and are very sensitive to random and
uncontrolled development. Some parts of the forest area are more
suitable for development than others, provided that such development
is subject to strict environmental performance standards. The division
of this area into two forest zones is intended to provide a transition
between developed areas and outlying permitted average density in
close proximity to the more developed areas and maintaining the lowdensity
character of the outlying areas
B. Principal permitted uses on the land and in buildings in the PF8 and
PF25 Districts shall be as follows:
(1) Detached dwellings, provided that clustering of the permitted
dwellings shall be required in accordance with § 185-70.1
whenever two or more units are proposed as part of a residential
development.
(2) Churches and/or cemeteries.
(3) Public purpose uses and public and private day schools of
elementary and/or high school grade not operated for profit,
provided that such uses will not generate subsidiary development,
have adequate public service infrastructure available and are
primarily designed to serve the needs of the forest zones.
(4) Detached single-family dwellings on lots of a minimum of 3.2 acres
in accordance with the provisions of Section 185-67. [Amended
2-24-97 by Ord. No. 97-01]
(5) Agriculture.
(6) Agricultural employee housing as an element of and necessary to
an active agricultural operation.
(7) Forestry.
(8) Low-intensity recreational uses, provided that:
(a) The parcel proposed for low-intensity recreational use has an
area of at least fifty (5) acres.
(b) The recreational use does not involve the use of motorized
vehicles except for necessary transportation.
(c) Access to bodies of water is limited to no more than fifteen feet
(15) linear feet of frontage per 1,000 feet of water-body
frontage.
(d) Clearing of vegetation, including ground cover and soil
disturbance, does not exceed 5% of the parcel.
§ 185-28 DENNIS CODE § 185-28
1:542
(e) No more than 1% of the parcel will be covered with impervious
surfaces.
(9) Expansion of intensive recreational uses, provided that: [Amended
2-24-97 by Ord. No. 97-01]
(a) The intensive recreational use was in existence on February 7,
1979 and the capacity of the use will not exceed two times the
capacity of the use on February 7, 1979;
(b) The use is necessary to achieve recreational use of a particular
element of the existing Pinelands environment; and
(c) The use is environmentally and aesthetically compatible with
the character of the Pinelands Forest Area and the
characteristics of the particular basin in which the use is to be
located, taking into consideration the proportion of cleared
and developed land, ambient water quality, ecologically
sensitive areas and unique resources and will not unduly
burden public services.
(10) Public service infrastructure intended to primarily serve the needs
of the Pinelands. Centralized waste water treatment and collection
facilities shall be permitted to service the PF8 and PF25 Districts
only in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.84(a)2. [Amended 2-24-97
by Ord. No. 97-01]
(11) Signs.
(12) Agricultural commercial establishments, excluding supermarkets,
restaurants and convenience stores, provided that:
(a) The principal goods or products available for sale were
produced in the Pinelands.
(b) The sales area of the establishment does not exceed 5,000
square feet.
(13) Roadside retail sales and service establishments, provided that:
(a) The parcel proposed for development has road- way frontage of
at least 150 feet.
(b) No portion of any structure proposed for development will be
more than 300 feet, measured along a line parallel to the
roadway, from the closest part of a roadside retail sales and
service establishment structure that was in existence on
February 7, 1979.
(c) The proposed use will not unduly burden public services,
including but not limited to water, sewer and roads.
§ 185-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-28
1:543
§ 185-29. M Marina Districts.
(14) Detached single-family dwellings on lots of a minimum of one acre
in accordance with the provisions of Section 185-68 or Section
185-69. [Added 2-24-97 by Ord. No. 97-01]
(15) Non-clustered single-family residential development as a
conditional use. See Section 185-73D(24) for standards.
C. Accessory uses permitted in PF8 and PF25 Districts shall be as follows:
(1) Private residential swimming pools. (See Section 185-44 for
standards).
(2) Private residential tool sheds not to exceed 15 feet in height.
(3) Travel trailers and campers to be parked or stored only and located
in rear or side yards only. Their dimensions shall not be counted in
determining total building coverage, and they shall not be used for
temporary or permanent living quarters while situated on a lot.
(4) Off-street parking and private garages.
(5) Signs.
(6) Fences and walls.
(7) Residential agriculture.
(8) Home occupations.
(9) Temporary construction trailers and one sign not exceeding 100
square feet, advertising the prime contractor, subcontractor(s),
architect, financing institution or similar data for the period of
construction beginning with the issuance of a building permit and
concluding with the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or one
year, whichever is less, provided that said trailer(s) and sign are on
the site where construction is taking place and set back at least 15
feet from the street and lot lines.
(10) Small wind energy systems and solar energy systems in accordance
with the standards in Section 185-73D(22). [Added 5-5-09 by
Ord. No. 2009-01]
D. Maximum building height. No building shall exceed 30 feet in height
and 2.5 stories, except that churches shall not exceed 55 feet in height
and except further as allowed in Section 185-72.
E. Area and yard requirements are located in Schedule A included as an
attachment to this chapter.
F. Gross floor area. Gross floor area shall be a minimum of 1,000 square
feet for single-family dwellings.
§ 185-28 DENNIS CODE § 185-29
1:544
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Marina District is to facilitate expansion
and improvements to the existing marina uses located at the eastern
border of the township adjoining Sea Isle City. Permitted used are
limited to water-dependent activities that increase public access to the
waterfront and enhance the range of facilities available at local
marinas.
B. Principal permitted uses in M Districts shall include the following:
(1) Berthing.
(2) Boat launching.
(3) Marina offices.
C. Permitted accessory uses in M Districts shall be as follows:
(1) Concession facilities for food, bait and tackle and boating supplies.
(2) Operations and maintenance facilities.
(3) Rest rooms and shower facilities.
(4) Dry storage facilities.
(5) Outdoor storage of boats and accessories.
(6) Boat and motor sales.
(7) Motor fuel sales.
(8) One permanent residential unit per marina for management or
security purposes.
(9) Small wind energy systems and solar energy systems in accordance
with the standards in Section 185-73D(22). [Added 5-5-09 by
Ord. No. 2009-01]
D. Maximum building height. No building shall exceed 40 feet in height,
except as allowed in Section 185-72.
E. Area and yard requirements in the M District shall be as follows:
Requirement Marinas
Principal Building
Minimum Lot Area 5 acres
Minimum Lot Frontage 200 ft.
Minimum Lot Width 200 ft.
Minimum Lot Depth 400 ft.
Minimum Side Yard 50(1)ft.
Minimum Front Yard 70(1)ft.
§ 185-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-29
1:545
§ 185-30. C-Conservation District.
Requirement Marinas
Minimum Rear Yard 70(1)ft.
Accessory Building
Minimum Side Yard 40(1)ft.
Minimum Rear Yard 40(1)ft.
Minimum Distance to Other
Building
15 ft.
Maximum Coverage
Impervious 50%
Principal Building 25%
Accessory Building 5%
NOTES:
(1) Where a lot line coincides with the water's edge, a minimum of
10 foot building setback is required.
F. General requirements.
(1) One building may contain more than one principal use.
(2) Marinas may contain more than one principal building, provided
that each principal building can meet the yard requirements
specified in Subsection E. above.
(3) No use shall be permitted in any marina which is not waterdependent,
and no marina shall contain permanent residential
housing units except for one dwelling unit per unit per marina for
management or security purposes.
(4) Any commercial uses developed at a marina shall be designed to
serve only the boating public.
G. Minimum off-street parking.
(1) One parking space for each permanent berthing slip shall be
provided.
(2) Forty parking spaces per single-width launch ramp available to the
boating public shall be provided.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the C District is to control development of
those lands in the township which are affected by extreme
physiographical impediments. The uses allowed may be subject to
approval by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
under provisions of the Wetlands Act and the Coastal Area Facility
§ 185-29 DENNIS CODE § 185-30
1:546
Review Act. Other areas in the township designated in the C District
include state forest and wildlife lands. The uses that are permitted
include limited agricultural and passive recreational uses.
B. Principal permitted uses on the land and in building in the C District
shall be as follows:
(1) Farms.
(2) Detached dwelling units.
(3) Public playgrounds, conservation areas, parks and public purpose
uses.
(4) Primitive campgrounds as conditional uses under N.J.S.A.
40:55D-67. (See Section 185-73 for standards.)
C. Accessory uses permitted in the C District shall be as follows:
(1) Private residential swimming pools. (See Section 185-44 for
standards.)
(2) Private residential tool sheds not to exceed 15 feet in height.
(3) Travel trailers and campers to be parked or stored only and located
in rear or side yards only. Their dimensions shall not be counted in
determining total building coverage, and they shall not be used for
temporary or permanent living quarters while situated on a lot.
(4) Off-street parking and private garages. (See Section 185-38.)
(5) Signs. (See Section 185-43.)
(6) Fences and walls. (See Section 185-33.)
(7) Residential agriculture.
(8) Home occupations.
(9) Small wind energy systems and solar energy systems in accordance
with the standards in Section 185-73D(22). [Added 5-5-09 by
Ord. No. 2009-01]
D. Maximum building height. No principal building shall exceed 30 feet in
height. No accessory building shall exceed 15 feet in height.
E. Area and yard requirements in the C District shall be as follows:
Requirement Detached Dwellings
Principal Building
Minimum Lot Area (acres) 25
Minimum Lot Frontage (feet) 400
Minimum Lot Width (feet) 400
§ 185-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-30
1:547
Requirement Detached Dwellings
Minimum Lot Depth (feet) 600
Minimum Side Yard, each (feet) 50
Minimum Front Yard (feet) 100
Minimum Rear Yard (feet) 100
Accessory Building
Minimum Distance to Side Line (feet) 40
Minimum Distance to Rear Line (feet) 40
Minimum Distance to Other Building
(feet)
20
Maximum Coverage
Impervious 3%
Principal Building (percent) 2
Accessory Building (percent) 0.5
F. Gross floor area. The minimum gross floor area for single-family
detached dwellings shall be 1,000 square feet.
§ 185-30 DENNIS CODE § 185-30
1:548
ARTICLE V
Supplemental Regulations
[Amended 7-15-13 by Ord. No. 2013-03]
§ 185-31. Accessory buildings.
§ 185-32. Architectural guidelines.
§ 185-32.1. Appearance of buildings in the R-3, R-10, PV, PR, PF8
and PF25 Districts.
Within any residential district, no building with permitted professional,
office or other home occupation shall be constructed or altered so as to
be inharmonious with the residential character of the adjacent residential
area.
§ 185-32.2. Guidelines for the OVCC, OVC, CVC and VC Districts.
A. Any accessory building attached to a principal building shall be
considered part of the principal building and the total structure shall
adhere to the yard requirements for the principal building, regardless
of the technique of connecting the principal and accessory buildings.
B. Distance between adjacent buildings. The minimum distance between
an accessory building and any other building(s) on the same lot shall be
as prescribed in Article IV, except that no poultry or livestock shelter
shall be erected nearer than 50 feet to any dwelling on the same lot.
C. Height of accessory buildings. The height of accessory buildings shall
be as prescribed in Article IV.
D. Location. An accessory building may be erected in side and rear yard
areas only and shall be set back from side and rear lot lines as
prescribed in Article IV, except that if erected on a corner lot, the
accessory building shall be set back from the side street to comply with
the setback line applying to the principal building for that side street,
and except further that no poultry or livestock shelter shall be erected
nearer than 50 feet to any lot lines.
A. Purpose. The purpose of these guidelines is to ensure that all buildings
in the OVCC and OVC District are designed to convey a village scale and
character. All buildings in the CVC and VC Zone shall be designed to
convey a village scale and shall be compatible with the historic nature
of the respective village. Buildings in the OVCC, OVC, CVC and VC
District shall contain the following design elements:
B. Materials.
(1) Building facades visible from a public street shall consist of brick,
stone, cast stone, clapboard, cedar shakes or other high-quality
material.
§ 185-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-32.2
1:549
(2) Cornices shall consist of wood, stone or fiberglass.
C. Scale.
(1) The building façade shall create a defining wall along the
streetscape.
(2) Covered archways (minimum eight feet wide) may connect rear
parking areas to the street, enabling pedestrian circulation.
(3) Building exteriors shall have vertical and/or horizontal offsets to
create visual breaks on the exterior.
(4) Long, blank, windowless, monotonous, uninterrupted walls or roof
planes are not permitted.
(5) Building wall offsets, including projections and recesses such as
balconies, canopies, awnings, architectural details are encouraged.
(6) Blind windows, display windows and/or intensive landscaping can
be employed in place of blank walls.
D. Articulation.
(1) The building façade shall have a clearly defined base, body and cap.
(2) The middle section of the façade may be horizontally divided at
floor, lintel or sill levels with belt courses.
(3) The architectural treatment of a façade shall be completely
continued around all street facing façades of a building. All sides of
a building shall be architecturally designed so as to be consistent
with regard to style, materials, colors and details.
E. Corner buildings.
(1) Buildings on corners are significant buildings because they have
two frontages visible from the street.
(2) Corner buildings act as important landmarks within the Centers.
(3) Corner buildings shall feature a prominent architectural element,
such as a chamfered corner, significant façade articulation or
portico.
F. Roofs.
(1) The shape, pitch and color of a roof shall be architecturally
compatible with the style, materials and colors of such building.
(2) If the building has a flat roof, a parapet shall project vertically to
hide any roof-mounted mechanical equipment. Additionally, a
cornice shall project out horizontally from the façade and shall be
ornamented with moldings, brackets or other details.
§ 185-32.2 DENNIS CODE § 185-32.2
1:550
(3) If the building has a pitched roof, a minimum pitch of 5:12 shall be
provided. 8:12 pitch is encouraged.
(4) Pitched roofs are encouraged to have dormers, chimneys, cupolas
and other similar elements to provide architectural interest. These
elements shall be compatible with the style, materials, colors and
details of the building.
(5) Roofline offsets shall be provided along any roof measuring more
than 30 feet in length in order to provide architectural interest and
articulation to a building.
(6) Roof top heating, ventilating and air-conditioning (HVAC) systems,
exhaust pipes and stacks, satellite dishes and other
telecommunications receiving devices shall be screened or
otherwise specially treated to be inconspicuous as viewed from the
primary or secondary street and adjacent properties.
G. Transparency.
(1) Ground floor commercial uses shall have large pane display
windows on the primary and secondary frontages. Such windows
shall be framed by the surrounding wall and shall be a minimum of
60% of the total ground level facade area.
(2) Transoms above display windows are encouraged.
(3) Window sills shall not be more than three feet above the sidewalk.
Base panels or bulkheads are encouraged between the sidewalk
and the window sills.
(4) Windows are encouraged to be vertically proportioned wherever
possible.
(5) Buildings of architectural styles that normally have windows with
muntins or divided lights shall utilize those types of windows.
(6) Glass blocks are not permitted on facades that abut a primary or
secondary street.
(7) Exterior security grates are prohibited
H. Entrances.
(1) The primary entrance to any building shall front on a primary or
secondary street.
(2) All entrances to a building shall be defined and articulated by
architectural elements such as lintels, pediments, pilasters,
columns, overhangs or canopies.
(3) These elements shall be compatible with the style and materials of
the building.
§ 185-32.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-32.2
1:551
§ 185-32.3. Guidelines for the OVCR and CVR Districts.
(4) Entrances may also be defined by planters as well.
I. Lighting.
(1) Light fixtures attached to the exterior of a building are encouraged.
These fixtures shall be architecturally compatible with the style,
material and colors of such building.
(2) Low-pressure sodium or mercury vapor lighting is prohibited.
A. Purpose. All buildings in the OVCR and CVR Districts shall be designed
to convey a village scale and character. Buildings in the OVCR and CVR
District shall contain the following design elements:
B. Materials.
(1) Building facades visible from a public street shall consist of brick,
stone, cast stone, clapboard, cedar shakes or other high-quality
material.
(2) Cornices shall consist of wood, stone or fiberglass.
C. Scale.
(1) The building façade shall create a defining wall along the
streetscape.
(2) Building exteriors shall have vertical and/or horizontal offsets to
create visual breaks on the exterior.
(3) Building wall offsets, including projections and recesses such as
balconies, canopies, awnings, architectural details are encouraged.
D. Articulation.
(1) The building façade shall have a clearly defined base, body and cap.
(2) The middle section of the façade may be horizontally divided at
floor, lintel or sill levels with belt courses.
(3) The architectural treatment of a façade shall be completely
continued around all street facing façades of a building. All sides of
a building shall be architecturally designed so as to be consistent
with regard to style, materials, colors and details.
E. Roofs.
(1) The shape, pitch and color of a roof shall be architecturally
compatible with the style, materials and colors of such building.
(2) If the building has a flat roof, a parapet shall project vertically to
hide any roof-mounted mechanical equipment. Additionally, a
§ 185-32.2 DENNIS CODE § 185-32.3
1:552
§ 185-32.4. Guidelines for the VR District.
cornice shall project out horizontally from the façade and shall be
ornamented with moldings, brackets or other details.
(3) If the building has a pitched roof, a minimum pitch of 5:12 shall be
provided. 8:12 pitch is encouraged.
(4) Pitched roofs are encouraged to have dormers, chimneys, cupolas
and other similar elements to provide architectural interest. These
elements shall be compatible with the style, materials, colors and
details of the building.
(5) Roofline offsets shall be provided along any roof measuring more
than 30 feet in length in order to provide architectural interest and
articulation to a building.
(6) Roof top heating, ventilating and air-conditioning (HVAC) systems,
exhaust pipes and stacks, satellite dishes and other
telecommunications receiving devices shall be screened or
otherwise specially treated to be inconspicuous as viewed from the
primary or secondary street and adjacent properties.
A. Purpose. All new construction, additions and renovations in the VR
District shall be designed to convey a village scale and shall be
compatible with the historic nature of the respective village. Additions
or renovations to historic structures outside the designated historic
districts shall respect the structure's historic features and maintain its
original scale, proportion and organization of architectural elements
(columns, shutters, cornice, dormers, molding, etc.).
Buildings within the designated Dennisville State and National
Registers Historic District, the State Historic Preservation Office
Opinion South Dennis District and the township-designated South
Seaville Historic District shall contain the following design elements:
(1) All sidling patterns shall have the finished appearance of lapped
board of beveled board on the principal structure. Board and
batten type construction is permitted on accessory buildings.
(2) Roofing finish shall have the appearance of shake or shingle,
standing seam or batten seam.
(3) Flat roofs are not permitted on principal structures.
(4) All windows along the front and sides of a building shall be double
hung with mullions representing a nine over six, six over six, two
over two or the window style appropriate to the period of the
structure being remodeled.
(5) All porches in the front and side yards shall be singe story with
fixed peaked or flat roofs.
§ 185-32.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-32.4
1:553
§ 185-33. Fences and walls.
§ 185-34. Sight triangles.
(6) Railings shall not exceed 42 inches in height. The finish floor of the
porch area shall not be higher than the finish first floor elevation of
the structure; but in no case lower than one foot below the
elevation of the finish first floor of the structure.
A. No fence shall be erected of barbed wire, topped with metal spikes or
constructed of any material or in any manner which may be dangerous
to persons or animals, except that these provisions shall not apply to
farms, and except further that fences permitted for commercial and
industrial uses may be topped by a barbed-wire protective barrier.
B. On any lot in any district, no wall or fence shall be erected or altered so
that said wall or fence shall be over three feet in height in side and front
yard areas and four feet in height in rear yard areas except that:
[Amended 12-4-07 by Ord. No. 2007-13]
(1) A privacy fence may be constructed on the property line. The
maximum height of a fence of this nature shall be six feet. If placed
in front yards or along street lines, it must be of chain link or
similar construction so that there will be no obstruction of vision,
except fences of this nature that are to provide site buffers along
street lines of existing campgrounds. These fences may be of such
material as to obstruct vision so as to provide privacy as it relates
to campground uses.
(2) A private residential swimming pool area must be surrounded by a
fence at least four feet but no more than six feet in height.
Swimming pool areas shall be located in rear and side yard areas
only.
(3) Buffer areas shall meet the requirements specified in Section
185-41.
C. All supporting members of a fence or wall are to be located on the
inside of the fence and all razor wire, cloth and canvas fences are
prohibited. Permitted materials include wood, chain-link, wrought iron,
stone, aluminum, vinyl and steel. [Added 12-4-07 by Ord. No.
2007-13]
A. On a corner lot in any district, sight triangles shall be required in
addition to the right-of-way, in which no grading, planting or structure
shall be erected or maintained more than two and one-half (2 1/2) feet
in height, as measured from the mean elevation of the finished grade
five feet away from the center line of the grading, planting or structure.
The "sight triangle" is defined as that area outside the right-of-way
which is bounded by the intersecting street lines and the straight line
connecting "sight points," one each located on the two intersecting
§ 185-32.4 DENNIS CODE § 185-34
1:554
§ 185-35. Grading.
All lots being filled shall be cleared of all debris, including brush and tree
stumps, and be filled with clean fill and/or top soil to allow complete surface
draining of the lot into local storm sewer systems or natural drainage rightsof-
way. No construction shall be permitted which creates or aggravates
water stagnation or a drainage problem on adjacent properties. Moreover,
no person, firm or corporation shall strip or otherwise remove fill or topsoil
from any land area in the township unless such activity is in accordance
with all applicable township ordinances.
§ 185-36. Lighting.
§ 185-37. Nonconforming uses, structures and lots.
street center lines the following distance away from the intersecting
center lines: arterial streets: 300 feet; collector streets: 200 feet; and
local streets: 90 feet. Where the intersecting streets are both arterial,
both collectors or one arterial and one collector, two overlapping sight
triangles shall be required, formed by connecting the sight points noted
above with a sight point 90 feet on the intersecting street.
A. All parking areas and walkways thereto and appurtenant passageways
and driveways serving commercial, public, office, industrial, apartment
or other similar uses having common off-street parking and/or loading
areas and building complexes requiring area lighting shall be
adequately illuminated for security and safety purposes. The lighting
plan in and around the parking areas shall provide for nonglare, colorcorrected
lights focused downward. The light intensity provided at
ground level shall be a minimum of three-tenths (.3) foot candle
anywhere in the area to be illuminated, shall average a minimum of 0.5
foot candle over the entire area and shall be provided by fixtures with a
mounting height not more than twenty- five (25) feet or the height of
the building, whichever is less, measured from the ground level to the
center line of the light source, spaced a distance not to exceed five
times the mounting height.
B. Any other outdoor lighting, such as building and sidewalk illumination,
driveways with no adjacent parking, the lighting of signs and
ornamental lighting, shall be shown on the lighting plan in sufficient
detail to allow determination of the effects to adjacent properties,
traffic safety and overhead sky glow. The objective of these
specifications is to minimize undesirable off-premises effects. No light
shall shine directly into windows or streets and driveways so as to
interfere with or distract driver vision.
A. The lawful use of land or structures existing at the date of adoption of
this chapter, as amended, may be continued although such use or
structure is nonconforming to the provisions specified in this chapter,
§ 185-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-37
1:555
as amended, for the zoning district in which such use or structure is
located, except as provided by law.
B. Any nonconforming use or structure which has been changed to a
conforming use or structure shall not be changed back again into a
nonconforming use or structure.
C. Any nonconforming use, structure or lot may change ownership and
continue to function as the same nonconforming use, structure or lot,
provided that all other provisions of this chapter and other applicable
laws are met.
D. Repairs and maintenance work required to keep a structure in sound
condition may be made to a nonconforming structure or a structure
containing a nonconforming use. However, no nonconforming structure
or structure containing a nonconforming use shall be enlarged,
extended, constructed, reconstructed or structurally altered in any
manner.
E. Any lot upon which a nonconforming use or structure is located shall
not be reduced in size, nor shall any lot already nonconforming be made
more nonconforming in any manner.
F. Any vacant lot, or lot with a single-family residential structure,
excepting those in the Pinelands Area, existing at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this section whose area or dimensions do not
meet the requirements of the district in which the lot is located, but
which lot has a minimum frontage of 100 feet and a minimum depth of
125 feet, may have a building permit issued, without variance approval,
for a use permitted for that zoning district, provided that the building
coverage limit will not exceed 20% of the lot area, parking
requirements are met and the yard and height provisions are reduced
by the same percentage that the area of such lot bears to the zoning
district requirements, except that no side yard shall be less than 10 feet
or half that required by this section, whichever is greater. Front yard
depth and setback shall conform to those of adjoining property owners.
No building shall be required to have a height less than 12 feet and one
story. All other applicable provisions of this section shall hold.
G. Any vacant lot of one acre or more within the Pinelands Area, existing
as a conforming lot as of February 7, 1979, which does not meet the
requirements for the zone in which the lot is located may have a
construction permit issued for the development of a single-family
dwelling without an appeal for variance relief, provided that:
[Amended 2-24-97 by Ord. No. 97-01]
(1) The lot was not held in common ownership with any adjoining
parcels on February 7, 1979, or since that date.
(2) The yard requirements of the zone in which such lot is located are
reduced by the same percentage that the lot area bears to the
zoning district requirement, except that no yard shall be reduced to
§ 185-37 DENNIS CODE § 185-37
1:556
§ 185-38. Off-street parking.
less than 50% of the requirement of this chapter and no side yard
shall be reduced to less than 15 feet. No front or rear yard shall be
reduced to less than 50 feet.
(3) The development of any lot under this section shall comply with the
other requirements of this chapter.
A. General provisions.
(1) Lighting. All parking areas providing five or more parking spaces
and requiring lighting shall be lighted in accordance with the
provisions specified in Section 185-36 of this chapter.
(2) Surfacing and curbing. All on-site off-street parking and loading
areas and access driveways shall be paved and curbed as
recommended by the Board Engineer and approved by the Board as
part of the site plan approval.
(3) Location of parking spaces. All required off- street parking spaces
shall be located on the same lot or premises as the use served.
(4) Landscaping.
(a) Each off-street parking area shall have a minimum area
equivalent to one parking space per every 30 parking spaces
and landscaped with 1/2 of said spaces having shrubs no
higher than three feet and the other half having trees with
branches no lower than seven feet. Such spaces shall be
distributed throughout the parking area in order to break the
view of long rows of parked cars in a manner not impairing
visibility.
(5) Type of facility.
(a) Parking spaces may be on, above or below the surface of the
ground. When parking spaces are provided within a garage or
other structure, said structure shall adhere to the proper
accessory or principal building setbacks, as applicable.
(b) The provision of parking spaces shall also include adequate
driveway and necessary turning areas for handling the vehicles
for which provision is made. Parking area shall be designed to
permit each motor vehicle to proceed to and from the parking
space provided for it without requiring the moving of any other
motor vehicles. Aisles providing access to parking spaces shall
have the following minimum dimensions. Where the angle of
parking is different on both sides of the aisle, the larger aisle
width shall prevail.
§ 185-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-38
1:557
Angle of Parking
Space
(degrees)
1-Way Aisle
(feet)
2-Way Aisle
(feet)
90 22 25
60 18 20
45 15 20
30 12 18
Parallel 12 18
B. Specific requirements. Each individual use shall provide parking spaces
according to the following provisions. Where a permitted use of land
includes different specific activities with different specific parking
requirements, the total number of required parking spaces shall be
obtained by individually computing the parking requirements for each
different activity and adding the resulting numbers together.
(1) Detached dwelling units shall follow RSIS.
(2) Churches shall provide one space per every four permanent seats.
[One seat may be considered 22 inches in calculating the capacity
of pews or benches.]
(3) Golf courses and public utilities shall provide sufficient spaces and
maneuvering area to prevent any parking along public rights-ofway
or private driveways, fire lanes and aisles. Golf courses shall
provide two spaces per hole and one space per employee.
(4) Schools shall provide one space per employee for grades
kindergarten through 10th, two and one-half (2 1/2) spaces per
employee for grades eleven and twelve and, in all cases, sufficient
space for school bus loading and unloading.
(5) Local retail and service activities shall provide parking at the ratio
of five spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.
(6) Restaurants that do not serve alcohol shall provide a minimum of
one parking space for every three seats but in all cases a sufficient
number of spaces to prevent any parking along public rights-of-way
or private driveways, fire lanes and aisles. Parking requirements
for restaurants serving alcoholic beverages are set forth in Section
185-73D(5). [Amended 9-18-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-05]
(7) Banks and offices shall provide parking at the ratio of five spaces
per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.
(8) Theaters shall provide one space for every four seats.
(9) Bowling alleys shall provide four spaces per bowling lane.
§ 185-38 DENNIS CODE § 185-38
1:558
(10) Service stations shall provide at least six spaces for the first lift,
wheel alignment pit or similar work area; five additional spaces for
a second work area; and an additional three spaces for each
additional work area. Such spaces shall be separated from the
driveway and general apron areas which give access to the gasoline
and air pumps and service areas. No designated parking space
shall obstruct access to such facilities.
(11) Automobile sales establishments shall provide 10 spaces for
customer convenience, separated from vehicular displays and not
used by employees.
(12) Car washes shall provide three access lanes for each mechanized
car wash entrance, with each lane having a minimum capacity for
12 vehicles; one separate space for each waxing, upholstery
cleaning or similar specialized service area; and one space for
every two employees. All vehicle entrances shall be from the rear of
the building, and all parked and waiting vehicles shall be
accommodated on the lot.
(13) Hotels and motels shall provide one and one-fourth (1 1/4) spaces
per room.
(14) Manufacturing plants and industrial uses shall provide parking at
the ratios of one space per every 700 square feet of gross floor area
plus one space for every 200 square feet of gross floor area used for
offices. Wholesale distribution centers, warehouses and storage
facilities shall provide parking at the ratios of one space for every
1,000 square feet of gross floor area. Additionally, one space shall
be provided for every vehicle owned and/or operated by the use
operating from the site.
(15) Liquor stores shall provide a minimum of 16 parking spaces for
patrons and a minimum of four parking spaces for employees. In
addition, the exit drive aisle from the liquor store parking lot shall
be at least 47 feet long, to allow for stacking of exiting vehicles.
Liquor stores shall also provide one truck loading and unloading
area for every 10,000 square feet, or part thereof, of gross floor
area. Each truck area shall be adjacent to the store, and shall be
fourteen feet wide by sixty feet long (14' x 60'). [Added 9-18-2002
by Ord. No. 2002-05]
C. Shared parking. Nothing in the above requirements or in this
subsection shall be construed to prevent the employment of shared
parking, which may be implemented in the following manner:
(1) On-site shared parking. For parcels with containing a mixed-use
building, on-site shared parking may be implemented.
(2) A 50% shared parking allowance shall be permitted for combining
weekday uses with evening/weekend uses in the same building.
Office and retail uses are considered to be weekday uses, while
§ 185-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-38
1:559
§ 185-39. Off-street loading.
§ 185-40. Trash receptacles.
§ 185-41. Performance standards.
An application for a permit shall provide documentation that the intended
use will comply with the performance standards enumerated below. In the
case of a structure being built where the future use is not known, a building
residential and restaurant uses are considered to be evening/
weekend uses.
A. Truck loading and unloading areas shall be provided in a sufficient
amount to permit the transfer of goods and products in other than a
public street or public parking area.
B. Where proposed, off-street loading areas shall be located in the rear
yard.
C. Where proposed, off-street loading berths shall be at least 12 feet wide.
D. All loading berths shall have unobstructed access that is at least 10 feet
wide to and from a street. Such access may be combined with access to
a parking lot.
E. All proposed loading berths shall be on the same lot as the use(s) to
which they are accessory.
F. Where the separate designation of a specific off-street loading berth is
not proposed for a use or uses, the required off-street parking area shall
not be used for loading and unloading purposes, except during hours
when normal business operations are suspended.
A. There shall be at least one trash and garbage pick-up location provided
by each non-residential building or at least one centralized trash and
garbage pick-up location provided where there are multiple
nonresidential buildings on the same site.
B. Trash and recycling receptacles shall be located in the rear yard and
shall be enclosed with a solid masonry enclosure and heavy duty gate.
No trash receptacles shall be visible from any public street. Such
facilities should be designed so that they fit within an overall project
design.
C. The size and capacity of all trash and recycling facilities shall be based
on the size and capacity of bins and/or dumpsters utilized, frequency of
pick-up and projected generation rates of site users.
D. Adequate provisions for recycling shall be provided.
E. All trash facilities shall be designed to reduce discernible odors and
contain such within the trash storage area.
§ 185-38 DENNIS CODE § 185-41
1:560
permit may be issued with the condition that no certificate of occupancy will
be issued until such time as this documentation is submitted with respect to
the particular occupant.
A. Buffers. Buffer areas are required along lot and street lines of all
nonresident lots where said property lines or the center line of adjacent
streets abut residential uses or residential zoning district lines. Each
permitted use shall provide and maintain attractively landscaped
grounds and suitable screening in order to safeguard the character of
adjacent districts. The width of the buffer area for each particular
zoning district shall be measured horizontally and be either
perpendicular to straight lot and street lines or radial to curved lot and
street lines. Buffer areas shall be maintained and kept clear of all
debris, rubbish, weeds and tall grass. No above-surface structure or
activity or the storage of materials or parking of vehicles shall be
permitted in the buffer area, and all buffer areas shall be planted and
maintained with grass or ground cover, together with a dense screen of
trees, shrubs or other plant materials meeting the following
requirements:
(1) Plant materials used in screen planting shall be at least six feet in
height when planted and be of such density that all the glare of
automobile headlights emitted from the premises is obscured
throughout the full course of the year. The plant materials shall be
of a species common to the area, shall be of nursery stock, shall be
free of insect and disease and shall otherwise conform to the
landscaping provisions of Section 185-54 which are applicable
within the Pinelands Area.
(2) Buffer areas shall be permanently maintained, and plant material
which does not live shall be replaced within one year or one
growing season.
(3) The screen planting shall be so placed that at maturity the plant
material will be no closer than three feet to any street or property
line.
(4) The buffer area shall not be broken unless specifically approved by
the Board.
B. Electricity. Electric or electronic equipment shall be shielded so there is
no interference with any radio or television reception at the lot line, or
beyond the operator's dwelling unit in the case of multifamily dwellings,
as the result of the operation of such equipment. Electronic equipment
shall be in accordance with Federal Communications Commission
standards.
C. Glare. No use shall produce a strong dazzling light or a reflection of a
strong dazzling light or glare beyond its lot lines. Exterior lighting shall
be shielded, buffered and directed so that glare, direct light or
reflection will not become a nuisance to adjoining properties, adjoining
dwelling units, adjoining districts or streets.
§ 185-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-41
1:561
D. Heat. No use shall produce heat perceptible beyond its lot lines.
Further, no use shall be permitted which would cause the temperature
to rise or fall in any part of ponds, streams or other watercourses.
E. Noise. Noise levels for commercial and industrial enterprises shall be
designed and operated in accordance with the regulations established
by the New Jersey State Department of Environmental Protection as
they are adopted and amended.
F. Odor. Odors shall not be discernible at the lot line or beyond to such an
extent that they become a nuisance.
G. Storage and waste disposal.
(1) No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or
manner that they may be transferred off the lot by natural causes
or forces, nor shall any substance be deposited which can
contaminate an underground aquifer or otherwise render such
underground aquifer undesirable as a source of water supply or
recreation or which will destroy aquatic life. All materials or wastes
which might cause fumes or dust or which constitute a fire hazard
or which may be edible or otherwise attractive to rodents or insects
shall be stored indoors and enclosed in appropriate containers
adequate to eliminate such hazards.
(2) No hazardous or toxic substances, including hazardous wastes,
shall be stored, transferred, processed, discharged, disposed or
otherwise used in the Pinelands Area. The land application of waste
or waste derived materials is prohibited in the Pinelands Area,
except as expressly authorized in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.79. Waste
management facilities shall only be permitted in the Pinelands Area
in accordance with the standard set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.
[Amended 2-24-97 by Ord. No. 97-01]
H. Vapor. No use shall produce smoke, ash, dust, fumes, vapors, gases or
other forms of air pollution which could cause damage to the health of
any person, animal or vegetation or which could cause excessive
soiling.
I. Vibration. There shall be no vibration which is discernible to the human
sense of feeling beyond the immediate site on which such use is located.
J. Landscaping and clearing.
(1) Disturbance of wooded areas shall be limited wherever possible
and the proposed buildings or improvements located in existing
cleared areas.
(2) Where disturbance is unavoidable, the clearing of trees from
proposed building sites is permitted within 15 feet of the building
foundation. Selective clearing of other than mature trees is
permitted within 30 feet of a building foundation. Clearing may
§ 185-41 DENNIS CODE § 185-41
1:562
extend into side and rear yard setbacks; however, a minimum
natural buffer of 20 feet shall be maintained between the edge of
clearing and the side or rear property line.
(3) Areas that are cleared during construction but which will not
contain permanent improvements shall be limited and shall be
revegetated with natural vegetation as indicated on the Natural
Revegetation List.
(4) If the location of improvements within existing cleared area is not
feasible, said cleared area shall be revegetated in an amount
equivalent to that area required for the improvements in
accordance with an approved landscape plan.
(5) Within the Pinelands Area portion of the township, development
shall be done in accordance with the Pinelands Area development
procedures and standards for Section 185-54, Clearing of
vegetation; landscaping, and Section 185-61, Fire management, of
this chapter.
K. Environmental assessment.
(1) Purpose. The impact on the environment associated with
development projects necessitates a comprehensive analysis of the
variety of problems that may result and the measures that can be
taken to minimize the adverse impacts. It is recognized that the
level of detail required for the variety of development applications
will vary depending on the size of the project, the site conditions,
the location of the project and the information already in the
possession of the township. Some flexibility is needed in preparing
the Environmental Assessment Report. The Environmental
Assessment Report requirements pertaining to different types of
development application are listed below.
(2) Requirements.
(a) All agricultural operations conducted in accordance with a
plan approved by the Soil Conservation District and all
silviculture operations conducted in accordance with a plan
prepared by a professional forester are specifically exempt
from the Environmental Assessment requirements.
(b) Any variance applications to the Zoning Board of Adjustment
not involving a site plan or subdivision application shall not
require an Environmental Assessment unless specifically
requested by the Board. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall
inform the applicant regarding any information that may be
required.
(c) All subdivision applications and/or site plan applications shall
be accompanied by a complete Environmental Assessment
Report including the Environmental Assessment Checklist and
§ 185-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-41
1:563
required documentation which shall be submitted as a
prerequisite to a complete application.
(d) Amended subdivision or site plan applications shall be
accompanied by a supplemental Environmental Assessment
Report which assesses the environmental impacts associated
with any modifications to the original plan.
(e) Any development application or amended development
application located in the Coastal Zone and for which an
Environmental Impact Statement has been prepared and
submitted to the NJDEP as part of a CAFRA application shall
not be bound by the provisions of this section provided that a
copy of the Environmental Impact Statement submitted as part
of the CAFRA application also accompanies any development
application to the Township Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment.
(3) Submission format.
(a) When an Environmental Assessment is required, the applicant
shall retain one or more competent professionals to perform
the necessary work. The qualifications and background of the
professionals shall be provided, and the method of
investigation shall be described.
(b) All applicable material on file in the township pertinent to
evaluation of regional impacts shall also be considered
including the Township Master Plan and accompanying natural
resources mapping, the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection (NJDEP) data and other information
as available.
(c) All Environmental Assessments shall consist of written and
graphic materials which clearly present the required
information in a report format utilizing the adopted
Environmental Assessment Checklist with accompanying
documentation as required.
(4) Environmental assessment report submission. The Environmental
Assessment Report including appropriate references shall be
submitted to the Board. Five copies of the Environmental
Assessment Report and one digital copy on cd-rom shall be
submitted with development application prior to the determination
of a complete application.
(5) Environmental assessment waiver.
(a) Notwithstanding the foregoing, the appropriate Board may, at
the request of an applicant, waive the requirement for an
Environmental Assessment Report if the appropriate Board
finds that sufficient evidence is submitted to support a
§ 185-41 DENNIS CODE § 185-41
1:564
§ 185-42. Principal structures.
Unless otherwise specified for a particular zoning district, no more than one
principal structure shall be permitted on one lot, except for the OVCC, OVC,
CVC, OVCR, CVR and VC Districts.
§ 185-43. Signs.
conclusion that the proposed development will have a
negligible environmental impact.
(b) Portions of such requirement may likewise be waived upon a
finding that the complete report need not be prepared in order
to evaluate adequately the environmental impact of a
particular project.
(c) Notwithstanding, any site development affecting wetlands and
C-1 waters shall not be granted a waiver from these
requirements.
(6) Environmental assessment checklist is included as an attachment
to this chapter.
A. General provisions. No billboards shall be erected except in the
Pinelands Area as provided in Subsection A(12) below. No sign of any
type shall be permitted to obstruct driving vision, traffic signals, traffic
directional and identification signs, other places of business, other
signs or windows of the building on which they are located. No sign
shall be attached to trees, fence posts, stumps, utility poles or other
signs, but they shall be freestanding or attached to buildings in an
approved manner.
(1) Animated, flashing and illusionary signs. Signs using mechanical or
electrical devised to revolve, flash or display movement or the
illusion of movement are prohibited.
(2) Height. No freestanding or attached sign shall be higher at any
point than the roof line of the building, except that no sign shall
exceed any lesser height if specified in any other provision of this
chapter. In addition, no attached sign shall project into or hand
over a street right-of- way, and no sign shall project beyond a
building in a manner placing it above an area traversed by motor
vehicles. Where signs project beyond a building facade or wall over
a pedestrian way, the lowest portion of the sign shall be at least
eight feet above the walkway.
(3) Illuminated signs. Illuminated signs shall be so arranged as to
reflect the light and glare away from adjoining premises and away
from adjoining highways. No sign with red, green or blue
illumination in a beam, beacon or flashing form resembling an
emergency light shall be erected in any location where it may be
§ 185-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-43
1:565
confused with a railroad, traffic control or emergency signal.
Illuminated signs shall comply with the National Electric Code.
(4) Information and direction signs. Street number designations,
postal boxes, on-site directional and parking signs, warning signs
and signs posting property as "private property" or "no hunting" or
similar signs are permitted in all zones but are not to be considered
in calculating sign area. No such sign shall exceed two square feet
in area.
(5) Maintenance. Signs must be constructed of durable materials,
maintained in good condition and not allowed to become
dilapidated.
(6) Character. Within the Village Residential (VR) Zone and within the
Pinelands Area, signs shall be of a character and composition to be
harmonious with the scenic and historic values of these areas to the
maximum extent practicable.
(7) Portable signs. Portable signs shall be those signs which are fixed
on a movable stand; self- supporting without being firmly
embedded in the ground; supported by other objects; mounted on
wheels (not included are motor vehicles); or made easily movable in
some other manner as may be acceptable to the Construction Code
Official. Portable signs may be of durable plastic products or wood,
maintained in good condition and not allowed to become
dilapidated or unsafe. Portable signs may be internally illuminated
with nonflashing lighting only. No other lighting of portable signs is
permitted. No portable sign shall be illuminated or lighted between
the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. Portable signs are
permitted in addition to any other allowable signs.
(8) Real estate signs. Signs temporarily advertising the sale, rental or
lease of the premises or a portion thereof shall be, if not attached to
the building, set back at least 10 horizontal feet from all street
lines. Such signs shall not exceed nine square feet on each of two
sides and shall be removed at the expense of the advertiser within
15 days after the termination or completion of the matter or
business being advertised. "Sold" signs shall be permitted between
the signing of the contract of sale and the date of the legal closing.
All such signs do not need a building permit.
(9) Sign area. Sign area shall be measured around the outside edges of
a framed or enclosed sign or by the area utilized by isolated words
and/or symbols, including the background, whether open or
enclosed, but said area shall not include any supporting framework
and bracing incidental to the display itself.
(10) Signs and sign structures. All signs and sign structures shall be
located to allow a clear unobstructed line of sight for 300 feet from
the stop line of any intersection of streets and/or driveways.
§ 185-43 DENNIS CODE § 185-43
1:566
(11) Signs with two exposures. Signs with two exposures shall be
measured for area by using the surface area of one side of the sign
only. Both sides may be used.
(12) Billboards and off-site commercial advertising signs.
(a) No billboard or outdoor off-site commercial advertising sign
shall be permitted except that billboards and off-site outdoor
signs advertising agricultural commercial establishments shall
be permitted in the Pinelands Area provided that:
[1] No more than two signs shall be placed in any one
direction along each road directly approaching the
establishment.
[2] No sign along a four-lane state or federal highway shall
exceed 50 square feet in area, and no sign along any other
road shall exceed 32 square feet in area.
(b) No existing billboard or off-site commercial advertising sign in
the Pinelands which does not conform to Subsection A(12)(a)
above shall be permitted to continue beyond January 14, 1991.
B. Permitted signs. The following signs are permitted for uses as specified
in Article IV of this chapter for the various zoning districts, except for
OVCC, OVC, CVC and VC Zoning Districts:
(1) Churches, cemeteries and schools: one free-standing sign not
exceeding 32 square feet in area and 12 feet in height and set back
at least 10 feet from all street rights-of-way and lot lines plus one
attached sign not exceeding 32 square feet in area.
(2) Golf courses and public utilities: one freestanding sign not
exceeding 32 square feet in area and 12 feet in height and set back
at least 10 feet from all street rights-of-way and lot lines.
(3) Local retail and service activities, restaurants, banks, theaters,
bowling alleys, automobile sales and car washes: one freestanding
sign not exceeding 32 square feet in area and 12 feet in height and
set back at least 10 feet from all street rights-of-way and lot lines.
[Amended 1-12-1998 by Ord. No. 97-18]
(4) Office buildings, hotels and motels: one freestanding sign not
exceeding 32 square feet in area and 12 feet in height and set back
at least 10 feet from all street rights-of-way and lot lines. Where an
individual office unit has direct access from the outside, a sign not
exceeding four square feet identifying the name of the office may
also be attached to the building at the office entrance. [Amended
1-12-1998 by Ord. No. 97-18]
(5) Shopping centers: one freestanding sign along each arterial or
collector road which the tract in question abuts, provided that
there exists at least 250 feet of unbroken frontage. Such sign shall
§ 185-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-43
1:567
not exceed a height of 25 feet, shall be set back from the street
rights-of-way and driveways at least 50 feet, shall be set back from
any property line a minimum of 100 feet and shall not exceed an
area of 32 square feet. [Amended 1-12-1998 by Ord. No. 97-18]
(a) Where uses share a common walkway, each use served by the
walkway may have one additional sign which shall be either
attached flat against the building or be suspended in
perpendicular fashion from the roof over the common walkway.
Suspended signs shall be no closer than eight feet at their
lowest point to the finished grade level below them. No such
sign shall exceed 10 square feet in area.
(b) All signs in a shopping center shall conform in character to all
other signs in the complex and shall blend with the overall
architectural scheme of the shopping center.
(6) Service stations: one freestanding sign and one sign attached flat
against the building. The freestanding sign shall not exceed an area
of 32 square feet and 25 feet in height and shall be set back at least
10 feet from all street rights-of-way and lot lines. The attached sign
shall not exceed 32 square feet in area.
(7) Industrial and manufacturing plants, wholesale distribution centers
and warehouses: one sign not exceeding 32 square feet in area. If
attached to the building, the sign shall not be higher than the roof
line; if freestanding, the sign shall not exceed a height of 25 feet,
shall be set back from the street rights-of-way and driveways at
least 50 feet and shall be set back from any property line a
minimum of 100 feet. [Amended 1-12-1998 by Ord. No. 97-18]
(8) Industrial parks: one freestanding sign along each arterial or
collector road which the tract in question abuts, provided that
there exists at least 250 feet of unbroken frontage. Such sign shall
not exceed a height of 25 feet, shall be set back from the street
rights-of-way and driveways at least 50 feet, shall be set back from
any property line a minimum of 100 feet and shall not exceed an
area of 32 square feet. [Amended 1-12-1998 by Ord. No. 97-18]
(9) Home occupations. Home occupations, where permitted, shall be
allowed to maintain one unlighted nameplate sign identifying the
home occupation, not exceeding six square feet in area, either
attached or freestanding, and set back at least 15 feet from the
street right-of-way line.
(10) Liquor stores. In addition to the requirements of Section
185-43B(3), liquor stores are subject to the following additional
requirements: [Added 9-18-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-05]
(a) There shall be no banners, portable signs or outside
advertising displays, such as inflatable product models.
§ 185-43 DENNIS CODE § 185-43
1:568
(b) There shall be no outside display of merchandise, and no
outside storage of merchandise, whether as a display or
otherwise.
(c) There shall be no outside vending machines, ice machines or
other facilities that advertise or dispense merchandise.
C. Permitted signs in the OVCC, OVC and CVC Districts. The following
signs are permitted for uses in the OVCC, OVC and CVC Districts:
(1) Wall signs, subject to the following requirements:
(a) One of the three types below shall be permitted for each street
frontage of each business:
[1] Internally-lit raised letters with concealed ballast (example
shown below).
[2] Back-lit raised letters with concealed ballast (example
shown below).
[3] Signage board with gooseneck lighting (example shown
below).
§ 185-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-43
1:569
(b) Sign area shall be a maximum of 30 square feet.
(c) Wall signs are also permitted for walls facing rear parking
areas with the same area as permitted on the front façade.
(d) Wall signs must be located below the second story floor line.
(2) Hanging signs, subject to the following requirements:
(a) One sign shall be permitted per business per street frontage
that is attached perpendicular to the street.
(b) Sign area shall be a maximum of 10 square feet.
(c) The letter/logo height shall be a maximum of six inches.
(d) Hanging signage must be located below the second story floor
line, but provide at least eight foot of clearance between its
bottom point and the sidewalk below.
(e) Hanging signs shall not be internally illuminated.
(3) Street address signs, subject the following requirements:
(a) Street address signage is required on each building or
individual tenant of a building.
(b) Numbers shall be a maximum of eight inches in height.
(4) Awning signs, subject to the following requirements:
(a) One sign with lettering per business shall be permitted on an
awning, and logos shall be permitted on all awnings, provided
that:
[1] The letter and logo area does not exceed 30 square feet or
up to a maximum of 50% of the diagonal portion of the
awning.
[2] The letter and logo height located on the vertical flap does
not exceed eight inches.
[3] The signage shall only be on first floor awnings.
§ 185-43 DENNIS CODE § 185-43
1:570
(b) Awnings shall be aesthetically compatible with the building
and consistent with each other.
(c) Awnings shall be kept in good order and repair.
(d) All awnings shall be made of cloth or canvas.
(e) A business cannot have a wall sign and an awning with
lettering.
(5) Window lettering signs, subject to the following requirements:
(a) All window lettering signs shall be inside the window and only
on first floor windows facing the street frontage.
(b) Window lettering signs shall not encompass more than 15% of
the window area.
(c) Window lettering signs shall pertain only to the establishment
occupying the premise where the window is located.
(6) Directory signs, subject to the following requirements:
(a) Shall only be permitted for upper story nonresidential uses.
(b) Sign area shall be a maximum of 12 square feet and located by
the main entrance to the upper floors.
(c) Letter height shall not exceed four inches.
D. Permitted signs in the VC District. The following signs are permitted for
uses as specified in Article IV of this chapter for the VC District:
(1) Wall signs, subject to the following requirements:
(a) One of the two types below shall be permitted for each street
frontage of each business:
[1] Back-lit raised letters with concealed ballast (example
shown below).
[2] Signage board with gooseneck lighting (example shown
below).
§ 185-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-43
1:571
(b) Sign area shall be a maximum of 10 square feet.
(c) Wall signs must be located below the second story floor line.
(2) Hanging signs, subject to the following requirements:
(a) One sign shall be permitted per business per street frontage
that is attached perpendicular to the street.
(b) Sign area shall be a maximum of four square feet.
(c) The letter/logo height shall be a maximum of six inches.
(d) Hanging signage must be located below the second story floor
line, but provide at least eight foot of clearance between its
bottom point and the sidewalk below.
(e) Hanging signs shall not be internally illuminated.
(3) Street address signs, subject the following requirements:
(a) Street address signage is required on each building or
individual tenant of a building.
(b) Numbers shall be a maximum of eight inches in height.
(4) Awning signs, subject to the following requirements:
(a) One sign with lettering per business shall be permitted on an
awning, and logos shall be permitted on all awnings, provided
that:
[1] The letter and logo area does not exceed 10 square feet or
up to a maximum of 50% of the diagonal portion of the
awning.
[2] The letter and logo height located on the vertical flap does
not exceed eight inches.
[3] The signage shall only be on first floor awnings.
(b) Awnings shall be aesthetically compatible with the building
and consistent with each other.
§ 185-43 DENNIS CODE § 185-43
1:572
§ 185-44. Swimming pools.
§ 185-45. Yard area.
§ 185-46. Off-tract improvements.
(c) Awnings shall be kept in good order and repair.
(d) All awnings shall be made of cloth or canvas.
(e) A business cannot have a wall sign and an awning with
lettering.
(5) Window lettering signs, subject to the following requirements:
(a) All window lettering signs shall be inside the window and only
on first floor windows facing the street frontage.
(b) Window lettering signs shall not encompass more than 15% of
the window area.
(c) Window lettering signs shall pertain only to the establishment
occupying the premise where the window is located.
A. No private residential swimming pool shall be constructed or installed
on any lot unless the lot contains a residence building. Pools shall be
located in rear and/or side yard areas only and shall meet the setback
distances for accessory buildings as specified in Article IV for each
particular zoning district, except that in no case may a swimming pool
be located closer than 15 feet to any lot line.
B. A swimming pool shall occupy no more than 75% of the yard area in
which it is located.
C. A private residential swimming pool area must be surrounded by a
suitable fence with a self-latching gate, at least four feet but no more
than six feet in height, and said fence shall be set back from any lot line
at least 15 feet if the fence exceeds four feet in height.
A. No open space provided around any principal building for the purposes
of complying with the front, side, rear or other yard provisions of this
chapter shall be considered as providing the yard provisions for any
other principal building.
B. Any structure located on a corner lot shall be set back from both streets
at least the required front yard distance.
A. Improvements required. Developers shall be required, as a condition
for approval of a subdivision or site plan, to pay their pro rata share of
the cost of providing reasonable and necessary street improvements
and water and drainage facilities and easements located outside the
property limits of the subdivision but necessitated or required by
construction or improvements within the subdivision. The following
§ 185-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-46
1:573
criteria shall be utilized in determining a developer's proportionate or
pro rata share of necessary off-tract improvements.
B. Cost of improvement.
(1) Improvements benefiting applicant only. In cases where the
reasonable and necessary need for an off-tract improvement or
improvements is necessitated or required by the proposed
development application where no other property owners receive a
special benefit thereby, the applicant may be required, as a
condition of approval, at the applicant's sole expense, to provide for
and construct such improvements as if such were an on-tract
improvement in the manner provided hereafter and otherwise
provided by law.
(2) Other improvements.
(a) In cases where the need for any off-tract improvement is
created by the proposed subdivision or site plan and where the
Planning Board determines that properties outside the
subdivision or tract will also be benefited by the improvement,
the Planning Board shall forthwith forward to the municipal
governing body a list and description of all such improvements,
together with its request that the Governing Body determine
and advise the Board of the procedure to be followed in the
construction or installation thereof. The Planning Board shall
withhold action upon the subdivision or site plan until receipt
of the governing body's determination or until the expiration of
60 days after the forwarding of such list and the description to
the governing body without such determination having been
made, whichever occurs sooner.
(b) The Governing Body, within 60 days after receipt of said list
and description, shall determine and advise the Planning Board
whether:
[1] The improvement or improvements are to be constructed
or installed by the municipality:
[a] As a general improvement, the cost of which is to be
borne at general expense (except as hereinafter
otherwise provided as to a contribution thereto by the
subdivider or developer); or
[b] As a local improvement, all or part of the cost of which
is to be specially assessed against properties
benefited thereby in proportion to benefits conferred
by the improvements in accordance with Chapter 56
of Title 40 of the New Jersey Revised Statutes (except
as hereinafter otherwise provided as to a contribution
thereto by the subdivider or developer).
§ 185-46 DENNIS CODE § 185-46
1:574
[2] The improvement or improvements are to be constructed
or installed by the subdivider or developer under a formula
for partial reimbursement as hereinafter set forth.
(c) If the Governing Body shall determine that the improvement or
improvements shall be constructed or installed under
Subsection B(2)(b)[1][a] above, the Planning Board shall
estimate, with the aid of the Municipal Engineer or such other
persons as have pertinent information or expertise, the
amount, if any, by which the total cost thereof will exceed the
total amount by which all properties, including the subdivision
or tract, will be specially benefited thereby, and the subdivider
or developer shall be liable to the municipality for such excess.
Further, the Governing Body shall adopt an ordinance
authorizing and providing for the financing of the improvement
or improvements in a manner consistent with the obligation of
the subdivider or developer for any excess of total cost over
total benefits conferred, as set forth above.
(d) If the Governing Body shall determine that the improvement or
improvements shall be constructed or installed under
Subsection B(2)(b)[1][b] above, the Planning Board shall, as
provided in Subsection C of this section, estimate the
difference between the total costs to be incurred and the total
amount by which all properties to be benefited thereby,
including the subdivision property or tract, will be specially
benefited by the improvement, and the subdivider or developer
shall be liable to the municipality therefor, as well as for the
amount of any special assessments against the subdivision
property or tract for benefits conferred by the improvement or
improvements. Further, the Governing Body shall adopt an
ordinance authorizing and providing for the financing of the
improvement or improvements and the assessment of benefits
arising therefor in a manner consistent with the obligation of
the subdivider or developer with respect thereto, and
proceedings under said ordinance shall be in accordance with
Chapter 56 of Title 40 of the New Jersey Revised Statutes,
except to the extent modified by the obligation of the
subdivider or developer for any excess of total costs over total
benefits conferred, as set forth above.
(e) If the Governing Body shall determine that the improvement or
improvements are to be constructed or installed by the
subdivider or developer under Subsection B(2)(b)[2] above, the
Planning Board shall in like manner estimate the amount of
such excess, and the subdivider or developer shall be liable to
the municipality therefor, as well as for the amount of any
special assessments against the subdivision property or tract
for benefits conferred by the improvement or improvements.
However, the subdivider or developer shall be entitled to be
§ 185-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-46
1:575
reimbursed by the municipality for the amount of any special
assessments against property other than the subdivision
property or tract for benefits conferred by the improvement or
improvements, and proceedings under said ordinance shall be
in accordance with Chapter 56 of Title 40 of the New Jersey
Revised Statutes. However, any such assessment against the
subdivision property or tract shall be marked "paid and
satisfied" in consideration of the construction or installation
of the improvement or improvements by the subdivider or
developer.
(f) If the Governing Body shall not adopt such an ordinance or
resolution with said time, the final subdivision layout or site
plan shall be designed accordingly, and the Planning Board
shall thereupon grant or deny final approval.
C. In cases where the need for any off-tract improvement is necessitated
by the proposed development application and where it is determined
that properties outside the development will also be benefited by the
improvement, the following criteria shall be utilized in determining the
developer's proportionate share of such improvements.
(1) Roadways. For street widening, alignment, channelization of
intersections, construction of barriers, new or improved traffic
signalization, signs, curbs, sidewalks, trees, utility improvement
uncovered elsewhere, the construction or reconstruction of new or
existing streets and other associated streets or traffic
improvements, the applicant's proportionate cost shall be
determined as follows:
(a) The Township Engineer shall provide the applicant's engineer
with the existing and anticipated peak-hour flows for the offtract
improvement.
(b) The applicant shall furnish a plan for the proposed off-tract
improvement, which shall include the estimated peak-hour
traffic generated by the proposed development. The ratio of
the peak-hour traffic generated by the proposed development
to the future peak- hour traffic shall form the basis of the
proportionate share. The prorated share shall be computed as
follows:
Total cost of the roadway
improvement and/or
extension
Developer's cost
= Future peak-hour traffic
Future peak-hour traffic
generated by the
development
(2) Drainage improvements. For stormwater and drainage
improvements, including the installation, relocation or replacement
§ 185-46 DENNIS CODE § 185-46
1:576
§ 185-47. Historic preservation.
§ 185-48. Open space and park standards.
of storm drains, culverts, catch basins, manholes, riprap or
improved drainage ditches and appurtenances thereto and the
relocation or replacement of other storm drainage facilities or
appurtenances associated therewith, the applicant's proportionate
share shall be determined as follows:
(a) The capacity and the design of the drainage system to
accommodate stormwater runoff shall be based on a method
described in Urban Hydrology for Small Watershed Technical
Release 55, Soil Conservation Service, United States
Department of Agriculture, January 1975, as amended, and
shall be computed by the developer's engineer and approved
by the Township Engineer.
(b) The capacity of the enlarged, extended or improved system
required for the subdivision and areas outside of the
developer's tributary to the drainage system shall be
determined by the developer's engineer, subject to approval of
the Township Engineer. The plans for the improved system
shall be prepared by the developer's engineer and the
estimated cost of the enlarged system calculated by the
Township Engineer. The prorated share for the proposed
improvement shall be computed as follows:
Total enlargement or
improvement cost of
drainage facilities
Developer's cost
= Total tributary cubic feet
per second
Development cubic feet
per second
D. Escrow accounts. Where the proposed off-tract improvement is to be
undertaken at some future date, the moneys required for the
improvement shall be deposited to the credit of the township in a
separate account until such time as the improvement is constructed. If
the off-tract improvement is not begun within 10 years of deposit, all
moneys and interest shall be returned to the applicant.
E. Computation of pro rata share. In any case in which an applicant shall
not provide the approving authority with the estimates of a traffic
consultant and/or consulting engineer with regard to estimated
improvement costs and all other information necessary to proportion
costs, the approving authority may rely on the estimates of the
Township Engineer.
A. (Reserved for Future Use.)
§ 185-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-48
1:577
A. Purpose. This section establishes open space and park standards for
potential park areas within the OVCC, OVC and CVC Districts. There
are a total of three open space and park typologies. The provision of
open space or parkland is triggered by the size of the tract. Note that
only the OVCC, OVC and CVC Districts have open space and recreation
requirements.
B. Development within the OVCC, OVC and CVC District shall provide one
of three types of park facilities, depending on the size of the
development tract as follows:
(1) 3.0-4.9 acre tract shall provide a Pocket Plaza.
(2) 5.0-9.9 acre tract shall provide a Center Plaza.
(3) 10.0 acre or larger tract shall provide a Community Park.
C. Standards for a Pocket Plaza.
(1) General description. A Pocket Plaza is the smallest type of open
space within the Villages. Pocket Plazas are similar to Center
Plazas, but are smaller in size. Pocket Plazas act as secondary focal
points within the community that provide intimate spaces for
seating and dining. Pocket Plazas can be created around a
sculpture or planting beds. The general character of a Pocket Plaza
is a hardscape surface with trees and plantings, which is defined by
buildings.
(2) Spatial, landscape and amenity standards for a Pocket Plaza shall
be as follows:
D. Standards for a Center Plaza.
(1) General description. A Center Plaza adds vitality to the streetscape
and creates open spaces for civic purposes and commercial activity.
They provide a gathering place for the community and should be
located either the intersection of important streets or between
nodes of activity. Center Plazas are primarily a hardscape surface
with trees and plantings, defined by buildings and streets, and
typically contain benches, outdoor dining areas and water features.
(2) Spatial, landscape and amenity standards for a Center Plaza shall
be as follows:
§ 185-48 DENNIS CODE § 185-48
1:578
E. Standards for a Community Park.
(1) General description. A Community Park provides active and/or
passive recreation space for all age groups while simultaneously
preserving open space. Play equipment, walking trails and civic
structures, such as a gazebo or amphitheater should be included
where appropriate. Landscaping should consist of trees, grass,
shrubs and native plants.
(2) Spatial, landscape and amenity standards for a Community Park
shall be as follows:
§ 185-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-48
1:579

ARTICLE VI
Pinelands Area Development Procedures and Standards
[Amended 7-15-13 by Ord. No. 2013-03]
§ 185-49. Special procedures for development.
A. Applicability of procedures. [Amended 11-13-18 by Ord. No.
2018-11]
(1) No person shall carry out any development within the Pinelands
Area without obtaining approval from an approval agency and
without obtaining development approval in accordance with the
procedures set forth in this chapter.
(2) Except as provided in Subsection A(3) below, the following shall not
be subject to the procedures set forth in this section:
(a) The improvement, expansion or reconstruction, within five
years of destruction or demolition, of any single-family
dwelling unit or appurtenance thereto.
(b) The improvement, expansion, construction or reconstruction of
any structure accessory to a single-family dwelling.
(c) The improvement, expansion, construction or reconstruction of
any structure used exclusively for agricultural or horticultural
purposes.
(d) The construction, repair or removal of any sign, except for the
construction or replacement of any off-site commercial
advertising sign.
(e) The repair of existing utility distribution lines and the
installation of utility distribution lines. [Amended 2-24-97 by
Ord. No. 97-01]
(f) The clearing of less than 1,500 square feet of land.
(g) The construction of any addition or accessory structure for any
non-residential use or any multi-family residential structure
provided that:
[1] If the addition or structure will be located on or below an
existing impervious surface, either the existing use is
served by public sewers or the addition or structure will
generate no wastewater flows, and said addition or
structure will cover an area of no more than 4,999 square
feet; and
[2] If the addition or structure will not be located on or below
an impervious surface, said addition or structure will
generate no wastewater flows and will cover an area of no
more than 1,000 square feet.
§ 185-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-49
1:581
(h) The demolition of any structure that is 50 years old.
(i) The installation of utility distribution lines, except for sewage
lines, to serve areas which are effectively developed or
development which has received all necessary approvals and
permits;
(j) The repair or replacement of any existing on-site waste water
disposal system;
(k) The repaving of existing paved roads and other paved surfaces,
provided no increase in the paved width or area of said roads
and surfaces will occur.
(l) The clearing of land solely for agricultural or horticultural
purposes.
(m) Fences, provided no more than 1,500 square feet of land is to
be cleared;
(n) Above-ground telephone equipment cabinets;
(o) Tree pruning;
(p) The following forestry activities:
[1] Normal and customary forestry practices on residentially
improved parcels of land that are five acres or less in size;
[2] Tree harvesting, provided that no more than one cord of
wood per five acres of land is harvested in any one year
and that no more than five cords of wood are harvested
from the entire parcel in any one year;
[3] Tree planting, provided that the area to be planted does
not exceed five acres in any one year, no soil disturbance
occurs other than that caused by the planting activity and
no trees other than those authorized by N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.25
are to be planted; and
[4] Forest stand improvement designated to selectively thin
trees and brush, provided that no clearing or soil
disturbance occurs and that the total land area on the
parcel in which the activity occurs does not exceed five
acres in any one year;
(q) Prescribed burning and the clearing and maintaining of fire
breaks; or
(r) Normal and customary landscape plantings, unless a
landscaping plan is required pursuant to Section 165-54B(2)(c)
of the Site Plan Review Chapter or Section 185-54C of this
chapter. [A(2)(i)—A(2)(r) added 2-24-97 by Ord. No. 97-01]
§ 185-49 DENNIS CODE § 185-49
1:582
(s) The installation of an accessory solar energy facility on any
existing structure or impervious surface.
(t) The installation of a local communications facilities antenna on
an existing communications or other suitable structure,
provided such antenna is not inconsistent with any
comprehensive plan for local communications facilities
approved by the Pinelands Commission pursuant to N.J.A.C.
7:50-5.4(c)6.
(u) The establishment of a home occupation within an existing
dwelling unit or structure accessory thereto, provided that no
additional development is proposed.
(v) The change of one nonresidential use to another nonresidential
use, provided that the existing and proposed uses are or will be
served by public sewers and no additional development is
proposed.
(3) The exceptions contained in Subsection A(2) above shall not apply
to any historic resources designated by the Pinelands Commission
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.154.
(4) Nothing herein shall preclude any local or state agency from
reviewing, in accordance with the provisions of any applicable
ordinance or regulation, any proposed development which does not
require an application to the Pinelands Commission pursuant to
this section.
B. Application requirements for minor development. Any application for
approval of minor development shall include at least the following
information:
(1) The applicant's name and address and his interest in the subject
property.
(2) The owner's name and address, if different from the applicant's,
and the owner's signed consent to the filing of the application.
(3) The legal description, including block and lot designation and
street address, if any, of the subject property.
(4) A description of all existing uses of the subject property.
(5) A brief written statement generally describing the proposed
development.
(6) A United States Geological Survey Quadrangle Map, or copy
thereof, and a copy of the Municipal Tax Map sheet on which the
boundaries of the subject property and the Pinelands Management
Area designation and the zoning designation are shown.
§ 185-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-49
1:583
(7) A plat or plan showing the location of all boundaries of the subject
property, the location of all proposed development and existing or
proposed facilities to provide water for the use and consumption of
occupants of all buildings and sanitary facilities which will serve
the proposed development. The following information shall be
included with respect to existing or proposed sanitary facilities:
(a) On-site treatment facilities: the location, size, type and
capacity of any proposed on-site wastewater treatment
facilities.
(b) Soil borings and percolation tests: If on-site sewage disposal is
proposed, results of soil borings and percolation tests in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 58:11-23 et seq., and the regulations
adopted pursuant thereto, shall be submitted at suitable
locations with a tract map showing location, logs, elevations of
all test holes, indicating where groundwater was encountered,
estimating the seasonal high-water table and demonstrating
that such facility is adequate to meet the water quality
standards contained in Section 185-58. [Amended 2-24-97 by
Ord. No. 97-01]
(8) A location map, including the area extending at least 300 feet
beyond each boundary of the subject property, showing ownership
boundary lines, the boundary of the proposed development, owners
of holdings adjoining and adjacent to the subject property, existing
facilities, buildings and structures on the site, all proposed
development, wetlands, streams (including intermittent streams),
rivers, lakes and other water bodies and existing roads.
(9) A soils map, including a county soils survey, which conforms to the
guidelines of the United States Department of Agricultural Soil
Conservation Service, showing the location of all proposed
development.
(10) A map showing existing vegetation, identifying predominant
vegetation types in the area and showing proposed landscaping of
the subject property, including the location of the tree line before
and after development and all areas to be disturbed as a result of
the proposed development.
(11) A certificate of filing from the Pinelands Commission issued
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.34 or, until January 14, 1991, evidence
of prior approval from the Pinelands Development Review Board or
the Pinelands Commission pursuant to the Interim Rules and
Regulations.
(12) When prior approval for the development has been granted by an
approval agency, evidence of Pinelands Commission review
pursuant to Subsection E.
§ 185-49 DENNIS CODE § 185-49
1:584
(13) In lieu of Subsections B(1) through B(12) above, the application
requirements of Section 185-49.1 shall apply to applications for the
development of a single family dwelling on an existing lot of record.
[Added 2-24-97 by Ord. No. 97-01]
C. Application requirements for other development.
(1) All applications for major development, other than forestry and
resource-extraction operations, shall be accompanied by the
information required in N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.2(b)(5), as well as the
following:
(a) A certificate of filing from the Pinelands Commission issued
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50- 4.34 or, until January 14, 1991,
evidence of prior approval from the Pinelands Development
Review Board or the Pinelands Commission pursuant to the
Interim Rules and Regulations.
(b) When prior approval for the development has been granted by
an approval agency, evidence of Pinelands Commission review
pursuant to Subsection E.
(2) An application for approval of forestry operations shall be subject
to the application requirements set forth in Section 185-55.
[Amended 2-24-97 by Ord. No. 97-01]
(3) An application for approval of resource-extraction operations shall
be subject to the application requirements set forth in Section
185-64. [Amended 2-24-97 by Ord. No. 97-01]
D. Notices to the Pinelands Commission. [Amended 11-13-18 by Ord.
No. 2018-11]
(1) Application submission and modifications. Written notification shall
be given by the Township, by email or regular mail, to the Pinelands
Commission within seven days after a determination is made by the
Township that an application for development in the Pinelands Area
is complete or if a determination is made by the Township approval
agency that the application has been modified. Said notice shall
contain:
(a) The name and address of the applicant.
(b) The legal description and street address, if any, of the parcel
that the applicant proposes to develop.
(c) A brief description of the proposed development, including
uses and intensity of uses proposed.
(d) The application number of the Certificate of Filing issued by
the Pinelands Commission, and the date on which it was
issued.
§ 185-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-49
1:585
(e) The date on which the application, or any change thereto, was
filed and any application number or other identifying number
assigned to the application by the approval agency.
(f) The approval agency with which the application or change
thereto was filed.
(g) The content of any change made to the application since it was
filed with the Commission, including a copy of any revised
plans or reports.
(h) The nature of the municipal approval or approvals being
sought.
(2) Meetings and hearings. Where a meeting, hearing or other formal
proceeding on an application for development approval in the
Pinelands Area is required, the applicant shall provide notice to the
Pinelands Commission by email, regular mail or delivery of the
same to the principal office of the Commission at least five days
prior to such meeting, hearing or other formal proceeding. Such
notice shall contain at least the following information:
(a) The name and address of the applicant.
(b) The application number of the Certificate of Filing issued by
the Pinelands Commission and the date on which it was issued.
(c) The date, time and location of the meeting, hearing or other
formal proceeding.
(d) The name of the approval agency or representative thereof
that will be conducting the meeting, hearing or other formal
proceeding.
(e) Any written reports or comments received by the approval
agency on the application for development that have not been
previously submitted to the Commission.
(f) The purpose for which the meeting, hearing or other formal
proceeding is to be held.
(3) Notice of approvals and denials. The Pinelands Commission shall
be notified of all approvals and denials of development in the
Pinelands Area, whether the approval occurs by action or inaction
of any approval agency or an appeal of any agency's decision. The
applicant shall, within five days of the approval or denial, give
notice by email or regular mail to the Pinelands Commission. Such
notice shall contain the following information:
(a) The name and address of the applicant.
(b) The legal description and street address, if any, of the parcel
that the applicant proposes to develop.
§ 185-49 DENNIS CODE § 185-49
1:586
(c) The application number of the Certificate of Filing issued by
the Pinelands Commission and the date on which it was issued.
(d) The date on which the approval or denial was issued by the
approval agency.
(e) Any written reports or comments received by the approval
agency on the application for development that have not been
previously submitted to the Commission.
(f) Any revisions to the application not previously submitted to the
Commission.
(g) A copy of the resolution, permit or other documentation of the
approval or denial. If the application was approved, a copy of
any preliminary or final plan, plot or similar document that was
approved shall also be submitted.
(4) Where an appeal of a decision is made to the Board of Adjustment
or governing body, the applicant shall notify the Pinelands
Commission by email or regular mail of the decision of the Board of
Adjustment or governing body within five days following the
decision on such an appeal. Such notification shall contain the
information set forth in Subsection D(3) above.
(5) Except as provided in Section 185-49.1, the requirements of
Subsection D shall not apply to the issuance of a preliminary zoning
permit or a refusal to issue a preliminary zoning permit for the
development of a single family dwelling on an existing lot of record.
[Amended 2-24-97 by Ord. No. 97-01]
E. Review by the Pinelands Commission.
(1) Upon receipt by the Pinelands Commission of a notice of approval
pursuant to Subsection D(3) above, the application for development
approval shall be reviewed in accordance with the provisions in
N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.37 through N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.42. The approval of the
township shall not be effective and no development shall be carried
out prior to a determination of whether the development approval
will be reviewed by the Commission. If the applicant is notified that
the Commission will review the application for development, no
development shall be carried out until such review has been
completed.
(2) Until January 14, 1991, approvals issued by the Pinelands
Development Review Board or the Pinelands Commission under the
Interim Rules and Regulations shall serve as the basis for Pinelands
Commission review of the local approval under this section.
(3) Although the Pinelands Commission shall be notified of all denials,
no such denial actions are subject to further review and action by
the Pinelands Commission.
§ 185-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-49
1:587
(4) Except as provided in Section 185-49.1, the requirements of
Subsection E. shall not apply to the issuance of a preliminary
zoning permit or a refusal to issue a preliminary zone permit for the
development of a single family dwelling on an existing lot of record.
[Amended 2-24-97 by Ord. No. 97-01]
F. Condition on prior approvals of the township. Where a prior approval
has been granted by an approval agency, no subsequent approval shall
be obtained until one of the following is satisfied:
(1) Notification is received from the Pinelands Commission that review
of the prior local approval is not required.
(2) Review of the prior local approval has been completed pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.37 through 7:50-4.42 and a final order regarding the
approval is received by the township from the Pinelands
Commission.
(3) Except as provided in Section 185-49.1, the requirements of
Subsection F. shall not apply to the issuance of a preliminary
zoning permit or a refusal to issue a preliminary zoning permit for
the development of a single family dwelling on an existing lot of
record. [Amended 2-24-97 by Ord. No. 97-01]
G. Effect of Pinelands Commission decision on township approval.
(1) If the Pinelands Commission disapproves an application for
development previously approved by an approval agency, such
approval shall be revoked by the approval agency within 30 days,
and the agency shall thereafter deny approval of the application.
(2) If the Commission approves the decision of an approval agency
subject to conditions, the approval agency which had previously
approved the application shall, within 30 days, modify its approval
to include all conditions imposed by the Commission and, if final
approval of the application is required, shall grant final approval
only if the application for approval demonstrates that the
conditions specified by the Commission have been met by that
applicant.
(3) Except as provided in Section 185-49.1, the requirements of
Subsection G. shall not apply to the issuance of a preliminary
zoning permit or a refusal to issue a preliminary zoning permit for
the development of a single family dwelling on an existing lot of
record. [Amended 2-24-97 by Ord. No. 97-01]
H. Participation of Pinelands Commission in public hearings. The
Pinelands Commission may participate in a hearing held in the
township involving the development of land in the Pinelands Area
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.36.
§ 185-49 DENNIS CODE § 185-49
1:588
§ 185-49.1. Procedures for applications for the development of a
single family dwelling. [Amended 2-24-97 by Ord. No. 97-01]
I. Natural Resource Committee Review. All applications for major
development, forestry and resource extraction maybe referred to the
Natural Resource Committee for review and comment.
J. Public development. All development proposed by the township of any
agency thereof will comply with all the requirements for public
development set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.51 et seq. and all the standards
set forth in this chapter.
K. Amendments. In amending the township's Master Plan or this chapter,
the township shall comply with all of the requirements of N.J.A.C.
7:50-3.45.
A. The Zoning Officer is hereby authorized and directed to issue
preliminary zoning permits as a prerequisite to the issuance of a
construction permit or other permits or approvals which are needed to
develop a single family dwelling on an existing lot of record.
B. Applications for a preliminary zoning permit.
(1) An application for a preliminary zoning permit shall be submitted to
the Zoning Officer and shall include the following:
(a) The applicant's name and address and his interest in the
subject property;
(b) The applicant's signed certification that he is duly authorized
to submit the application, that the materials and information
are accurate, and that duly authorized representatives of the
Township of Dennis and Pinelands Commission are authorized
to inspect the property;
(c) The owner's name and address, if different from the
applicant's, and the owner's signed consent to the filing of the
application;
(d) The street address, if any, the tax map sheet and block and lot
number of the property;
(e) Proof that taxes for the property have been paid;
(f) Acreage of the property in square feet;
(g) A dated plot plan, with the scale noted, showing:
[1] The zoning district in which the property is located;
[2] The location and dimensions of all property lines,
easements affecting the property and streets abutting the
property;.
§ 185-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-49.1
1:589
[3] The location of all yards and setbacks required pursuant to
Article III;
[4] The location and use of all existing structures and
improvements on the property and their intended
disposition;
[5] A building envelope within which the single family
dwelling is to be located;
[6] The location and dimensions of the proposed driveway;
[7] The location and dimensions of any proposed accessory
structures or improvements;
[8] The location and dimensions of the area in which any
sewage disposal system, including the disposal field, is
proposed to be located; and
[9] The location of any proposed water supply well.
(h) If development of the property is proposed in accordance with
the density transfer program of Section 185-69, the street
address, if any, the tax map sheet, block and lot number and
acreage in square feet of the noncontiguous property.
(2) The Zoning Officer is authorized to require such additional
information as may be necessary to determine compliance with the
Zoning Chapter. Such may include, but is not limited to, a soil
boring in the area of any proposed septage system disposal field, a
wetland and wetland buffer map and information to determine
compliance with any permitted use requirement of the Zoning
Chapter.
(3) The Zoning Officer is authorized to waive any of the
aforementioned application requirements if the information is not
necessary to determine compliance with the Zoning Chapter.
(4) Within 14 days of receipt of an application, the Zoning Officer shall
determine whether the application is complete and, if necessary,
notify the applicant of any additional information which is
necessary to complete the application.
C. Permit decisions. Within, 14 days of determining an application to be
complete, the Zoning Officer shall issue either a preliminary zoning
permit or a refusal to issue a preliminary zoning permit.
D. Preliminary zoning permit.
(1) A preliminary zoning permit shall be issued if:
(a) The application is consistent with the requirements of the
Zoning Chapter or any necessary variance from those
requirements has been obtained;
§ 185-49.1 DENNIS CODE § 185-49.1
1:590
(b) No Waiver of Strict Compliance from the requirements of the
Pinelands Comprehensive Management Plan is necessary or
any such Waiver has been approved by the Pinelands
Commission; and
(c) A duly authorized representative of the Pinelands Commission
approves the Zoning Officer's determination and so signifies by
signing the preliminary zoning permit.
(2) A preliminary zoning permit shall expressly incorporate the plot
plan being approved, shall specify any conditions which the Zoning
Officer determines are necessary to ensure compliance with the
Zoning Chapter and shall specify the expiration date of the permit.
(3) The Zoning Officer shall provide copies of the application and the
preliminary zoning permit to the Pinelands Commission within five
days of the issuance of the permit.
E. Effect of preliminary zoning permit.
(1) A preliminary zoning permit represents a determination that the
application meets the requirements of the Zoning Chapter and the
Pinelands Comprehensive Management Plan, N.J.A.C. 7:50-1.1 et
seq.
(2) A preliminary zoning permit shall be valid for two years and shall,
during that period, confer the following rights and privileges:
(a) The approved application shall not be subject to any
substantive revisions of the Zoning Chapter of Dennis
Township or the Pinelands Comprehensive Management Plan,
N.J.A.C. 7:50-1.1 et seq.
(b) Any subsequent approvals necessary for the development of
the single family dwelling on the property may be sought
without the need for a certificate of filing from the Pinelands
Commission.
(3) Any subsequent approvals to be sought, including but not limited to
construction permits, shall be subject to the notice, review and
decision requirements of Section 185-49, Subsections D through G.
F. Refusal to issue preliminary zoning permit.
(1) The Zoning Officer shall issue a refusal to issue a preliminary
zoning permit if any of the following are found to apply:
(a) A variance from the Zoning Chapter of Dennis Township is
required;
(b) A variance from the Zoning Chapter of Dennis Township is not
required but the Zoning Officer determines that the application
does not meet any requirement of the Zoning Chapter that
§ 185-49.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-49.1
1:591
§ 185-50. Compliance required.
No development in the Pinelands Area shall be carried out by any person
unless it is in conformance with each of the standards set forth in this
article.
reflects a provision of the Pinelands Comprehensive
Management Plan;
(c) A Waiver of Strict Compliance from the Pinelands
Comprehensive Management Plan is required; or
(d) The duly authorized representative of the Pinelands
Commission has not attested to the consistency of the
application with the Pinelands Comprehensive Management
Plan, N.J.A.C. 7:50-1.1 et seq.
(2) A refusal to issue a preliminary zoning permit shall expressly
reference the reasons why the refusal was issued. If the refusal is
predicated solely upon the need to obtain a variance from the
Zoning Chapter, the refusal shall also indicate that upon the
applicant's submission of evidence of Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment approval of the necessary variance, the Zoning Officer
shall determine whether a preliminary zoning permit may be issued
pursuant to Subsection D above.
(3) When a refusal to issue a preliminary zoning permit is predicated
solely upon the need to obtain a variance from the Zoning Chapter,
the Zoning Officer shall provide a copy of the application and the
refusal to the Pinelands Commission within five days of the
issuance.
(4) When a refusal to issue a preliminary zoning permit is predicated
wholly or in part upon Subsection F(l)(b), (c) or (d) above, the
Zoning Officer shall provide the original application and a copy of
the refusal to the Pinelands Commission within five days of the
issuance. The Pinelands Commission shall thereafter process the
application pursuant to the Pinelands Comprehensive Management
Plan, N.J.A.C. 7:50-1.1 et seq. and Section 185-49 of the Zoning
Chapter of Dennis Township. In lieu of a preliminary zoning permit,
a certificate of filing from the Pinelands Commission shall
thereafter be required as a prerequisite to the issuance of a
construction or other permit.
G. Zoning Officer vacancy. Should the position of Zoning Officer become
vacant for any reason, the application procedures set forth in Section
185-49.1 shall be of no force or effect and the procedures of Section
185-49 shall apply until the position has been filled.
§ 185-49.1 DENNIS CODE § 185-51
1:592
§ 185-51. Permitted uses in wetlands.
No development in the Pinelands Area shall be permitted in a wetland or in
a wetlands transition area except for the following uses:
A. Horticulture of native Pinelands species.
B. Berry agriculture in accordance with the requirements of Section
185-56 of this chapter.
C. Beekeeping.
D. Forestry in accordance with the requirements of Section 185-55 of this
chapter.
E. Fish and wildlife activities and wetlands management, in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.10.
F. Low-intensity recreational uses which do not involve use of a structure,
including hunting, fishing, trapping, hiking, boating and swimming and
other low- intensity recreational uses, provided that any development
associated with those other uses does not result in a significant adverse
impact on the wetland as set forth in Section 185-52 below.
G. Private docks, piers, moorings and boat launches for the use of a
landowner, provided that there is no significant adverse impact on the
wetland as set forth in Section 185-52 hereof.
H. Commercial or public docks, piers, moorings and boat launches shall be
permitted, provided that:
(1) There is a demonstrated need for the facility that cannot be met by
existing facilities.
(2) The development conforms to all state and federal regulations.
(3) The development will not result in a significant adverse impact as
set forth in Section 185-52 hereof.
I. Bridges, roads, trails and utility transmission and distribution facilities
and other similar linear facilities, provided that:
(1) There is no feasible alternative route for the facility that does not
involve development in a wetland or, if none, that another feasible
route which results in less significant adverse impacts on wetlands
does not exist.
(2) The need for the proposed linear improvement cannot be met by
existing facilities or modification thereof.
(3) The use represents a need which overrides the importance of
protecting the wetland.
(4) Development of the facility will include all practical measures to
mitigate the adverse impact on the wetland.
§ 185-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-51
1:593
§ 185-52. Adverse impacts.
§ 185-53. Development restricted.
(5) The resources of the Pinelands will not be substantially impaired as
a result of the facility and its development as determined
exclusively based on the existence of special and unusual
circumstances.
A. No development, except for those uses which are specifically
authorized in Section 185-51A through D, shall be carried out within
300 feet of any wetland unless the applicant has demonstrated that the
proposed development will not result in a significant adverse impact on
the wetland. [Amended 2-24-97 by Ord. No. 97-01]
B. A significant adverse impact shall be deemed to exist where it is
determined that one or more of the following modifications of a wetland
will have an irreversible effect on the ecological integrity of the wetland
and its biotic components, including but not limited to threatened or
endangered species of plants or animals:
(1) An increase in surface water runoff discharging into a wetland.
(2) A change in the normal seasonal flow patterns in the wetland.
(3) An alteration in the water table in the wetland.
(4) An increase in erosion resulting in increased sedimentation in the
wetland.
(5) A change in the natural chemistry of the ground- or surface water
in the wetland.
(6) A loss of wetland habitat.
(7) A reduction in wetland habitat diversity.
(8) A change in wetland species composition.
(9) A significant disturbance of areas used by indigenous and
migratory wildlife for breeding, nesting or feeding.
C. Determinations under Subsection B. above shall consider the
cumulative modifications of the wetland due to the development being
proposed and any other existing or potential development which may
affect the wetland.
A. Development prohibited in the vicinity of threatened or endangered
plants. No development shall be carried out by any person in the
Pinelands Area unless it is designed to avoid irreversible adverse
impacts on the survival of any local populations of threatened or
endangered plants of the Pinelands designated in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.27.
[Amended 2-24-97 by Ord. No. 97-01]
§ 185-51 DENNIS CODE § 185-53
1:594
§ 185-54. Clearing of vegetation; landscaping. [Amended 2-24-97 by
Ord. No. 97-01]
B. Protection of threatened or endangered wildlife required. No
development shall be carried out in the Pinelands Area unless it is
designed to avoid irreversible adverse impacts on habitats that are
critical to the survival of any local populations of those threatened or
endangered animal species designated by the Department of
Environmental Protection pursuant to N.J.S.A. 23:2A-1 et seq.
C. Protection of wildlife habitat. All development shall be carried out in the
Pinelands Area in a manner which avoids disturbance to distinct fish
and wildlife habitats that are essential to the continued nesting, resting,
breeding and feeding of significant populations of fish and wildlife in
the Pinelands.
A. All clearing and soil disturbance activities shall be limited to that which
is necessary to accommodate an activity, use or structure which is
permitted by this chapter.
B. Where practical, all clearing and soil disturbance activities associated
with an activity, use or structure, other than agriculture, forestry and
resource extraction, shall:
(1) Avoid wooded areas, including New Jersey's Record Trees as
published by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection in 1991 and periodically updated; and
(2) Revegetate or landscape areas temporarily cleared or disturbed
during development activities.
C. All applications for major development shall contain a landscaping or
revegetation plan which incorporates the elements set forth in
Subsection D below.
D. In order to conserve water, conserve natural features and reduce
pollution from the use of fertilizers, pesticides and other soil
supplements, all landscaping or revegetation plans prepared pursuant
to Subsection C above or required pursuant to Section 165-54B(2)(c) of
the Site Plan Review Chapter shall incorporate the following elements:
(1) The limits of clearing shall be identified;
(2) Existing vegetation, including New Jersey's Record Trees as
published by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection in 1991 and periodically updated, shall be incorporated
into the landscape design where practical;
(3) Permanent lawn or turf areas shall be limited to those specifically
intended for active human use such as play fields, golf courses and
lawns associated with a residence or other principal nonresidential
use. Existing wooded areas shall not be cleared and converted to
§ 185-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-54
1:595
§ 185-55. Forestry. [Amended 2-24-97 by Ord. No. 97-01]
lawns except when directly associated with and adjacent to a
proposed structure; and
(4) Shrubs and trees authorized by N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.25 shall be used for
revegetation or landscaping purposes. Other shrubs and trees may
be used in the following circumstances:
(a) When the parcel to be developed or its environs contain a
predominance of shrubs and tree species not authorized by
N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.25;
(b) For limited ornamental purposes around buildings and other
structures; or
(c) When limited use of other shrubs or tree species is required for
proper screening or buffering.
A. Permit required. No forestry in the Pinelands Area of the township shall
be carried out by any person unless a permit for such activity has been
issued by the Township Zoning Officer. Notwithstanding this
requirement, no such permits shall be required for the following
forestry activities:
(1) Normal and customary forestry practices on residentially improved
parcels of land that are five acres or less in size;
(2) Tree harvesting provided that no more than one cord of wood per
five acres of land is harvested in any one year and that no more
than five cords of wood are harvested from the entire parcel in any
one year;
(3) Tree planting, provided that the area to be planted does not exceed
five acres in any one year, no soil disturbance occurs other than
that caused by the planting activity and no trees other than those
authorized by N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.25 are to be planted;
(4) Forest stand improvement designed to selectively thin trees and
brush, provided that no clearing or soil disturbance occurs and that
the total land area on the parcel in which the activity occurs does
not exceed five acres in any one year; and
(5) Prescribed burning and the clearing and maintaining of fire breaks.
B. Forestry application requirements. The information in Subsection B(1)
or (2) below shall be submitted to the Township Zoning Officer prior to
the issuance of any forestry permit:
(1) For forestry activities on a parcel of land enrolled in the New Jersey
Forest Stewardship Program, a copy of the approved New Jersey
Forest Stewardship Plan. This document shall serve as evidence of
the completion of an application with the Pinelands Commission as
§ 185-54 DENNIS CODE § 185-55
1:596
well as evidence that the activities are consistent with the
standards of the Comprehensive Management Plan. No certificate
of filing from the Pinelands Commission shall be required.
(2) For all other forestry applications:
(a) The applicant's name and address and his interest in the
subject parcel;
(b) The owner's name and address, if different from the
applicant's, and the owner's signed consent to the filing of the
application;
(c) The description, including block and lot designation and street
address, if any, of the subject parcel;
(d) A description of all existing uses of the subject parcel;
(e) A brief written statement generally describing the proposed
forestry operation;
(f) A USGS Quadrangle map, or copy thereof, and a copy of the
municipal tax map sheet on which the boundaries of the
subject parcel, the Pinelands management area designation
and the municipal zoning designation are shown;
(g) A forestry management plan that includes, as appropriate:
[1] A cover page for the plan containing:
[a] The name, mailing address and telephone number of
the owner of the subject parcel;
[b] The municipality and county in which the subject
parcel is located;
[c] The block and lot designation and street address, if
any, of the subject parcel;
[d] The name and address of the forester who prepared
the plan, if not prepared by the owner of the subject
parcel; and
[e] The date the plan was prepared, subsequent revision
dates and the period of time the plan is intended to
cover;
[2] A clear and concise statement of the owner's objectives for
undertaking the proposed forestry activities, including a
description of the short- (five years) and long-term (20
years) objectives for all proposed silvicultural techniques
that will be used to manage the parcel;
§ 185-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-55
1:597
[3] A description of the existing conditions of the subject
parcel and of each forest stand in which a proposed
activity, prescription or practice will occur. These stand
descriptions shall include photographs of each stand taken
at eye level showing the location of all Pinelands Native
Forest Types, as identified at N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.43, and shall
be keyed to an activity map that shall include, as
appropriate, the following information:
[a] The number of acres;
[b] The general condition and quality of each stand;
[c] The overall site quality, relative to the management
goals and objectives identified in Subsection (2)(g)[2]
above;
[d] An inventory and map of Pinelands Native Forest
Types with Native Forest Types broken into "stands,"
including information on type, size and volume by
species;
[e] The age of representative trees;
[f] The species composition, including overstory,
understory, ground layer structure and composition;
[g] The stand cohort composition;
[h] The percent cover;
[i] The basal area;
[j] The structure, including age classes, diameter breast
height (DBH) classes and crown classes;
[k] The condition and species composition of advanced
regeneration when applicable;
[l] A stocking table showing the stocking levels, growth
rates and volume;
[m] Projections of intended future stand characteristics at
10-, 20-, and 40-year intervals;
[n] A description of the forestry activities, silvicultural
prescriptions, management activities and practices
proposed during the permit period and the acreage
proposed for each activity. These may include, but are
not necessarily limited to, a description of:
i. Stand improvement practices;
ii. Site preparation practices;
§ 185-55 DENNIS CODE § 185-55
1:598
iii. Harvesting practices;
iv. Regeneration and reforestation practices;
v. Improvements, including road construction,
stream crossings, landings, loading areas and skid
trails;
vi. Herbicide treatments;
vii. Silvicultural treatment alternatives;
viii. If planting will occur to accomplish reforestation,
the application shall include seed sources
records, if such records are available;
ix. Implementation instructions; and
x. Measures that will be taken to prevent the
potential spread of exotic plant species or
Phragmites into wetlands; and
[o] A description, if appropriate, of the forest products to
be harvested, including volume expressed in cords
and board feet; diameter breast height (DBH) classes
and average diameter; age; heights; and number of
trees per acre; and
[4] A map of the entire parcel which includes the following:
[a] The owner's name, address and the date the map was
prepared;
[b] An arrow designating the north direction;
[c] A scale which is not smaller than one inch equals
2,000 feet or larger than one inch equals 400 feet;
[d] The location of all property lines;
[e] A delineation of the physical features such as roads,
streams and structures;
[f] The identification of soil types (a separate map may be
used for this purpose);
[g] A map inset showing the location of the parcel in
relation to the local area;
[h] Clear location of the area and acreage in which each
proposed activity, prescription or practice will occur. If
shown on other than the property map, the map or
maps shall note the scale, which shall not be smaller
than one inch equals 2,000 feet or larger than one inch
§ 185-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-55
1:599
equals 400 feet, and shall be appropriately keyed to
the property map; and
[i] A legend defining the symbols appearing on the map.
(h) A letter from the Office of Natural Lands Management
identifying any threatened or endangered plants or animals
reported on or in the immediate vicinity of the parcel and a
detailed description by the applicant of the measures proposed
to meet the standards set forth in Sections 185-53A and
185-53B;
(i) A cultural resource survey documenting cultural resources on
those portions of the parcel where ground disturbance due to
site preparation or road construction will occur and a detailed
description of the measures proposed by the applicant to treat
those cultural resources in accordance with Section 185-63;
(j) A statement identifying the type, location and frequency of any
proposed herbicide treatments and how such treatments will
comply with the standards set forth in Subsection C(9)(b)
below;
(k) A statement identifying the specific steps to be taken to ensure
that trees or areas to be harvested are properly identified so as
to ensure that only those trees intended for harvesting are
harvested;
(l) Written comments from the New Jersey State Forester
concerning the extent to which the proposed forestry activities
are consistent with the guidelines provided in the New Jersey
Forestry and Wetlands Best Management Practices Manual
developed by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, dated October 1995, as amended. Any such
comments which indicate that the proposed activities are not
consistent with said Manual must be addressed by the
applicant in terms of their potential impact on the standards
set forth in Subsection C below;
(m) A Certificate of Filing from the Pinelands Commission issued
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.34; and
(n) When prior approval for the forestry activities has been
granted by the Zoning Officer or other municipal approval
agency, a letter from the Pinelands Commission indicating that
the prior approval has been reviewed pursuant to Section
185-49E.
C. Forestry standards. Forestry operations shall be approved only if the
applicant can demonstrate that the standards set forth below are met:
§ 185-55 DENNIS CODE § 185-55
1:600
(1) All forestry activities shall serve to maintain Pinelands native forest
types, including those which are locally characteristic, except in
those stands where other forest types exist;
(2) Any newly developed access to lands proposed for harvesting shall
avoid wetland areas except as absolutely necessary to harvest
wetlands species or to otherwise gain access to a harvesting site;
(3) The following actions shall be required to encourage the
establishment, restoration or regeneration of Atlantic White Cedar
in cedar and hardwood swamps:
(a) Clearcutting cedar and managing slash;
(b) Controlling competition by other plant species;
(c) Utilizing fencing and other retardants, where necessary, to
protect cedar from overbrowsing;
(d) Utilizing existing streams as cutting boundaries, where
practical;
(e) Harvesting during dry periods or when the ground is frozen;
and
(f) Utilizing the least intrusive harvesting techniques, including
the use of winches, corduroy roads and helicopters, where
practical.
(4) All forestry activities and practices shall be designed and carried
out so as to comply with the standards set forth in Sections
185-53A and 185-53B. The species accounts provided in the
"Recommended Forestry Management Practices Report," Appendix
I - Endangered Animals, dated March 2006, as amended and
supplemented and available at the principal office of the
Commission or at www.nj.gov/pinelands, may be utilized as a guide
for meeting these standards;
(5) All forestry activities and practices shall be designed and carried
out so as to comply with the standards for the land application of
waste set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.79, except as expressly authorized
in this section;
(6) All forestry activities and practices shall be designed and carried
out so as to comply with the standards for the protection of historic,
archaeological and cultural resources set forth in Section 185-63;
(7) A vegetated streamside management zone shall be maintained or
established adjacent to streams, ponds, lakes and marshes, except
that no streamside management zone shall be required when
Atlantic White Cedar is proposed to be harvested, established,
restored or regenerated. The streamside management zone shall
be at least 25 feet in width. Where soils are severely erodible,
§ 185-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-55
1:601
slopes exceed 10% or streamside vegetation is not vigorous, the
streamside management zone shall be increased up to a maximum
of 70 feet to buffer the water body from adjacent forestry activities;
(8) Stream crossings, access roads, timber harvesting, skid trails, log
decks, portable sawmill sites, site preparation, and reforestation
shall be designed and carried out so as to:
(a) Minimize changes to surface and ground water hydrology;
(b) Minimize changes to temperature and other existing surface
water quality and conditions;
(c) Prevent unnecessary soil erosion, siltation and sedimentation;
and
(d) Minimize unnecessary disturbances to aquatic and forest
habitats.
(9) The following standards shall apply to silvicultural practices for site
preparation, either before or after harvesting:
(a) In areas with slopes of greater than 10%, an undisturbed buffer
strip of at least 25 feet in width shall be maintained along
roads during site preparation to catch soil particles;
(b) Herbicide treatments shall be permitted, provided that:
[1] The proposed treatment is identified in the forestry
application submitted to the Zoning Officer pursuant to
Subsection B(2)(j) above;
[2] Control of competitive plant species is clearly necessary;
[3] Control of competitive plant species by other, nonchemical
means is not practical;
[4] All chemicals shall be expressly labeled for forestry use
and shall be used and mixed in a manner that is consistent
with relevant state and federal requirements; and
[5] In Pine-Shrub Oak Native Forest Types, herbicide
treatments shall only be permitted as a method to
temporarily suppress shrub-oak understory in order to
facilitate pine regeneration. All such herbicide treatments
shall be applied in a targeted manner so that there will be
no significant reduction in tree or shrub-oak re-sprouting
outside those areas subject to the herbicide treatment;
(c) Broadcast scarification and mechanical weeding shall be
permitted in all Pinelands Native Forest Types;
(d) Disking shall be permitted, provided that:
§ 185-55 DENNIS CODE § 185-55
1:602
[1] It shall not be permitted in Pine Plains Native Forest
Types;
[2] Disking shall only be permitted in Pine-Shrub Oak Native
Forest Types as a method to temporarily suppress shruboak
understory in order to facilitate pine regeneration, and
shall be limited as follows:
[a] Disking may occur one time during the first year of the
establishment of a stand to assure the successful
growth of pine seedlings and may be repeated one
time during the second year of the growth of the stand
only in areas where pine seedling establishment has
not successfully occurred; and
[b] Only single-pass disking, which penetrates the soil no
deeper than six inches, shall be permitted.
[3] It shall not occur in wetlands, except as may be necessary
to establish, restore or regenerate Atlantic White Cedar.
When so used, disking shall be limited to shrub-dominated
parcels and recently abandoned agricultural lands; and
[4] It shall follow land contours when slopes are discernible;
(e) Root raking shall be permitted, provided that:
[1] It shall not be permitted in Pine-Shrub Oak Native Forest
Types or Pine Plains Native Forest Types;
[2] When used to establish, restore or regenerate Atlantic
White Cedar, root raking shall be limited to shrubdominated
parcels and recently abandoned agricultural
lands; and
[3] Root raking debris shall not be piled in wetlands;
(f) Bedding shall be permitted only in recently abandoned,
cultivated wetlands where there are no established Pinelands
Native Forest Types; and
(g) Drum chopping shall be permitted, provided that:
[1] It shall not be permitted in Pine Plains Native Forest Types
except to create road shoulder fuelbreaks, which shall be
limited to 25 feet in width, or to create scattered early
successional habitats under two acres in size;
[2] It shall not be permitted in wetlands, except as may be
necessary to establish, restore or regenerate Atlantic
White Cedar. When so used, drum chopping shall be
limited to shrub-dominated parcels and recently
abandoned agricultural lands; and
§ 185-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-55
1:603
[3] It shall adhere to the following procedures:
[a] No more than two passes shall be permitted except to
create scattered early successional habitats under two
acres in size;
[b] Drums shall remain unfilled when used during the
dormant season;
[c] Chop up and down the slope on a parcel so the
depressions made by the cleats and chopper blades
run parallel to the contour of the land to help reduce
the occurrence of channeled surface erosion;
[d] Chop so the depressions made by the cleats and
chopper blades run parallel to a wetland or water
body; and
[e] Avoid short-radius, 180-degree turns at the end of
each straight pass.
(10) The following standards shall apply to silvicultural practices for
harvesting:
(a) Clearcutting shall be permitted, provided that:
[1] It shall not be permitted in Pine Plains Native Forest
Types;
[2] It shall be limited to 300 acres or 5% of a parcel,
whichever is greater, during any permit period;
[3] A 50 foot wide buffer strip, in which only periodic pruning
and thinning may occur, shall be maintained between any
clearcut and the parcel boundaries;
[4] A buffer strip, in which only periodic pruning and thinning
may occur, shall also be maintained to separate each
25-acre or larger clearcut from other 25-acre or larger
clearcuts, coppice cuts and seed tree cuts that occur
within a 15 year period. The buffer strip separating two
25-acre harvests shall be 50 feet in width and, for a larger
harvest, shall increase in width by one foot for each acre of
that harvest above 25, to a maximum of 300 feet in width;
[5] Where present on a parcel, a minimum of 18 dead snags
per acre of at least 10 inches diameter breast height
(DBH) and six feet in height shall be left on the parcel for a
minimum of five years; and
[6] The area of the parcel subject to the clearcut shall have
contoured edges unless the boundary of the clearcut
§ 185-55 DENNIS CODE § 185-55
1:604
serves as a firebreak in which case straight edges may be
used;
(b) Coppicing shall be permitted in all Pinelands Native Forest
Types, provided that:
[1] It shall be limited to 500 acres in size or 10% of a parcel,
whichever is greater, during any permit period;
[2] A 50-foot-wide buffer strip, in which only periodic pruning
and thinning may occur, shall be maintained between any
coppice cut and the parcel boundaries;
[3] A buffer strip, in which only periodic pruning and thinning
may occur, shall also be maintained to separate each
25-acre or larger coppice cut from other 25-acre or larger
clearcuts, coppice cuts and seed tree cuts that occur
within a 15 year period. The buffer strip separating two
25-acre harvests shall be 50 feet in width and, for a larger
harvest, shall increase in width by one foot for each acre of
that harvest above 25, to a maximum of 300 feet in width;
[4] Where present on a parcel, a minimum of 18 dead snags
per acre of at least 10 inches DBH and six feet in height
shall be left on the parcel for a minimum of five years; and
[5] The area of the parcel subject to the coppice cut shall have
contoured edges unless the boundary of the coppice cut
serves as a firebreak in which case straight edges may be
used;
(c) Seed tree cutting shall be permitted in all Pinelands Native
Forest Types, provided that:
[1] It shall be limited to 500 acres in size or 10% of a parcel,
whichever is greater, during any permit period;
[2] A 50 foot-wide buffer strip, in which only periodic pruning
and thinning may occur, shall be maintained between any
seed tree cut and the parcel boundaries;
[3] A buffer strip, in which only periodic pruning and thinning
may occur, shall also be maintained to separate each
25-acre or larger seed tree cut from other 25-acre or
larger clearcuts, coppice cuts and seed tree cuts that
occur within a 15 year period. The buffer strip separating
two 25-acre harvests shall be 50 feet in width and, for a
larger harvest, shall increase in width by one foot for each
acre of that harvest above 25, to a maximum of 300 feet in
width;
§ 185-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-55
1:605
[4] Where present on a parcel, a minimum of 18 dead snags
per acre of at least 10 inches DBH and six feet in height
shall be left on the parcel for a minimum of five years;
[5] The area of the parcel subject to the seed tree cut shall
have contoured edges unless the boundary of the seed tree
cut serves as a firebreak in which case straight edges may
be used;
[6] Dominant residual seed trees shall be retained at a
distribution of at least seven trees per acre; and
[7] Residual seed trees shall be distributed evenly throughout
the parcel; and
(d) Shelterwood cutting, group selection and individual selection
shall be permitted in all Pinelands Native Forest Types.
(11) The following standards shall apply to silvicultural practices for
forest regeneration:
(a) Natural regeneration shall be permitted in all Pinelands Native
Forest Types and shall be required in the Pine Plains Native
Forest Type, except as provided in Subsection (11)(b) below;
and
(b) Artificial regeneration shall be permitted in all Pinelands
Native Forest Types provided that:
[1] The use of non-native cuttings, seedlings or seeds shall not
be permitted;
[2] The use of hybrid cuttings, seedlings or seeds shall be
permitted if it can be demonstrated that the cutting is from
a locally native, naturally occurring hybrid which will be
planted within its natural range and habitat;
[3] Cuttings, seedlings or seeds shall be collected and utilized
so as to ensure genetic diversity; and
[4] When used in Pine Plains Native Forest Types, artificial
regeneration shall only be permitted to restore drastically
disturbed sites if seeds or seedlings from the immediate
vicinity have been collected from local, genetically similar
sources.
(12) Following site preparation and harvesting activities, slash shall
either be retained in piles on the parcel, distributed throughout the
parcel, removed from the parcel or burned.
(13) Thinning shall be permitted in all Pinelands Native Forest Types,
including that which serves to maintain an understory of native
§ 185-55 DENNIS CODE § 185-55
1:606
plants and/or manage stand composition, density, growth and
spatial heterogeneity.
(14) A copy of the approved municipal forestry permit shall be
conspicuously posted on the parcel which is the site of the forestry
activity.
D. Forestry permit procedures.
(1) Applications for forestry permits shall be submitted to the Zoning
Officer and shall be accompanied by an application fee of $25
dollars.
(2) Within 14 days of receipt of an application, the Zoning Officer shall
determine whether the application is complete and, if necessary,
notify the applicant in writing of any additional information which
is necessary to complete the application. Should the Zoning Officer
fail to make such a determination within 14 days, the application
shall be considered to be complete as of the fifteenth (15th) day
following its submission.
(3) Within 45 days of determining an application to be complete
pursuant to Subsection D(2) above, or within such further time as
may be consented to by the applicant, the Zoning Officer shall issue
a forestry permit if the activities proposed in the application
comply with the standards in Subsection C above or disapprove any
application which does not meet the requirements of Subsection C
above. Any such notice of disapproval shall specifically set forth the
deficiencies of the application.
(4) Upon receipt of a notice of disapproval pursuant to Subsection D(3)
above, the applicant shall have 30 days in which to correct the
deficiencies and submit any necessary revisions to the application
to the Zoning Officer for review. The Zoning Officer shall review the
revised application to verify conformity with the standards in
Subsection C above and shall, within 14 days of receipt of the
revised application, issue a forestry permit or disapprove the
application pursuant to Subsection D(3) above.
(5) Failure of the Zoning Officer to act within the time period
prescribed in Subsection D(3) and D(4) above shall constitute
approval of the forestry application as submitted. At the request of
the applicant, a certificate as to the failure of the Zoning Officer to
act shall be issued by the municipality and it shall be sufficient in
lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence of municipal
approval required herein.
(6) In reviewing and issuing permits for forestry applications, the
Zoning Officer shall also comply with the Pinelands Area notice and
review procedures set forth in Sections 185-49D through 185-49G.
§ 185-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-55
1:607
§ 185-56. Agricultural and fish and wildlife management activities.
All agricultural activities and fish and wildlife management activities,
including the preparation of land and the planting, nurturing and harvesting
of crops, shall be carried out in accordance with recommended
management practices established for the particular agricultural activity by
the New Jersey Department of Agriculture, the Soil Conservation Service
and the New Jersey Agricultural Experimental Station at Rutgers University.
§ 185-57. Waste management. [Amended 2-24-97 by Ord. No. 97-01]
§ 185-58. Water quality and treatment.
(7) Forestry permits shall be valid for a period of 10 years. Nothing in
this section shall be construed to prohibit any person from securing
additional permits, provided that the requirements of this chapter
and the Pinelands Comprehensive Management Plan are met.
E. Administrative fees. Upon the issuance of a forestry permit pursuant to
Subsection D(3) above, the applicant shall be required to pay of a sum
of $250 dollars which shall serve as reimbursement for any
administrative costs incurred by the municipality during the 10 year
permit period. The applicant shall not be subject to any additional fees
or escrow requirements for the duration of the forestry permit.
F. Notification of harvesting. No harvesting shall be commenced until the
applicant has provided the Zoning Officer with 72 hours written notice
of the intention to begin harvesting operations.
A. No hazardous or toxic substances, including hazardous waters, shall be
stored, transferred, processed, discharged, disposed or otherwise used
in the Pinelands Area. The land application of waste or waste derived
materials is prohibited in the Pinelands Area, except as expressly
authorized in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.79. Waste management facilities shall only
be permitted in the Pinelands Area in accordance with the standards set
forth in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.
A. General.
(1) All development shall be designed and carried out so that the
quality of surface and ground water will be protected and
maintained. Agricultural use shall not be considered development
for purposes of this section.
(2) Except as specifically authorized in this section, no development
which degrades surface or ground water quality or which
establishes new point sources of pollution shall be permitted.
(3) No development shall be permitted which does not meet the
minimum water quality and potable water standards of the State of
New Jersey or the United States.
§ 185-55 DENNIS CODE § 185-58
1:608
B. The following point and nonpoint sources may be developed and
operated in the Pinelands:
(1) Development of new or the expansion of existing commercial,
industrial and waste water treatment facilities, or the development
of new or the expansion of existing nonpoint sources, except those
specifically regulated in subsections B(2) through B(6) below,
provided that: [Amended 2-24-97 by Ord. No. 97-01]
(a) There will be no direct discharge into any surface water body.
(b) All discharges from the facility or use are of a quality and
quantity such that groundwater exiting from the parcel of land
or entering a surface body of water will not exceed two parts
per million nitrate/nitrogen. [Amended 2-24-97 by Ord. No.
97-01]
(c) All public wastewater treatment facilities are designed to
accept and treat septage.
(d) All storage facilities, including ponds or lagoons, are lined to
prevent leakage into groundwater.
(2) The development of new wastewater treatment facilities which are
designed to improve the level of nitrate/nitrogen attenuation of
more than one existing on-site wastewater treatment system may
be exempted from the standards of Subsection B(1)(b) above,
provided that:
(a) There will be no direct discharge into any surface water body.
(b) The facility is designed only to accommodate wastewater from
existing residential, commercial and industrial development.
(c) Adherence to Subsection B(1)(b) above cannot be achieved due
to limiting site conditions or that the costs to comply with the
standard will result in excessive user fees. [Amended 2-24-97
by Ord. No. 97-01]
(d) The design level of nitrate/nitrogen attenuation is the
maximum possible within the cost limitations imposed by such
user fee guidelines, but in no case shall groundwater existing
from the parcel or entering a surface body of water exceed five
parts per million nitrate/nitrogen. [Amended 2-24-97 by
Ord. No. 97-01]
(3) Improvements to existing commercial, industrial and wastewater
treatment facilities which discharge directly into surface waters,
provided that:
(a) There is no practical alternative available that would adhere to
the standards of Subsection B(1)(a) above.
§ 185-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-58
1:609
(b) There is no increase in the existing approved capacity of the
facility.
(c) All discharged from the facility into surface waters are such
that the nitrate/nitrogen levels of the surface waters at the
discharge point do not exceed two parts per million. In the
event that nitrate/nitrogen levels in the surface waters
immediately upstream of the discharge point exceed two parts
per million, the discharge shall not exceed two parts per
million nitrate/nitrogen.
(4) Individual on-site septic wastewater treatment systems which are
not intended to reduce the level of nitrate/nitrogen in the waste
water, provided that: [Amended 2-24-97 by Ord. No. 97-01]
(a) The proposed development to be served by the system is
otherwise permitted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter;
(b) The design of the system and its discharge point, and the size
of the entire contiguous parcel on which the system or systems
is located will ensure that ground water exiting from the entire
contiguous parcel or entering a surface body of water will not
exceed two parts per million nitrate/nitrogen, calculated
pursuant to the Pinelands dilution model dated December,
1993, as amended, subject to the provisions of Subsection
B(5)(c) below. The entire contiguous parcel may include any
contiguous lands to be dedicated as open space as part of the
proposed development but may not include previously
dedicated road rights-of-way or any contiguous lands that have
been deed restricted pursuant to Section 185-69 or N.J.A.C.
7:50-5.47;
(c) Only contiguous lands located within the same zoning district
and Pinelands management area as the proposed system or
systems may be utilized for septic dilution purposes, except for
the development of an individual single family dwelling on a lot
existing as of January 14, 1981, or cluster development as
permitted by N.J.A.C. 7:50-5.19;
(d) The depth to seasonal high water table is at least five feet;
(e) Any potable water well will be drilled and cased to a depth of at
least 100 feet, unless the well penetrates an impermeable clay
aquiclude, in which case the well shall be cased to at least 50
feet;
(f) The system will be maintained and inspected in accordance
with the requirements of N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.85;
(g) The technology has been approved for use by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection; and
§ 185-58 DENNIS CODE § 185-58
1:610
(h) Flow values for nonresidential development shall be
determined based on the values contained in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-7.4,
as amended, except that number of employees may not be
utilized in calculating flow values for office users. In the event
that N.J.A.C. 7:9A-7.4 does not provide flow values for a specific
use, but a flow value is assigned for that use in N.J.A.C.
7:14A-23.3(a), the flow value specified in N.J.A.C. 7:14A-23.3(a)
shall be used in calculating flow.
(5) Individual on-site septic wastewater treatment systems which are
intended to reduce the level of nitrate/nitrogen in the waste water,
provided that: [Amended 2-24-97 by Ord. No. 97-01]
(a) The standards set forth in Subsections B(4)(a) and B(4)(c)
through B(4)(h) above are met;
(b) If the proposed development is non-residential and located
outside of the PV zone, the standards of N.J.A.C.
7:50-6.84(a)5iii(2) are met. [Amended 11-13-18 by Ord. No.
2018-11]
(c) The design of the system and its discharge point, and the size
of the entire contiguous parcel on which the system or systems
is located will ensure that ground water exiting from the entire
contiguous parcel or entering a surface body of water will not
exceed two parts per million nitrate/nitrogen, calculated
pursuant to the Pinelands dilution model dated December,
1993, as amended, subject to the provisions of Subsection
B(4)(c) above and the assumptions and requirements set forth
in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.84(a)5iv. The entire contiguous parcel may
include any contiguous lands to be dedicated as open space as
part of the proposed development but may not include
previously dedicated road rights-of-way or any contiguous
lands that have been deed restricted pursuant to Section
185-69 or N.J.A.C. 7:50-5.47.
(6) Surface water runoff, provided that: [Added 2-24-97 by Ord. No.
97-01]
(a) The total runoff generated from any net increase in impervious
surfaces by a 10 year storm of a 24 hour duration shall be
retained and infiltrated on-site. Runoff volumes shall be
calculated in accordance with the United States Soil
Conservation Service Technical Release No. 55 or the S.C.S.
National Engineering Handbook, section 4;
(b) The rates of runoff generated from the parcel by a two year, 10
year and 100 year storm, each of a 24 hour duration, shall not
increase as a result of the proposed development. Runoff rates
shall be calculated in accordance with the United States Soil
§ 185-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-58
1:611
Conservation Service Technical Release No. 55 or the S.C.S.
National Engineering Handbook, section 4;
(c) Surface water runoff shall not be directed in such a way as to
increase the volume and rate of discharge into any surface
water body from that which existed prior to development of the
parcel;
(d) Excessively and somewhat excessively drained soils, as defined
by the Soil Conservation Service, should be avoided for
recharge of runoff wherever practical;
(e) A minimum separation of two feet between the elevation of the
lowest point of the bottom of the infiltration or detention
facility and the seasonal high water table is met, or a lesser
separation when it is demonstrated that the separation, either
due to soil conditions or when considered in combination with
other stormwater management techniques, is adequate to
protect ground water quality; and
(f) A four year maintenance guarantee is provided for the entire
stormwater management system by the applicant. In addition,
the applicant shall fund or otherwise guarantee an inspection
and maintenance program for a period of no less than 10 years.
The program shall identify the entity charged with
responsibility for annual inspections and the completion of any
necessary maintenance, and the method to finance said
program.
(7) Alternate design pilot program treatment systems, provided that:
[Added 12-9-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-07; amended 11-13-18 by
Ord. No. 2018-11]
(a) The proposed development to be served by the system is
residential and is otherwise permitted pursuant to the
provisions of this paragraph;
(b) The design of the system and its discharge point, and the size
of the entire contiguous parcel on which the system or systems
are located will ensure that ground water exiting from the
entire contiguous parcel or entering a surface body of water
will not exceed two parts per million nitrate/nitrogen,
calculated pursuant to the Pinelands dilution model dated
December, 1993, as amended, subject to the provisions of
Subsection B(7)(c) below. The entire contiguous parcel may
include any contiguous lands to be dedicated as open space as
part of the proposed development but may not include
previously dedicated road rights-of-way or any contiguous
lands that have been deed restricted pursuant to Section
185-69 or N.J.A.C. 7:50-5.47;
§ 185-58 DENNIS CODE § 185-58
1:612
(c) Only contiguous lands located within the same zoning district
and Pinelands management area as the proposed system or
systems may be utilized for septic dilution purposes, except for
the development of an individual single family dwelling on a lot
existing as of January 14, 1981, nonresidential development on
a lot of five acres or less existing as of January 14, 1981, or
cluster development as permitted by N.J.A.C. 7:50-5.19;
(d) The depth to seasonal high water table is at least five feet;
(e) Any potable water well will be drilled and cased to a depth of at
least 100 feet, unless the well penetrates an impermeable clay
aquiclude, in which case the well shall be cased to at least 50
feet;
(f) No more than 10 alternate design pilot program treatment
systems utilizing the same technology shall be installed in the
development of any parcel if those systems are each serving
one single family dwelling;
(g) Each system shall be equipped with automatic dialing
capability to the manufacturer, or its agent, in the event of a
mechanical malfunction;
(h) Each system shall be designed and constructed so that samples
of effluent leaving the alternate design pilot program septic
system can be readily taken to confirm the performance of the
technology;
(i) The manufacturer or its agent shall provide to each owner an
operation and maintenance manual approved pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 7:50-10.22(a)2.iv;
(j) Each system shall be covered by a five year warranty and a
minimum five year maintenance contract consistent with those
approved pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-10.22(a)2.v that cannot be
cancelled and is renewable and which includes a provision
requiring that the manufacturer or its agent inspect the system
at least once a year and undertake any maintenance or repairs
determined to be necessary during any such inspection or as a
result of observations made at any other time; and
(k) The property owner shall record with the deed to the property
a notice consistent with that approved pursuant to N.J.A.C.
7:50-10.22(a)2.vi that identifies the technology, acknowledges
the owner's responsibility to operate and maintain it in
accordance with the manual required in Subsection B(7)(i)
above, and grants access, with reasonable notice, to the local
Board of Health, the Commission and its agents for inspection
and monitoring purposes. The recorded deed shall run with the
property and shall ensure that the maintenance requirements
are binding on any owner of the property during the life of the
§ 185-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-58
1:613
§ 185-59. Prohibited substances; storage of chemicals; use of
herbicides.
§ 185-60. Scenic corridors; screening; location of utilities.
system and that the monitoring requirements are binding on
any owner of the property during the time period the
monitoring requirements apply pursuant to the pilot program
or any subsequent regulations adopted by the Commission that
apply to said system.
C. Individual wastewater treatment facility and petroleum tank
maintenance.
(1) The owner of every on-site septic wastewater treatment facility in
the Pinelands Area shall, as soon as a suitable septage disposal
facility capacity is available, in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 326 of the Solid Waste Management Act, N.J.S.A. 13:1E-1
et seq., and Section 201 of the Clean Water Act:
(a) Have the facility inspected by a technician at least once every
three years.
(b) Have the facility cleaned at least once every three years.
(c) Once every three years, submit to the local Board of Health a
sworn statement that the facility has been inspected, cleaned
and is functional, and setting forth the name of the person who
performed the inspection and cleaning and the date of such
inspection.
(2) The owners of commercial petroleum storage tanks shall comply
with the requirements of Chapter 102 of the Laws of 1986.
A. Use of the following substances is prohibited in the Pinelands Area to
the extent that such use will result in direct or indirect introduction of
such substances to any surface, or ground- or surface water to any land:
(1) Septic tank cleaners, except biodegradable products.
(2) Waste oil.
B. All storage facilities for deicing chemicals shall be lined to prevent
leaking into the soil and shall be covered with an impermeable surface
which shields the facility from precipitation.
C. No person shall apply any herbicide to any road or public utility right-ofway
within the Pinelands Area unless necessary to protect an adjacent
agricultural activity.
D. Water shall not be exported from the Pinelands except as otherwise
provided in N.J.S.A. 58:1A-7.1.
§ 185-58 DENNIS CODE § 185-60
1:614
§ 185-61. Fire management.
No development shall be carried out in the Pinelands Area in vegetated
areas which are classified as moderate, high or extreme hazard as defined
in Section 185-7 of this chapter, unless such development complies with the
following standards:
A. Setbacks and screening requirements for scenic corridors. No
development shall be located within 200 feet of the center line of a
public paved road in the PR, PF8 and PF25 Districts unless
environmental or other physical considerations make it impractical to
do so; provided, however, that the development shall be set back as
close to 200 feet as practicable and the site shall be landscaped so as to
provide screening from the corridor, except in a cleared agricultural
area. These requirements shall not apply to residential cluster
developments in the PR, PF8 and PF25 Districts which comply with the
standards of § 185-70.1. [Amended 2-24-97 by Ord. No. 97-01]
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A above, all structures
within 1,000 feet of the center line of West Creek within the Pinelands
Area shall be designed to avoid visual impacts as viewed from the river.
C. Screening and storage of motor vehicles. Within the Pinelands Area, no
person shall store more than 10 automobiles, trucks or other motor
vehicles, whether or not they are in operating condition, on any lot,
unless such motor vehicles are adequately screened from adjacent
residential uses and scenic corridors with a six foot high solid fence. All
vehicles not in operating condition shall be stored only if the gasoline
tanks of such vehicles are drained. These provisions shall not apply to
vehicles which are in operating condition and which are maintained for
agricultural purposes, nor for service stations which are proposed for
use pursuant to Section 185-73 of this chapter.
D. Location of utilities.
(1) New utility distribution lines and telephone lines to locations not
served by such utilities as of the date of this chapter shall be placed
underground, except for those lines which are located on or
immediately adjacent to active agricultural operations.
(2) All electric transmission lines shall be located on existing towers or
underground to the maximum extent practical.
(3) Above-ground generating facilities, switching complexes, pumping
stations and substations shall be screened in accordance with the
vegetation requirements of Section 185-54.
A. All dead-end roads will terminate in an area adequate to provide
ingress and egress for fire-fighting equipment.
B. The rights-of-way of all roads will be maintained so that they provide an
effective fire break.
§ 185-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-61
1:615
§ 185-62. Recreation.
All recreation areas and facilities in the Pinelands Area shall be designed in
accordance with the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection's
C. A fire hazard fuel break is provided around structures proposed for
human use by the selective removal or thinning of trees, bushes, shrubs
and ground cover as follows:
(1) In moderate fire hazard areas, a fuel break of 30 feet measured
outward from the structure in which:
(a) Shrubs, understory trees and bushes and ground cover are to
be selectively removed, mowed or pruned on an annual basis.
(b) All dead plant material is removed.
(2) In high fire hazard areas, a fuel break of 75 feet measured outward
from the structure in which:
(a) Shrubs, understory trees and bushes and ground cover are to
be selectively removed, mowed or pruned on an annual basis.
(b) All dead plant material is removed.
(3) In extreme high hazard areas, a fuel break of 100 feet measured
outward from the structure in which:
(a) Shrubs, understory trees and bushes and ground cover are to
be selectively removed, mowed or pruned on an annual basis.
(b) No pine tree (Pinus species) is closer than 25 feet to another
pine tree.
(c) All dead plant material is removed.
D. All structures will meet the following specifications:
(1) Roofs and exteriors will be constructed of fire- resistant materials
such as asphalt rag felt roofing, tile, slate, asbestos-cement
shingles, sheet iron, aluminum or brick. Fire-retardant- treated
wood shingles or shake type roofs are prohibited in high or extreme
fire hazard areas.
(2) All projections such as balconies, decks and roof gables shall be
constructed of fire-resistant material or materials treated with fireretardant
chemicals.
(3) Chimneys and stovepipes which are designed to burn solid or liquid
fuels shall be equipped with screens over the outlets.
(4) Flat roofs are prohibited in areas where vegetation is higher than
the roof.
§ 185-61 DENNIS CODE § 185-62
1:616
publication Administration Guidelines: Barrier Free Design Standard for
Parks and Recreation Facilities.
§ 185-63. Historic, archaeological and cultural resources.
A. The Planning Board shall exercise all the powers and perform all the
duties set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:50- 6.153(a), including recommendations
to the Township Committee for designation of historic resources, in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., which are determined to be
significant pursuant to Subsection E(4) below.
B. Authority to issue certificates of appropriateness.
(1) The Planning Board shall issue all certificates of appropriateness
except as specified in Subsection B(2) below.
(2) The Board of Adjustment shall issue certificates of appropriateness
for those applications for development which it is otherwise
empowered to review.
C. Certificates of appropriateness shall be required for the following:
(1) Construction, encroachment upon, alteration, remodeling,
removal, disturbance or demolition of any resource designated by
the Township Committee or the Pinelands Commission pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.154 or any action which renders such a site
inaccessible.
(2) Development not otherwise exempted from review pursuant to
Section 185-49A of this chapter where a significant resource has
been identified pursuant to Subsection E. below. [Amended
2-24-97 by Ord. No. 97-01]
D. Applications for certificates of appropriateness shall include the
information specified in N.J.A.C. 7:50- 6.156(b).
E. Cultural resource survey.
(1) A cultural resource survey shall accompany all applications for
development in a Pinelands Village and all applications for major
development in order to determine whether any significant historic
resources exist on the parcel. Guidelines for this survey are
contained in Appendix B of the "Cultural Resource Management
Plan, " Dated April 1991, as amended, available at the principal
offices of the Pinelands Commission. [Amended 2-24-97 by Ord.
No. 97-01]
(2) In general, the survey shall include:
(a) A statement as to the presence of any properties listed on the
National and State Registers of Historic Places on the site or
within the area of the project's potential environmental
impacts.
§ 185-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-63
1:617
(b) A thorough search of state, local and any other pertinent
inventories to identify sites of potential significance.
(c) A review of the literature and consultation with professional
and a vocational archaeologists knowledgeable about the area.
(d) A thorough pedestrian survey and archaeological testing as
necessary to provide reasonable evidence of the presence or
absence of historic resources of significance.
(e) A list of personnel involved and qualifications of the person(s)
involved and qualifications of the person(s) performing the
survey.
(3) This requirement for a survey may be waived by the local approval
agency if:
(a) There is insufficient evidence of significant cultural activity on
the project site or, in the case of archaeological resources,
within the vicinity;
(b) The evidence of cultural activity on the site lacks the potential
for importance because further recording of the available data
will not contribute to a more comprehensive understanding of
Pinelands culture; or
(c) The evidence of cultural activity lacks any potential for
significance pursuant to the standards of Subsection E(4)
below.
(4) A resource shall be deemed to be significant if it possesses integrity
of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling and
association which reflects its significance in American history,
architecture, archaeology or culture under one or more of the
following criteria:
(a) The presence of structures, sites or areas associated with
events of significance to the cultural, political, economic or
social history of the nation, state, local community or the
Pinelands.
(b) The presence of structures, sites or areas associated with
events of significance to the cultural, political, economic or
social history of the nation, state, local community or the
Pinelands.
(c) The presence of structures that represent the work of a master
or that possess high artistic values or that embody the
distinctive characteristics of a type, period or method of
construction or that represent a distinguishable entity of
significance to the architectural, cultural, political, economic
or social history of the nation, state, local community or the
§ 185-63 DENNIS CODE § 185-63
1:618
Pinelands, although its components may lack individual
distinction.
(d) The presence of a site or area which has yielded or is likely to
yield significant information regarding the history or
archaeological history of the Pinelands.
F. The standards governing the issuance of certificates of appropriateness
in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.156(c) shall be followed by the Planning Board and
Board of Adjustment.
G. The effect of the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness is as
follows:
(1) All subsequent development approvals shall be issued or denied in
a manner consistent with the certificate of appropriateness except
as provided in Subsection G(2) below.
(2) A certificate of appropriateness issued as a result of the cultural
resource survey requirement set forth in Subsection E. above shall
be effective for two years. If the resource is not designated by the
Pinelands Commission pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.154 or by the
Township Committee pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. within
that two year period, the historic resource standards of this section
shall no longer apply to the resource in question until such time as
the Pinelands Commission designates the resource pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.154. [Amended 2-24-97 by Ord. No. 97-01]
H. The following information will be required to document resources
which are not found to be significant but which are otherwise found to
present graphic evidence of a cultural activity:
(1) A narrative description of the resource and its cultural
environment.
(2) Photographic documentation to record the exterior appearance of
buildings, structures and engineering resources.
(3) A site plan depicting, in correct scale, the location of all buildings,
structures and engineering resources.
(4) A New Jersey State inventory form, as published by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, for buildings, and a
narrative description of any process or technology if necessary to
elaborate upon the photographic record.
I. If archaeological data is discovered on a site at any time after
construction has been commenced, the developer shall immediately
cease construction, notify the Planning Board and the Pinelands
Commission and take all reasonable steps to protect the archaeological
data in accordance with the Guidelines for the Recovery of Scientific,
Prehistoric, Historic and Archaeological Data: Procedures for
Notification, Reporting and Data Recovery (36 CFR 66).
§ 185-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-64
1:619
§ 185-64. Resource extraction.
A. Except as otherwise authorized in this chapter, the extraction or mining
of mineral resources other than sand, gravel, clay and ilmenite is
prohibited.
B. No resource extraction in the Pinelands shall be carried out by any
person unless an application has been filed with and approved by the
Planning Board. Said application shall contain the following
information:
(1) The applicant's name and address, and his interest in the subject
property.
(2) The owner's name and address, if different from the applicant's,
and the owner's signed consent to the filing of the application.
(3) The legal description, including block and lot designation and
street address, if any, of the subject property.
(4) A description of all existing uses of the subject property.
(5) A brief written statement generally describing the proposed
development.
(6) A United States Geological Survey Quadrangle Map, or a copy
thereof, and a copy of the Municipal Tax Map sheet on which the
boundaries of the subject property and the Pinelands Management
Area designation and zoning designation are shown.
(7) A topographic map at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet, showing
the proposed dimensions, location and operations on the subject
property.
(8) The location, size and intended use of all buildings.
(9) The location of all points of ingress and egress.
(10) A location map, including the area extending at least 300 feet
beyond each boundary of the subject property, showing all streams,
wetlands and significant vegetation, forest associations and wildlife
habitats.
(11) The location of all existing and proposed streets and rights-of-way,
including railroad rights-of-way.
(12) A soils map.
(13) A reclamation plan which includes:
(a) The method of stockpiling topsoil and overburden.
(b) Proposed grading and final elevations.
(c) Topsoil material application and preparation.
§ 185-64 DENNIS CODE § 185-64
1:620
(d) The type, quantity and age of vegetation to be used.
(e) Fertilizer application, including method and rates.
(f) The planting method and schedules.
(g) A maintenance requirements schedule.
(14) A signed acknowledgement from both the owner and the applicant
that they are responsible for any resource-extraction activities
which are contrary to any provisions of this chapter or of the
approved resource extraction plan done by any agent, employee,
contractor, subcontractor or any other person authorized to be on
the parcel by either the owner or the applicant.
(15) A performance guaranty in accord with the requirements of the
Subdivision Ordinance, guaranteeing performance of the
requirements of Subsection D below. The financial surety shall be
equal to the cost of restoration of the area to be excavated during
the two year duration of any approval which is granted. The
financial surety, which shall name the Commission and the
Township of Dennis as the obligee, shall be posted by the property
owner or his agent with the Township of Dennis.
(16) A certificate of filing from the Pinelands Commission issued
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.34 or, until January 14, 1991, evidence
of prior approval from the Pinelands Development Review Board or
the Pinelands Commission pursuant to the Interim Rules and
Regulations.
(17) When prior approval for the development has been granted by an
approval agency, evidence of Pinelands Commission review
pursuant to Section 185-49.
C. Time limit on Board approval. Board approvals authorizing resource
extraction shall be effective for a period of two years. Additional
approvals shall be considered by the Board only if the requirements of
this section have been met.
D. Resource extraction standards. Resource-extraction activities shall:
(1) Be designed so that no area of excavation, sedimentation pond,
storage area equipment or machinery or other structure or facility
is closer than:
(a) Two hundred feet to any property line.
(b) Five hundred feet to any residential or non-resourceextraction-
related commercial use which is in existence on the
date the permit is issued.
(2) Be located on a parcel of land of at least 20 acres.
§ 185-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-64
1:621
(3) Provide that all topsoil that is necessary for restoration will be
stored on the site, and will be protected from wind or water
erosion.
(4) Be fenced or blocked so as to prevent unauthorized entry into the
resource extraction operation through access roads.
(5) Provide ingress and egress to the resource extraction operation
from public roads by way of gravel or porous paved roadways.
(6) Be designed so that the surface runoff will be maintained on the
parcel in a manner that will provide for on-site recharge to
groundwater.
(7) Not involve excavation below the seasonal high- water table, unless
the excavation will serve as a recreational or wildlife resource or a
water reservoir for public, agricultural or industrial uses or for any
other use authorized in the zoning district in which the site is
located, provided that in no case shall excavation have a depth
exceeding 65 feet below the natural surface of the ground existing
prior to excavation, unless it can be demonstrated that a depth
greater than 65 feet will result in no significant adverse impact
relative to the proposed final use or on off-site areas.
(8) Be carried out in accordance with an extraction schedule which
depicts the anticipated sequence, as well as the anticipated length
of time, that each of the 20 acre units of the parcel proposed for
extraction will be worked. This shall not preclude more than one
twenty (20) acre unit from being worked at any one time, provided
that there is a demonstrated need for additional units, restoration
is proceeding on previously mined units and the area of clearing
does not exceed that specified in Subsection D(9) below.
[Amended 2-24-97 by Ord. No. 97-01]
(9) Not involve clearing adjacent to ponds in excess of 20 acres or an
area necessary to complete scheduled operations or will not involve
unreclaimed clearing exceeding 100 acres or 50% of the area to be
mined, whichever is less, for surface excavation at any time.
(10) Involve restoration of disturbed areas at the completion of the
resource-extraction operation in accordance with the following
requirements:
(a) Restoration shall be a continuous process, and each portion of
the parcel shall be restored such that the ground cover is
established within two years and tree cover established within
three years after resource extraction is completed for each
portion of the site mined.
(b) Restoration shall proceed in the same sequence and time
frame set out in the extraction schedule required in the
application.
§ 185-64 DENNIS CODE § 185-64
1:622
(c) All restored areas shall be graded so as to conform to the
natural contours of the parcel to the maximum extent practical.
Grading techniques that help to control erosion and foster
revegetation shall be utilized. The slope of surface of restored
surfaces shall not exceed one foot vertical to three feet
horizontal, except as provided in Subsection D(10)(f) of this
section. [Amended 2-24-97 by Ord. No. 97-01]
(d) Topsoil shall be restored in approximately the same quality and
quantity as existed at the time the resource-extraction
operation was initiated. All topsoil removed shall be stockpiled
and used for the next area to be restored, unless it is
immediately reused for reclamation that is currently underway.
[Amended 2-24-97 by Ord. No. 97-01]
(e) Drainage flows, including direction and volume, shall be
restored to the maximum extent practical to those flows
existing at the time the resource-extraction operation was
initiated.
(f) Any body of water created by the resource extraction operation
shall have a graded shoreline with a slope not less than three
feet above and three feet below the projected average water
table elevation. The shoreline both above and below the
surface water elevation shall have a slope of not less than five
feet horizontal to one feet vertical. This requirement shall
apply to any water body or portion of a water body created
after December 5, 1994. For any water body or portion of a
water body created prior to December 5, 1994, this
requirement shall apply to the extent that it does not require
grading of areas which have not been disturbed by mining
activities. Where grading would require such disturbance, a
reduction in the distance of the graded shoreline above and
below the average water table elevation shall be permitted.
[Amended 2-24-97 by Ord. No. 97-01]
(g) All equipment, machinery and structures, except for structures
that are usable for recreational purposes or any other use
authorized in the area, shall be removed within six months
after the resource-extraction operation is terminated and
restoration is completed.
(h) Reclamation shall, to the maximum extent practical, result in
the re-establishment of the vegetation association which
existed prior to the extraction activity and shall include:
[Amended 2-24-97 by Ord. No. 97-01]
[1] Stabilization of exposed areas by establishing ground
cover vegetation; and
§ 185-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-64
1:623
§ 185-65. Air quality.
[2] Re-establishment of the composition of the natural forest
and shrub types that existed prior to the extraction activity
through one of the following:
[a] The planting of a minimum of 1,000 one-year-old pitch
pine seedlings or other native Pinelands tree species
per acre in a random pattern;
[b] Cluster plating of characteristic Pinelands oak
species, such as blackjack oak, bear oak, chestnut oak
and black oak, and shrubs such as black huckleberry,
sheep laurel and mountain laurel, at a spacing
sufficient to ensure establishment of these species;
[c] A combination of the planting techniques set forth in
Subsection (h) [2] [a] and [b] above; or
[d] The use of other planting techniques or native
Pinelands species as may be necessary to restore the
vegetation association which existed prior to the
extraction activity.
(i) Slopes beyond a water body's shoreline shall be permitted at
the natural angle of repose to the bottom of the pond.
[Amended 2-24-97 by Ord. No. 97-01]
(11) Not result in a substantial adverse impact upon those significant
resources depicted on the Special Areas Map appearing as Figure
7.1 in the Pinelands Comprehensive Management Plan.
E. The letter of credit, surety bond or other guaranty of performance
which secures restoration of each section shall be released after the
Township of Dennis has determined that the requirements of
Subsection D(1) through D(11) above are being met and the guaranty of
performance is replaced with a maintenance guaranty for a period of
two years thereafter.
A. All development shall adhere to the relevant air quality standards of
N.J.A.C. 7:27 et seq. Adherence to the standards of this section shall be
determined by means of an air quality simulation model approved by
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 7:27-18.3. [Amended 2-24-97 by Ord. No. 97-01]
B. Applications for residential development of 100 or more units and any
other development involving more than 300 parking spaces located in
the PF8, PF25, PR or PV Districts shall ensure that all state ambient air
quality standards in N.J.A.C. 7:27 et seq. for carbon monoxide shall not
be exceeded at places of maximum concentration and at sensitive
receptors.
§ 185-64 DENNIS CODE § 185-66
1:624
§ 185-66. Pinelands development credits.
§ 185-67. Cultural housing. [Amended 2-24-97 by Ord. No. 97-01]
Residential dwellings on lots of 3.2 acres may be permitted in the PF8, PF25
and PR Districts, provided that:
§ 185-68. Residential dwelling units.
Residential dwelling units on lots of one acre may be permitted in the PF8,
PF25 and PR Districts, provided that:
A. Pinelands Development Credits may be allocated to certain properties
in the township by the Pinelands Commission pursuant to N.J.A.C.
7:50-4.61 et seq.
B. Pinelands Development Credits may be used in the township in the
following circumstances:
(1) When a variance for cultural housing is granted by the township.
(2) When a variance of density or lot area requirements for a
residential or principal nonresidential use in the PV District is
granted by the township, for all dwelling units or lots in excess of
that otherwise permitted without the variance. [Amended
2-24-97 by Ord. No. 97-01]
(3) When a waiver of strict compliance is granted by the Pinelands
Commission pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.61 et seq.
C. The requirements of N.J.A.C. 7:50-5.41 et seq. shall apply when
Pinelands Development Credits are either allocated or used in the
township. [Amended 2-24-97 by Ord. No. 97-01]
A. The dwelling unit will be the principal residence of the property owner
or a member of the immediate family of the property owner;
B. The individual whose principal residence the dwelling unit will be has
not developed a dwelling unit under this section within the previous five
years;
C. The parcel of land on which the dwelling is to be located has been in the
continuous ownership since February 7, 1979 of the person whose
principal residence the dwelling unit will be, a member of that person's
immediate family, or a partnership or corporation in which members of
that person's immediate family collectively own more than a majority
interest in such partnership or corporation; and
D. The person whose principal residence the dwelling unit will be has
resided in the Pinelands for at least five years and that person or one or
more members of that person's immediate family has resided in the
Pinelands for a total of at least 20 different years, applicant's principal
place of residence.
§ 185-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-68
1:625
§ 185-69. Density transfer program.
Single-family dwellings on lots of one acre existing as of January 14, 1981,
shall be permitted in the PF8, PF25 and PR Zones, provided that:
A. The applicant satisfies all of the requirements set forth above in Section
185-67.
B. The lot to be developed existed as of February 8, 1979, or was created
as a result of an approval granted by the Pinelands Development
Review Board or by the Pinelands Commission pursuant to the Interim
Rules and Regulations prior to January 14, 1981.
C. The applicant qualifies for and receives from the township a variance
from the 3.2 acre lot size requirement set forth in Section 185-67 above.
[Amended 2-24-97 by Ord. No. 97-01]
D. The applicant purchases and redeems 0.25 Pinelands Development
Credits.
A. The owner of the lot proposed for development acquires sufficient
vacant contiguous or noncontiguous land which, when combined with
the acreage of the lot proposed for development, equals at least the
following:
(1) Five acres if development is proposed in the PR Zone.
(2) Twenty-five and zero tenths acres if development is proposed in the
PF25 Zone.
(3) Eight acres if development is proposed in the PF8 Zone and all
acquired noncontiguous lands are also located in the PF8 Zone.
(4) Twenty-three and zero tenths acres if development is proposed in
the PF8 Zone and all acquired noncontiguous lands are located in
the PF25 Zone.
B. If development is proposed in the PR Zone, all lands acquired pursuant
to Subsection A above, which may or may not be developable, are
located within the PR Zone.
C. If development is proposed in the PF8 Zone, all lands acquired pursuant
to Subsection A above, which may or may not be developable, are
located in either the PF8 or PF25 Zones.
D. If development is proposed in the PF25 Zone, all lands acquired
pursuant to Subsection A above, which may or may not be developable,
are located in the PF25 zone.
E. All noncontiguous lands acquired pursuant to Subsections A through D
above shall be permanently protected through recordation of a deed
restriction in accordance with the following requirements:
(1) The deed of restriction shall permit the parcel to be managed for:
§ 185-68 DENNIS CODE § 185-69
1:626
(a) Low intensity recreation, ecological management and forestry,
provided that no more than 5% of the land may be cleared, no
more than 1% of the land may be covered with impervious
surfaces and any such uses or activities are approved and
conducted in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter;
(b) Where agricultural use exists on a parcel proposed to be
protected, the following standards shall apply:
[1] For those agricultural uses in existence as of April 6, 2009,
the deed of restriction may provide for the continuation of
agricultural uses and the expansion of the area of
agricultural use by up to 50%;
[2] For those agricultural uses established after April 6, 2009,
the deed of restriction may provide for the continuation of
agricultural uses, provided the agricultural use has been
in existence for a period of at least five years prior to
submission of an application for density transfer;
[3] For those agricultural uses established after April 6, 2009
which do not meet the standards of Subsection (b)[2]
above, the deed of restriction shall permit the land to be
managed only in accordance with Subsection E(1)(a)
above and shall not provide for continuation of any
agricultural use on the parcel; and
[4] The deed of restriction to be recorded pursuant to
Subsection (b)[1] or [b][2] above shall authorize
agricultural uses and provide that impervious surface may
not exceed that which currently exists or 3%, whichever is
greater, unless a Resource Management System Plan has
been prepared. Before these impervious surface limits may
be exceeded, evidence of Pinelands Commission approval
of the Resource Management System Plan shall be
provided. If the deed of restriction is in favor of Cape May
County or the State Agricultural Development Committee,
evidence of their approval shall also be provided.
(2) The deed of restriction shall be in favor of the parcel to be
developed and the township or another public agency or non-profit
conservation organization. In all cases, such restriction shall be
expressly enforceable by the Pinelands Commission. The deed
restriction shall be in a form to be approved by the Township
Solicitor and the Pinelands Commission.
F. Tax assessments for the acquired noncontiguous lands are combined
and assigned to the land to be developed.
G. The lot proposed for development otherwise meets the minimum
standards of Section 185-50 et seq. of this chapter.
§ 185-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-70
1:627
§ 185-70. Public purpose uses.
All public purpose uses within the Pinelands Area shall conform to the
provisions of this chapter, except those of Article VI and N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.51
et seq.
§ 185-70.1. Residential cluster development in the PR, PF8 and
PF25 Districts.
A. In the PR, PF8 and PF25 Districts, clustering of single-family detached
dwellings shall be required whenever two or more units are proposed
as part of a residential development. The following standards shall
apply:
(1) Permitted density:
(a) In the PR Zone: one unit per 5 acres.
(b) In the PF8 Zone: one unit per 8 acres.
(c) In the PF25 Zone: one unit per 25 acres.
(2) The number of residential lots permitted within the cluster shall be
calculated on the basis of the size of the parcel of land and the
density permitted in Subsection A(1) above, with a bonus applied as
follows:
Parcel Size PR and PF8 Zones PF25 Zone
<50 acres 0 0
50-99.99 acres 15% 25%
100-149.99 acres 20% 30%
≥150 acres 25% 40%
(3) The residential cluster shall be located on the parcel such that the
development area:
(a) Is located proximate to existing roads;
(b) Is located proximate to existing developed sites on adjacent or
nearby parcels;
(c) Is or will be appropriately buffered from adjoining or nearby
nonresidential land uses; and
(d) Conforms with the minimum environmental standards of
N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.
(4) Development within the residential cluster shall be designed as
follows:
(a) Residential lots shall be one acre in size but may be larger if
dictated by unusual site conditions. In no case shall the
§ 185-70 DENNIS CODE § 185-70.1
1:628
average size of residential lots within a cluster exceed 1.1
acres;
(b) The minimum lot and building requirements specified in
Subsections 185-27E and 185-28E for residential cluster
development shall apply;
(c) Individual on-site septic waste water treatment systems which
are not intended to reduce the level of nitrate/nitrogen in the
waste that comply with the standards of Section 185-58 may
serve the lots within the cluster development area. However, in
the event that existing agricultural uses will continue on the
parcel in accordance with Subsection A(5)(b)[2] below,
individual on-site septic waste water treatment systems shall
comply with the standards of Section 185-58. Community onsite
waste water treatment systems serving two or more
residential dwelling units which meet the standards of Section
185-58 shall also be permitted;
(d) The residential cluster development area shall include such
land and facilities as are necessary to support the
development, including wastewater facilities, stormwater
management facilities and recreation amenities; and
(e) Permitted recreation amenities may include playgrounds, tot
lots, swimming pools, tennis courts and other such
recreational facilities, which are solely for use by the residents
of the cluster development. Recreational amenities shall not be
limited to the foregoing so that the applicant may propose
additional facilities. All such facilities shall be accessory to the
residential cluster development. No advertising or commercial
enterprise shall be permitted. In no case may such amenities
occupy more than 1/2 acre of land or the equivalent of one acre
of land for every 25 residential lots, whichever is greater.
(5) The balance of the parcel located outside of the residential cluster
development shall be owned and managed by a duly constituted
homeowners' association in accordance with Section
185-73D(23)(b)[8], a non-profit conservation organization, Dennis
Township or incorporated as part of one of the lots within the
cluster development area.
(a) All such land shall be permanently protected through
recordation of a deed of conservation restriction. Such
restriction shall be in favor of Dennis Township or another
public agency or non-profit organization. In all cases, such
restriction shall be expressly enforceable by the Pinelands
Commission; and
(b) The deed of restriction shall permit the parcel to be managed
for:
§ 185-70.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-70.1
1:629
[1] Low intensity recreation, ecological management and
forestry, provided that no more than five percent of the
land may be cleared, no more than 1% of the land may be
covered with impervious surfaces and any such uses or
activities are approved and conducted in accordance with
the requirements of Chapter 185; and
[2] Where agricultural use exists on a parcel proposed for
cluster development, the following standards shall apply:
[a] For those agricultural uses in existence as of April 6,
2009, the deed of restriction may provide for the
continuation of agricultural uses and the expansion of
the area of agricultural use by up to 50%;
[b] For those agricultural uses established after April 6,
2009, the deed of restriction may provide for the
continuation of agricultural uses, provided the
agricultural use has been in existence for a period of
at least five years prior to submission of an application
for cluster development;
[c] For those agricultural uses established after April 6,
2009 which do not meet the standards of Subsection
(b)[2][b] above, the deed of restriction shall permit the
land to be managed only in accordance with (b)[1]
above and shall not provide for continuation of any
agricultural use on the parcel;
[d] The deed of restriction to be recorded pursuant to
Subsections (b)[2][a] or (b)[2][b] above shall authorize
agricultural uses and provide that impervious surface
may not exceed that which currently exists or 3%,
whichever is greater, unless a Resource Management
System Plan has been prepared. Before these
impervious surface limits may be exceeded, evidence
of Pinelands Commission approval of the Resource
Management System Plan shall be provided. If the
deed of restriction is in favor of Cape May County or
the State Agricultural Development Committee,
evidence of their approval shall also be provided; and
[e] For parcels which meet the standards of Subsections
(b)[2][a] or (b)[2][b] above, a provision shall be
recorded in the deed for each residential lot within the
cluster development area which acknowledges
agricultural use of the protected land outside the
cluster development area and recognizes the legal
protections afforded to that use through the deed of
restriction and any applicable statutes.
§ 185-70.1 DENNIS CODE § 185-70.1
1:630
ARTICLE VII
Exceptions and Modifications
[Amended 7-15-13 by Ord. No. 2013-03]
§ 185-71. Area requirements.
Except as provided in Section 185-37 of this chapter, whenever title to
two or more contiguous lots is held by the same owner, regardless of
whether or not each of said lots may have been approved as portions of
a subdivision or acquired by separate conveyance or by other operation of
law, and one or more of said individual lots should, by reason of exceptional
shallowness, topographic conditions, substandard area or yard space or
similar measurement, not conform to the minimum lot area and dimensional
requirements for the zone in which it is located, the contiguous lots of said
owner shall be considered as a single lot, and the provisions of this chapter
shall hold.
§ 185-72. Height limits. [Amended 2-24-97 by Ord. No. 97-01]
Except for detached dwellings as permitted in this chapter, penthouses
or roof structures for the housing of stairways, tanks, ventilation; fans,
air-conditioning equipment or similar equipment required to operate and
maintain the building, skylights, spires, cupolas, flagpoles, chimneys or
similar structures may be erected above the height limits prescribed by
this chapter, but in no case more than 25% more than the maximum height
permitted for the use in the district, except that farm silos shall have no
height restrictions. In the Pinelands Area, the height limits prescribed by
this chapter shall not apply to the antenna and any supporting structure
of a local communication facility of greater than 35 feet, provided that the
standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:50-5.4(c) are met. All accessory uses are
limited to a maximum height of 15 feet.
§ 185-73. Conditional uses.
A. Before a building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for
any conditional use as permitted by this chapter, application shall be
made to the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall grant or deny
said application within 95 days of submission of a complete application
by a developer to the Zoning Officer or within such further time as may
be consented to by the applicant.
B. The review by the Planning Board of a conditional use shall include any
required site plan review pursuant to Article VI of this chapter. Public
notice and a hearing shall be required as stipulated in Article IX of
Chapter 165, Subdivision of Land.
C. In all requests for approval of conditional uses, the burden of proof shall
be on the applicant. The Planning Board shall give due consideration to
all reasonable elements which could affect the public health, welfare,
safety, comfort, and convenience, such as but not limited to the
§ 185-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-73
1:631
proposed use(s), the character of the area, vehicular travel patterns and
access, pedestrian ways, landscaping, lighting, signs, drainage, sewage
treatment, potable water supply, utilities and building and structure
location(s) and orientation(s).
D. Special requirements.
(1) Car washes, as accessories to service stations.
(a) All activities must be conducted within a totally enclosed
building.
(b) Drainage from inside the building(s) shall feed into a sanitary
sewer system. No dry well or septic tank will be permitted in
connection with this use.
(c) All of the area, yard, building coverage and height
requirements of the respective zone and other applicable
requirements of this chapter must be met.
(d) All water must be recycled.
(e) Car washes as accessory uses to service stations are limited to
one bay.
(2) Hotels and motels.
(a) Hotels only are permitted as a conditional use in the OVCC,
OVC and CVC District.
(b) Any hotel or motel that may be constructed on a lot or parcel of
land must contain a minimum of at least 25 units of
accommodation, exclusive of a permanent, on-site
superintendent's living quarters. The minimum number of
units of accommodation in any single building shall be 10.
(c) Each unit of accommodation shall contain a minimum floor
area of 250 square feet. Ceilings shall be a minimum of eight
feet in height.
(d) Each unit of accommodation shall include a minimum of two
rooms, a bedroom and a separate bathroom.
(e) There shall be a residency limitation on all guests of 30 days
maximum. The foregoing residency limitation shall not apply to
an employee living on the premises.
(f) All of the area, yard, building coverage and height
requirements of the respective zone and other applicable
requirements of this chapter must be met.
(3) Public utility uses.
§ 185-73 DENNIS CODE § 185-73
1:632
(a) For purposes of this chapter, the term "public utility uses" shall
include such uses as telephone dial equipment centers, power
substations and other public utility services.
(b) The proposed installation in a specific location must be
reasonably necessary for the satisfactory provision of service
by the utility to the neighborhood or area in which the
particular use is to be located.
(c) The design of any building in connection with such facilities
must conform to the general character of the area and not
adversely affect the safe, comfortable enjoyment or property
rights in the zone in which it is located.
(d) Adequate fences and other safety devices must be provided as
may be required. Fences, when used to enclose public utility
facilities such as electrical power substations, shall be built in
accordance with the applicable requirements of the New
Jersey Board of Public Utility Commissioners and the National
Electrical Safety Code in effect at the time of construction.
(e) Sufficient landscaping, including shrubs, trees and lawns, shall
be provided and shall be periodically maintained. Within the
Pinelands Area, the requirements of Section 185-54 shall apply.
(f) Adequate off-street parking shall be provided.
(g) All of the area, yard, building coverage and height
requirements of the respective zone and other applicable
requirements of this chapter must be met.
(4) Service stations.
(a) The minimum lot size for service stations shall be 20,000
square feet, and the minimum frontage shall be 150 feet.
(b) No service station shall be located within 500 feet of any
firehouse, school, playground, church, hospital, public building
or institution.
(c) All appliance, pits, storage areas and trash facilities, other
than gasoline filling pumps or air pumps, shall be within a
building. Gasoline filling pumps and air pumps shall be
permitted within the required front yard space of service
stations but shall be no closer than 50 feet to any future street
line. All lubrication, repair or similar activities shall be
performed in a fully enclosed building, and no dismantled parts
shall be displayed outside of an enclosed building.
(d) No junked motor vehicle or part thereof or motor vehicles
incapable of normal operation upon the highway shall be
permitted on the premises of any service station. It shall be
deemed prima facie evidence of violation of this chapter if
§ 185-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-73
1:633
more than three motor vehicles incapable of operation are
located at any one time upon any premises not within a closed
and roofed building; excepting, however, that a number not
exceeding six motor vehicles may be located upon any service
station premises outside of a closed or roofed building for a
period of time not to exceed seven days, and provided that
the owners of said motor vehicles are awaiting their repair or
disposition.
(e) Landscaping shall be provided in the front yard area equal to at
least 25% of the front yard area, and such landscaping shall be
reasonably distributed throughout the entire front yard area.
(f) The exterior display and parking of motor vehicles, trailers,
boats or other similar equipment for sale shall not be permitted
as part of a service station.
(g) No parking shall be permitted on unpaved areas.
(5) Restaurants serving alcoholic beverages.
(a) Restaurants serving alcoholic beverages shall have a minimum
lot area of five acres.
(b) On-premises alcoholic beverage services will be limited to
restaurant establishments serving food. Restaurants may have
an ancillary bar area, but only in conjunction with the
restaurant as a place for restaurant patrons waiting for a table.
No stand-alone or bar-only operations are permitted.
(c) There shall be a minimum of 45 dining room seats.
(d) The bar area shall contain no more than 30% of the number of
seats in the dining area.
(e) All refrigeration/generation equipment shall be contained
within the building.
(f) There shall be a specified area for collection of trash and
recycling. The area shall be suitably enclosed. There shall be
separate collection areas for trash and separate recycling
areas for glass and plastic, cardboard and paper, and oil and
grease.
(g) There shall be a specified exterior "wash down" or "cleanup
area" for the cleaning of floor mats, furniture, etc.
(h) Each restaurant shall provide one truck berth, for loading and
unloading, adjacent to the restaurant and in addition to
parking areas. The truck berth shall be fourteen feet wide by
sixty feet (14' x 60') long.
§ 185-73 DENNIS CODE § 185-73
1:634
(i) Each restaurant shall provide parking for patrons at a ratio of
one parking space for every three seats in the restaurant,
including both dining area and bar seats. Each restaurant shall
also provide employee parking at a ratio of one parking space
for every 10 seats.
(j) Trash pickup/removal shall occur a minimum of two times per
week.
(k) No part of any on-site waste disposal system shall be placed in
the buffer areas of the restaurant.
(6) Improved and primitive campgrounds. [Added 1-12-1998 by Ord.
No. 97-18; amended 9-18-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-05]
(a) All provisions stipulated in the applicable ordinances (Chapter
75 of the Code of the Township of Dennis) shall be met.
(b) All provisions of Chapter XI, Campgrounds, of the New Jersey
State Sanitary Code, as amended shall prevail.
(c) Site plan approval by the Planning Board shall be required
prior to the issuance of a building permit or prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy should a building permit
not be required. Prior to site plan approval, all necessary and
appropriate permits from the State Department of Health and
the State Department of Environmental Protection shall be
furnished to the township.
(7) Residential health care facilities.
(a) For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
RESIDENTIAL HEALTH CARE FACILITIES — Facilities
occupied by the elderly that provide rooms, meals, personal
care and health monitoring services under the supervision of
a professional nurse and that may provide other services, such
as recreational, social and cultural activities, financial services
and transportation. Rooms and baths may be either private or
shared. Residential health care facilities may be independent,
but are often developed in conjunction with long-term, bedcare
facilities. Additional definitions include:
Intermediate-care facilities. "Intermediate—care facilities"
are such facilities which provide, on a regular basis,
health-related care and services to individuals who do not
require the degree of care and treatment which a hospital
or skilled nursing facility is designated to provide, but
who, because of their mental or physical condition, require
care and services, above the level of room and board,
which can be made available to them only through
institutional facilities such as these.
[1]
§ 185-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-73
1:635
Long-term-care facilities. "Long-term-care" facilities shall
be deemed to include governmental medical institutions,
extended-care facilities, skilled nursing homes and
infirmary units of homes for the aged.
[2]
(b) Only those uses licensed by the State of New Jersey shall be
permitted.
(c) In all zones, the conditional uses shall remain the same being
minimum tract size shall be 20 acres with a maximum of six
beds per acre, and the minimum frontage shall be 350 feet,
which shall be on an arterial road as designated in the
Township Master Plan. [Amended 8-25-1997 by Ord. No.
97-11]
(d) Building coverage shall not exceed 20% of the tract area, and
building height shall not exceed four stories and 40 feet.
(e) Parking shall be provided at the minimum ratio of 1.25 spaces
per bed.
(f) Site plan approval by the Planning Board shall be required
prior to the issuance of a building permit. Certification that all
state requirements have been met shall be furnished to the
township prior to granting site plan approval.
(8) Day care centers.Owner operated day care center, adult or child, or
preschool or nursery school as a conditional use, there must be a
principal owner occupied single family residence on the property
and all of the following conditions are met: [Amended 9-18-2002
by Ord. No. 2002-05]
(a) The maximum number of students is five.
(b) There is an onsite circular drive aisle for drop off and pick up.
(c) The outside play area is completely fenced.
(9) Schools. All schools shall be a conditional use in an appropriate
zone provided that they meet all requirements of the New Jersey
Department of Education and/or any other state, county or federal
regulatory agency provided their having jurisdiction over the same.
[Amended 9-18-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-05]
(10) Inns.
(a) Inns shall contain no more than 25 units of accommodation,
exclusive of a permanent, on-site superintendent's living
quarters.
(b) Ceilings shall be a minimum of eight feet in height for each unit
of accommodation.
§ 185-73 DENNIS CODE § 185-73
1:636
(c) There shall be a residency limitation on all guests of 30 days
maximum. The forgoing residency limitation shall not apply to
an employee living on the premises.
(d) All of the area, yard, building coverage and height
requirements of the respective zone shall be met.
(11) Hotels with a conference center.
(a) Hotels shall have a conference center facility with a minimum
of 25,000 square feet of meeting room, business center and/or
banquet room space.
(b) Hotels with a conference center shall also provide a
restaurant, pool and/or other recreational facilities.
(12) Retail with drive-through facilities.
(a) Drive-through facilities shall be located in the rear or side
yard; no drive-through facilities are permitted in the front
yard.
(13) Financial services with drive-through facilities.
(a) Drive-through facilities shall be located in the rear or side
yard; no drive-through facilities are permitted in the front
yard.
(14) Bed and breakfasts.
(a) Bed and breakfast facilities shall be owner-occupied.
(b) There shall be a maximum of five rooms for rent.
(c) Facilities shall provide a minimum of 300 square feet of
common area for guests (i.e. living room, lounge, dining room,
etc.).
(d) Bed and breakfast facilities shall provide one off-street parking
space per rented room; plus one parking space for each
employee.
(15) Outdoor recreation facilities.
(a) Outdoor recreation facilities shall be limited to miniature golf,
driving range, waterslides, tennis courts, batting and
basketball cages.
(16) Liquor stores.
(a) Liquor stores shall either be separate establishments or in
conjunction with a supermarket. Where in conjunction with a
supermarket, at least 1,000 square feet shall be devoted to the
sales of liquor.
§ 185-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-73
1:637
(b) There shall be no outside storage of any type.
(c) All cooling, refrigeration and generation equipment shall be
contained within the building area.
(17) Assisted living facilities.
(a) Yard and bulk requirements for assisted living facilities shall be
as follows:
Minimum lot area 4 acres
Minimum lot width 275 feet
Minimum lot depth 250 feet
Maximum impervious
coverage
60%
Maximum building coverage 35%
Maximum building height 30 feet
Maximum front yard 25 feet
Minimum side yard 50 feet
Minimum rear yard setback 50 feet
Minimum building setbacks to
tract boundary
50 feet
Maximum density 5 dwelling units per acre
Affordable housing units A minimum of 20% of the
housing units shall be
affordable to low and
moderate income households
Minimum open space: 25% percent
Minimum parking setback
from tract boundaries
35 feet
Minimum landscape buffer 35 feet
(b) The tract shall have direct access to either an arterial or
collector road.
(c) The tract must be located within an area proposed for a
privately constructed and maintained community wastewater
treatment facility. The sewage and water capacity provided
shall be sufficient to accommodate the uses as approved by the
Planning Board.
(d) Permitted accessory uses. The following accessory uses shall
be permitted in conjunction with an assisted living residence
as a principal use:
[1] Linen service facilities.
§ 185-73 DENNIS CODE § 185-73
1:638
[2] Nursing services.
[3] Housekeeping services.
[4] Beautician services.
[5] Meeting and social rooms.
[6] Snack bars/ice cream parlors.
[7] Medical offices for visiting doctors.
[8] Indoor and outdoor recreation facilities.
[9] Health care administrative and management facilities.
(e) Parking requirements.
[1] A minimum of 1/2 space per each assisted living
residential care suites plus one space per employee for the
largest employee shift.
[2] No parking or standing shall be permitted in the required
front yard except for emergency vehicles, drop-off/pick-up
areas and visitor parking spaces.
[3] Required parking spaces may be provided by any
combination of enclosed or open spaces but in no event
shall the parking facilities be more than 150 feet from the
building that they are intended to serve.
[4] The arrangement and location of internal roads, garages
and parking areas shall be subject to the approval of the
Planning Board and shall be designed to insure safe and
adequate circulation for senior citizen residents and their
guests.
(f) Design standards.
[1] The minimum size of a single occupancy residential unit,
including bathroom, shall be 280 square feet.
[2] The development shall be restricted to the effect that no
unit shall be occupied by more than two persons. At least
50% of all units shall be restricted to occupancy by one
person.
[3] Each development shall have an architectural theme
designed to be attractive and compatible with surrounding
land uses. All buildings shall be designed in accordance
with the architectural guidelines contained in Section
185-32.3. Architectural elevations and typical floor plans
shall be submitted to the Planning Board for its review and
approval as part of a submitted site plan application.
§ 185-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-73
1:639
[4] An all-season landscape buffer shall be provided around
the perimeter of the site, which shall be composed of 75%
evergreens. This landscaped buffer shall include a mixture
of shade trees, evergreens, ornamental trees and
understory shrubs planted in a staggered fashion. At the
time of installation, shade trees shall be a minimum three
inch caliper, evergreens shall be a minimum eight feet in
height, ornamental trees shall be a minimum of 10 feet in
height and understory shrubs shall be a minimum of 36
inches in height.
(g) Assisted living residence shall include the following:
[1] Outdoor recreational facilities such as shuffleboard courts,
bocce courts or putting greens;
[2] Indoor recreation facilities with a minimum area of 500
square feet (for movies, board games etc.);
[3] Physical therapy facilities with a minimum area of 200
square feet;
[4] Library with a minimum area of 200 square feet;
[5] Congregate dining facilities with the minimum area of 3.33
square feet per person based upon the maximum number
of permitted residents of the facility;
[6] Health care facilities and services including but not limited
to security facilities, administrative offices, personal care
services, storage and maintenance facilities used only to
provide administrative services for the assisted living
residence;
[7] Gift shops/convenience shops with personal hygiene aids,
sundries and reading materials;
[8] Laundry rooms (one for each 30 units with a minimum of
one per floor);
[9] A chapel with a minimum area of 250 square feet;
[10] An indoor exercise area with a minimum area of 400
square feet;
[11] Food preparation and congregate dining facilities;
[12] Linen service and housekeeping facilities;
[13] Barber shop and beauty parlor (optional);
[14] Other uses as customarily associated with and subordinate
to the principal permitted use; however, all support
facilities, functions and services shall be designed and
§ 185-73 DENNIS CODE § 185-73
1:640
available only for the use and benefit of resident users of
the assisted living residence and their guests.
(h) Architectural standards for assisted living residences must be
consistent with the ultimate purpose of achieving independent,
self-reliant and pleasant living arrangements for senior citizens
and physically disabled persons and should take into account
the desires and needs of older persons for privacy and
participation in social and community activities. Provisions
should be made to accommodate the limitations that
sometimes accompany advanced years and disabilities so the
independent living can be sustained. Such provisions shall
include but not be limited to the following:
[1] Ramps shall be provided leading to all structures.
[2] Grab bars shall be provided besides toilets, and bathtubs
or shower stalls.
[3] Dwelling units shall be designed and constructed so as to
be free of architectural barriers, which should prohibit or
limit access to or utilization of the dwelling units by
physically handicapped or disabled individuals.
[4] The use of stairways shall be minimized.
[5] Trash and recycling facilities shall be provided in
accordance with Section 185-40.
(18) Golf course and related auxiliary facilities.
(a) Golf courses shall meet the following bulk standards:
[1] Minimum lot size: 50 acres
[2] Minimum lot frontage and width: 600 feet
[3] Minimum lot depth: 1,000 feet
[4] Minimum front, side (each) and rear yard setbacks: 200
feet
[5] Maximum coverage, principal building: 1.0%
(b) Accessory buildings shall meet the following bulk standards:
[1] Minimum side (each) and rear yard setbacks: 50 feet
[2] Minimum distance to principal building: 50 feet
[3] Maximum coverage, accessory buildings: 0.5%
(c) Permitted accessory uses. The following uses shall be
permitted in conjunction with a golf course facility as a
principal use:
§ 185-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-73
1:641
[1] Club house, which may include banquet facilities, exercise/
fitness facilities and/or offices.
[2] Golf lodge, which is a facility that provides transient
sleeping accommodations with all rooms having access to
an interior hallway; the facility provides other ancillary
uses, such as a restaurant, fitness facilities, etc.
[3] Restaurant and banquet facilities.
[4] Maintenance buildings.
[5] Pro shop.
[6] Cart storage buildings.
[7] Restroom buildings.
[8] Refreshment stands.
[9] Driving range.
[10] Practice putting green.
[11] Swimming pool.
[12] Tennis courts.
(19) Center residential clusters.
(a) The purpose of this section is to provide a method of
developing residential dwellings which will preserve desirable
open spaces, conservation areas and floodplains by permitting
the reduction of lot sizes and certain other regulations
hereinafter stated without increasing the number of lots in the
total area to be developed. Center residential cluster
development is permitted as a conditional use in the CVR and
OVCR Districts.
(b) All center residential cluster developments shall meet the
following requirements:
[1] Center residential cluster development shall have a
privately constructed and maintained wastewater
treatment facility.
[2] The minimum size of a tract of land proposed for
development under the cluster development provisions of
this section shall be five acres, including the areas of
existing streets and water areas within the tract boundary
lines, provided that they total no more than 5% of the tract
area.
§ 185-73 DENNIS CODE § 185-73
1:642
[3] Total residential units permitted shall be calculated by
subtracting 10% of the site area as an allowance for
streets and multiplying the remaining land by two.
[4] Area and yard requirements for residential units
developed as part of a center residential cluster
development shall follow the bulk standards for the
respective zone the tract lies within. However, a minimum
of 40% of the tract shall be permanent, deed-restricted
open space.
[5] A cluster subdivision plan shall be submitted to the Board.
[6] All land area not included in lots and not utilized for street
rights-of-way shall be delineated on the plat submitted to
the Board and shall be offered to the township.
[7] All lands not accepted by the township shall be owned and
maintained by a homeowners' association. In any case, all
streets within the development shall be dedicated to the
township; however, the township shall not be responsible
for the maintenance of said streets until officially
accepting their dedication.
[8] The lands offered to the township shall be subject to
review by the Board, which, in its review and evaluation of
the suitability of such land, shall be guided by the Master
Plan of the township, by the ability to assemble and relate
such lands to an overall plan and by the accessibility and
potential utility of such lands. The Board may request an
opinion from other public agencies or individuals as to the
advisability of the township's accepting any lands to be
offered to the township.
[9] Every parcel of land offered to and accepted by the
township shall be conveyed to the township by deed at the
time final plan approval is granted by the township. The
deed shall contain such restrictions as may reasonably be
required by the Board to effectuate the provisions of this
chapter pertaining to the use of such areas. Should the
subdivision consist of a number of development stages, the
Board may require that acreage proportionate in size to
the stage being considered for final approval be donated to
the township simultaneously with the granting of final
subdivision approval for the particular stage even though
these lands may be located in a different section of the
overall development.
(c) A homeowners' association, established for the purpose of
owning and maintaining common lands and facilities, including
conservation, open space, floodplain, recreation and park
areas and other lands which would otherwise be dedicated to
§ 185-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-73
1:643
the township, shall be in accordance with the following
provisions:
[1] Membership in any created homeowners' association by
all property owners shall be mandatory. Such required
membership in any created homeowners' association and
the responsibilities upon the members shall be in writing
between the association and the individual in the form of a
covenant, with each member agreeing to his liability for
his pro rata share of the association's costs and providing
that the township shall be a party beneficiary to such
covenant, entitled to enforce its provisions.
[2] Executed deeds shall be tendered to the township
simultaneously with the granting of final subdivision
approval, stating that the prescribed use(s) of the lands in
the common ownership shall be absolute and not subject
to reversion for possible future development.
[3] The homeowners' association shall be responsible for
liability insurance, municipal taxes, maintenance of land
and any facilities that may be erected on any land deeded
to the homeowners' association and shall hold the
township harmless from any liability.
[4] The assessment levied by the homeowners' association
may become a lien on the private properties in the
development. The duly created homeowners' association
shall be allowed to adjust the assessment to meet
changing needs, and any deeded lands may be sold,
donated or in any other way conveyed to the township for
public purposes only.
[5] The homeowners' association initially created by the
developer shall clearly describe in its bylaws the rights
and obligations of any homeowner and tenant in the center
residential cluster development, along with the covenant
and model deeds and the Articles of Incorporation of the
association, prior to the granting of final approval by the
township.
[6] Part of the development proposals submitted to and
approved by the township shall be provisions to ensure
that control of the homeowners' association will be
transferred to the individual lot owners in the development
based on a percentage of the dwelling units sold and/or
occupied, together with assurances in the bylaws that the
homeowners' association shall have the maintenance
responsibilities for all lands to which it holds title.
[7] No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any building
or part thereof until all streets, drainage, parking facilities
§ 185-73 DENNIS CODE § 185-73
1:644
and water and sewer facilities servicing said structure are
properly completed and functioning.
(20) Mixed-use buildings with residential units.
(a) No residential units shall be located on the ground floor.
(b) Mixed-use buildings shall provide off-street parking for both
the residential use, based on New Jersey Residential Site
Improvement Standards, and nonresidential use, based on the
standards contained in Section 185-38.
(c) A maximum of two units per acre shall be permitted.
(21) Home businesses.
(a) The principal use shall be a single-family residence with anonsite
resident operating a business on the property.
(b) The home business shall not exceed 50% of the first floor area
of the dwelling or shall be accommodated within one accessory
structure.
(c) There shall be no permanent outside storage or display,
however, temporary outside display shall be permitted.
Displays shall not be permitted outside overnight.
(d) Home businesses shall be limited to the following types of
uses:
[1] Antique shops.
[2] Craft shops, where crafts are made on the premises.
[3] Artists' studios.
[4] Book and music shops.
[5] Cafes.
[6] Professional offices, such as an accountant, engineer, etc.
(e) Home business uses shall provide off-street parking for both
the residential use, based on New Jersey Residential Site
Improvement Standards, and the home business use, which
shall provide one parking space per 200 square feet of
business floor area.
(f) Signage is permitted for home businesses within both the VC
and VR Districts, which may consist of either a wall sign or
hanging sign in accordance with the standards in Section
185-43.
(22) Small wind energy systems and solar energy systems. [Added
5-5-09 by Ord. No. 2009-01]
§ 185-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-73
1:645
(a) The primary purpose of a wind or solar energy system will be
to provide power for the principal use of the property whereon
said system is to be located and shall not be for the generation
of power for commercial purposes, although this provision
shall not be interpreted to prohibit the sale of excess power
generated from time to time from a wind or solar energy
system designed to meet the energy needs of the principal use.
For the purposes of this section, the sale of excess power shall
be limited so that in no event an energy system is generating
more energy for sale than what is otherwise necessary to
power the principal use on the property.
(b) Wind and solar energy systems shall only be permitted as an
accessory use on the same lot as the principal use.
(c) All applications for wind energy systems shall be presented to
the Plan Review Committee for review for completion and
compliance with the section.
(d) Minor site plan approval will be required before a permit for a
wind energy system can be issued by the Zoning Officer.
(e) Small wind energy systems.
[1] Wind turbines are permitted in all residential, agricultural,
forest and preservation districts subject to the following
requirements:
[a] Wind turbines shall not be permitted in any front yard.
[b] Minimum setbacks: All wind turbines shall be set back
from all property lines a distance equal to 100% of the
height of the structure including the blades.
[c] Maximum height. Freestanding wind turbines shall
not exceed a height of 150 feet. The maximum height
shall include the height of the blades at its highest
point.
[d] No more than one wind turbine shall be permitted per
property.
[e] Wind turbines shall not be permitted as rooftop
installation.
[f] Wind turbines on residential property shall have a
nameplate capacity of 10 kilowatts or less.
[2] Wind turbines shall be permitted in a nonresidential
zoning district subject to the bulk requirements for that
district and the following:
§ 185-73 DENNIS CODE § 185-73
1:646
[a] The maximum height for a wind turbine shall not
exceed 150 feet, including the height of the blades at
its highest point.
[b] Minimum setbacks: All wind turbines shall be set back
from all property lines a distance equal to 100% of the
height of the structure including the blades.
[c] Wind turbines shall not be permitted in a front yard.
[d] No more than one wind turbine shall be permitted per
property.
[e] Wind turbines shall not be permitted as a rooftop
installation.
[3] Noise: All wind energy systems shall comply with the
following:
[a] Between a residential use or zone sound levels of the
wind energy system shall not exceed 50 dBA at the
closest neighboring, occupied structure.
[b] In all other cases at a common property line sound
levels of the wind energy system shall not exceed 65
dBA. These levels may be exceeded during short-term
events, such as utility outages and/or severe
windstorms.
[c] Wind turbines shall be designed with an automatic
brake or other similar device to prevent over-speeding
and excessive pressure on the lower structure.
[d] Wind energy systems shall not be artificially lighted,
except to the extent required by the FAA or other
applicable authority.
[e] All ground-mounted electrical and control equipment
shall be labeled and secured to prevent unauthorized
access.
[4] The tower shall be designed and installed so as not to
provide step bolts, a ladder, or other publicly accessible
means of climbing the tower, for a minimum height of eight
feet above the ground.
[5] All moving parts of the wind energy system shall be a
minimum of 20 feet above ground level.
[6] The blades on the wind energy system shall be constructed
of a corrosive resistant material.
[7] All guy wires or any part of the wind energy system shall
be located on the same lot as the energy system.
§ 185-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-73
1:647
[8] No wind energy system shall be painted with any type of
paint that will reflect sunlight on or toward adjoining
properties.
(f) Solar energy systems.
[1] Solar panels shall be permitted as a rooftop installation in
any zoning district. In no event shall the placement of the
solar panels result in a total height including building and
panels than what is permitted in the zoning district which
they are located for the principal building.
[2] Solar panels shall be permitted as ground arrays in
accordance with the following:
[a] All ground arrays shall be set back a distance of 20
feet from all property lines in a residential zoning
district or in conformance with the bulk standards for
accessory structures in commercial districts as
provided herein.
[b] Ground arrays shall not be permitted in a front yard.
[c] Ground arrays shall be located so that any glare is
directed away from an adjourning property.
[d] Ground arrays shall not exceed a height of 15 feet.
(g) Wind and solar energy systems shall not be used for displaying
any advertising except for reasonable identification of the
manufacturer or operator of the system. In no case shall any
identification be visible from a property line.
(h) The design of wind or solar energy systems shall, to the extent
reasonably possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening
and landscaping that will blend the facility into the natural
setting and existing environment.
(i) All applications for a wind or solar energy system shall conform
to the provisions of Section 185-54 with respect to tree
removal. Any trees to be removed in excess of that permitted
under the exemptions of the tree removal and protection
ordinance shall be accompanied by a plan demonstrating the
need to remove the trees and replacement of the trees in
accordance with the provisions of Section 185-54 of the
chapter. An applicant shall locate a wind or solar energy
system so that tree removal is not required to the extent
practical.
(j) The installation of a wind or solar energy system shall conform
to the National Electric Code as adopted by the New Jersey
Department of Community Affairs.
§ 185-73 DENNIS CODE § 185-73
1:648
(k) The installation of a wind or solar energy system is subject to
all Atlantic City Electric Company requirements for
interconnection.
(l) The maximum standards for building height set forth in
Chapter 185 shall not apply to wind and solar energy systems
with regard to height. Wind and solar energy systems shall
conform to the height restrictions provided in this section.
(m) Abandonment.
[1] A small wind energy system or solar energy system that is
out of service for a continuous 12 month period will be
deemed to have been abandoned.
[2] The Zoning Officer may issue a "Notice of Abandonment"
to the owner. The notice shall be sent via regular and
certified mail return receipt requested to the owner of
record.
[3] Any abandoned system shall be removed at the owner's
sole expense within six months after the owner receives
the "Notice of Abandonment" from the municipality. If the
system is not removed within six months of receipt of
notice from the township notifying the owner of such
abandonment, the township may remove the system as set
forth below.
[4] When an owner of a wind or solar energy system has been
notified to remove same and has not done so six months
after receiving said notice, then the township may remove
such system and place a lien upon the property for the cost
of the removal. If removed by the owner, a demolition
permit shall be obtained and the facility shall be removed.
Upon removal, the site shall be cleaned, restored and
revegetated to blend with the existing surrounding
vegetation at the time of abandonment.
(23) Cluster single-family residential development.
(a) The purpose of this section is to provide a method of
developing single-family detached dwellings which will
preserve desirable open spaces, conservation area, floodplains,
school sites, recreation and park areas and lands for other
public purposes by permitting the reduction of lot sizes and
certain other regulations hereinafter stated without increasing
the number of lots in the total area to be developed. Cluster
single-family development is permitted as a conditional use in
the R-3 and R-10 Districts.
(b) All cluster single-family residential developments shall meet
the following requirements:
§ 185-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-73
1:649
[1] The minimum size of a tract of land proposed for
development under the cluster development provisions of
this chapter shall be 10 acres in the R-3 District or 20
acres in the R-10 District, including the areas of existing
streets and water areas within the tract boundary lines,
provided that they total no more than 5% of the tract area.
[2] Total lots permitted shall be calculated by subtracting 15%
of the site area as an allowance for streets and dividing the
remaining land by three acres in the R-3 Districts and by
10 acres in the R-10 District.
[3] Area and yard requirements for lots developed as part of a
cluster single-family residential development shall be as
follows:
Requirement Detached
Dwellings in
R-3 District
Detached
Dwellings in
R-10 District
Principal Building
Minimum lot area 40,000 sq.ft. 60,000 sq.ft.
Minimum lot frontage 100 ft. 125 ft.
Minimum lot width 100 ft. 125 ft.
Minimum lot depth 200 ft. 250 ft.
Minimum side yard,
each
25 ft. 30 ft.
Minimum front yard 50 ft. 75 ft.
Minimum rear yard 50 ft. 75 ft.
Accessory Building
Minimum distance to
side line
15 ft. 30 ft.
Minimum distance to
rear line
15 ft. 20 ft.
Minimum distance to
other building
20 ft. 30 ft.
Maximum coverage
Impervious 35% 25%
Principal building 20% 10%
Accessory building 2% 2%
[4] All land area not included in lots and not utilized for street
rights-of-way shall be delineated on the plat submitted to
the Board and shall be offered to the township. A portion of
this land area, such portion equivalent to a minimum of
§ 185-73 DENNIS CODE § 185-73
1:650
20% of the total tract of land proposed for development,
shall be specifically set aside for recreation or park areas,
school sites or other public purposes and shall be designed
in accordance with the requirements stipulated in
Subsection D(23)(b)[5] below. All lands not accepted by
the township shall be owned and maintained by a
homeowners' association. In any case, all streets within
the development shall be dedicated to the township;
however, the township shall not be responsible for the
maintenance of said streets until officially accepting their
dedication.
[5] At least 30% in the R-3 District and 70% in the R-10
District of the total tract of land proposed for development
shall be specifically set aside for recreation or park areas,
school sites or other public purposes and shall be designed
as follows:
[a] The minimum contiguous acreage of each parcel shall
be one acre in the R-3 District and one and one-half
(1.5) acres in the R-10 District.
[b] Lands set aside for recreation purposes shall be
improved by the developer, including equipment,
walkways and landscaping, in order to qualify the
lands for acceptance by the township.
[c] All land areas shall be optimally related to the overall
plan and design of the development and improved to
best suit the purpose(s) for which intended.
[6] The lands offered to the township shall be subject to
review by the Board, which, in its review and evaluation of
the suitability of such land, shall be guided by the Master
Plan of the township, by the ability to assemble and relate
such lands to an overall plan and by the accessibility and
potential utility of such lands. The Board may request an
opinion from other public agencies or individuals as to the
advisability of the township's accepting any lands to be
offered to the township.
[7] Every parcel of land offered to and accepted by the
township shall be conveyed to the township by deed at the
time final plan approval is granted by the township. The
deed shall contain such restrictions as may reasonably be
required by the Board to effectuate the provisions of this
chapter pertaining to the use of such areas. Should the
subdivision consist of a number of development stages, the
Board may require that acreage proportionate in size to
the stage being considered for final approval be donated to
the township simultaneously with the granting of final
§ 185-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-73
1:651
subdivision approval for the particular stage even though
these lands may be located in a different section of the
overall development.
[8] A homeowners' association, established for the purpose of
owning and maintaining common lands and facilities,
including conservation, open space, floodplain, recreation
and park areas and other lands which would otherwise be
dedicated to the township, shall be in accordance with the
following provisions:
[a] Membership in any created homeowners' association
by all property owners shall be mandatory. Such
required membership in any created homeowners'
association and the responsibilities upon the members
shall be in writing between the association and the
individual in the form of a covenant, with each
member agreeing to his liability for his pro rata share
of the association's costs and providing that the
township shall be a party beneficiary to such
covenant, entitled to enforce its provisions.
[b] Executed deeds shall be tendered to the township
simultaneously with the granting of final subdivision
approval, stating that the prescribed use(s) of the
lands in the common ownership shall be absolute and
not subject to reversion for possible future
development.
[c] The homeowners' association shall be responsible for
liability insurance, municipal taxes, maintenance of
land and any facilities that may be erected on any land
deeded to the homeowners' association and shall hold
the township harmless from any liability.
[d] The assessment levied by the homeowners'
association may become a lien on the private
properties in the development. The duly created
homeowners' association shall be allowed to adjust
the assessment to meet changing needs, and any
deeded lands may be sold, donated or in any other way
conveyed to the township for public purposes only.
[e] The homeowners' association initially created by the
developer shall clearly describe in its bylaws the
rights and obligations of any homeowner and tenant in
the cluster development, along with the covenant and
model deeds and the Articles of Incorporation of the
association, prior to the granting of final approval by
the township.
§ 185-73 DENNIS CODE § 185-73
1:652
§ 185-74. Cape May Tributaries and Bays East Overlay Zone
[f] Part of the development proposals submitted to and
approved by the township shall be provisions to
ensure that control of the homeowners' association
will be transferred to the individual lot owners in the
development based on a percentage of the dwelling
units sold and/or occupied, together with assurances
in the bylaws that the homeowners' association shall
have the maintenance responsibilities for all lands to
which it holds title.
[9] No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any building
or part thereof until all streets, drainage, parking facilities
and water and sewer facilities servicing said structure are
properly completed and functioning.
(24) Single-family detached dwellings in the PR, PF8 and PF25 Zones
which are not clustered in accordance with Section 185-70.1,
provided that:
(a) The Planning Board finds that:
[1] Clustering of the proposed dwellings would be
inconsistent with the minimum environmental standards
set forth at N.J.A.C. 7:50-6; or
[2] Clustering of the proposed dwellings would disrupt the
contiguity of the forest ecosystem to a greater degree than
non-clustered development.
(b) Minimum lot area requirements:
[1] In the PR Zone: 5.0 acres.
[2] In the PF8 Zone: 8.0 acres.
[3] In the PF25 Zone: 25.0 acres.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect the water quality of
the watersheds within the township and to comply with the established
standards for Wastewater Management Plans in the State of New
Jersey. Specifically, the state requires that municipalities adopt
ordinances that address the carrying capacity of land.
B. Background.
(1) The quality and quantity of ground water available directly affects
the health and welfare of the population because ground water is
the primary source of potable water for a significant number of
township residents.
§ 185-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-74
1:653
(2) Contamination of ground water by nitrates introduced by on-site
disposal systems (i.e., septic systems) can result in a high
concentration of nitrates.
(3) Fertilization contributes to nitrate groundwater contamination.
(4) Additional pollutants, such as chemicals, pesticides and animal
waste can be introduced into the ground water.
(5) Rainwater penetration of the aquifer is necessary to dilute
groundwater contamination.
(6) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, and the
Pinelands Commission promote and promulgate the use of Nitrate
Dilution Models for land use purposes.
(7) It is desirable and necessary to regulate development, processes
and activities that threaten Dennis Township's groundwater.
(8) The nitrate dilution subsection provides for a limitation on the
nitrate loading based on the available dilution of each lot being
subdivided that proposes the use of an onsite subsurface sewage
disposal system.
C. Applicability. Lands that are being considered for subdivision within the
Cape May Bays and Tributaries East Overlay Zone, as identified in the
Township Master Plan and reflected on the zoning map will require that
the Planning and/or Zoning Board apply the site specific Nitrate
Dilution Model to the proposed subdivision.
(1) This article is not intended to regulate the development of existing
individual lots.
(2) Further, this article is not intended to modify the underlying zoning
area requirements for individual lots; rather it is required to
address the standards established by NJDEP for Wastewater
Management. This section shall be considered an overlay to the
existing underlying zone.
D. The proposed on-site sewage disposal systems would continue to be
required to be designed in accordance with "Standards for Individual
Subsurface Sewage Disposal Systems" (N.J.A.C. 7:9A- Chapter 199) and
continue to be under the jurisdiction of the Cape May County Health
Department and NJDEP where applicable.
E. Nitrate Dilution Model.
(1) A nitrate dilution model and analysis shall be provided as part of
subdivision approval applications requiring septic systems to
ensure that the number of units allowed, regardless of underlying
zoning, supports conformance with the groundwater standards
when considering the available dilution on site. The goal of the
analysis is to meet anti-degradation for groundwater for 2.0 mg/l.
§ 185-74 DENNIS CODE § 185-74
1:654
(2) If the designated minimum lot area for the zone cannot meet the
standards established for septic disposal systems pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 7:9A, then the minimum lot area shall be adjusted to a
larger size and configuration as is necessary in order to meet said
standards.
(3) The Nitrate Dilution Analysis shall utilize NJDEP's Recharge-Based
Nitrate-Dilution Model for New Jersey V6.0 (Hoffman, J.L. and
Canace, R.J., 2004 A Recharge-Based Nitrate Dilution Model for
New Jersey: N.J. Geological Survey Open-File Report 04-1, 27), as
supplemented or amended, for residential subdivisions, and the
Recharge-Based Nitrate-Dilution Model for Small Commercial
Establishments in NJ V.2, as supplemented or amended, for
commercial/institutional subdivisions, or another method that has
received approval from the NJDEP.
F. Requirements.
(1) Any proposed subdivision to be served by individual on-site
disposal systems (septic) within the Cape May Bays and Tributaries
East Overlay Zone must meet the groundwater standard for nitrate
(2 mg/l).
(2) The design of the system and its discharge point, and the size of the
entire contiguous parcel on which the system or systems is located
will ensure that ground water exiting from the entire contiguous
parcel or entering a surface body of water will not exceed 2.0 parts
per million nitrate/nitrogen, calculated pursuant to a Recharge-
Based Nitrate-Dilution Model for New Jersey V6.0, as may be
amended from NJDEP from time to time. The entire contiguous
parcel may include any contiguous lands to be dedicated as open
space as part of the proposed development, but may not include
previously dedicated road rights-of-way. Any contiguous parcel
under consideration must be deed restricted to prohibit any further
development that would generate additional nitrate loading.
(3) Approval of all individual subsurface sewage disposal systems
under N.J.A.C. 7:9A remain under the jurisdiction of the
appropriate County Health Department and/or NJDEP.
G. Administration. The administration of the section requirements must be
handled by a combination of individuals. The Planning Board shall be
responsible to track the number of systems and their acreages for
compliance with the results of the individual model.
(1) Application procedure - Planning Board. Whenever an application
is submitted to the Planning Board for subdivision review and the
proposed method of sewage disposal is an individual onsite system,
the applicant shall submit an approval from NJDEP that each
system meets the requirements for nitrate dilution. This application
shall include the proposed use, the number of residential units. No
§ 185-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-74
1:655
application shall be deemed complete by the Planning Board unless
an approval from NJDEP is received.
§ 185-74 DENNIS CODE § 185-74
1:656
ARTICLE VIII
Planning Board
[Amended 7-15-13 by Ord. No. 2013-03]
§ 185-75. Establishment of Planning Board; powers and procedures.
[Amended 4-16-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-04]
A. The Township of Dennis hereby exercises the option provided by
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-25c, and accordingly, the Zoning Board of Adjustment is
hereby terminated; provided, however, in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-72.1, that any application for development submitted to the
Zoning Board of Adjustment pursuant to lawful authority before the
effective date of this chapter may be continued at the option of the
applicant, and the Board of Adjustment shall have every power which it
possessed before the effective date of the chapter in regard to the
application.
B. When necessary for the purposes of implementing this chapter and the
election to have the Planning Board exercise, to the same extent and
subject to the same restrictions, all the powers of a Board of
Adjustment, the term Planning Board shall be substituted for the term
Zoning Board of Adjustment or equivalent in each and every instance
where Zoning Board of Adjustment or equivalent appears in any code,
ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation or amendments thereto of the
Township of Dennis.
C. Where the substitution of Planning Board for Zoning Board of
Adjustment or equivalent results in an apparent duplication,
redundancy, or conflict in any code, ordinance, resolution, rule or
regulation, the same shall be liberally construed and interpreted in
accordance with the intent and purpose of N.J.S.A. 55D-25c. as adopted
herein, whereby the Planning Board replaces and to the same extent
and subject to the same restrictions exercises all the powers of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment.
D. The Class I and the Class III members shall not participate in the
consideration of applications for development which involve relief
pursuant to subsection d of section 57 of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70).
E. There shall be four alternate members appointed to the newly
empowered Planning Board in accordance with law.
F. All other provisions of this Code applicable to the Planning Board shall
remain in full force and effect.
G. All other provisions of this Code and of general law delineating the
powers and responsibilities of the Zoning Board of Adjustment are
hereby deemed to refer to the Planning Board where applicable as the
Planning Board exercises its zoning adjustment authority.
§ 185-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-76
1:657
§ 185-76. Public notice of hearing. [Added 4-26-99 by Ord. No.
99-07]
§ 185-77. (Reserved for Future Use.)
§ 185-78. (Reserved for Future Use.)
§ 185-79. (Reserved for Future Use.)
§ 185-80. Conflicts of interest.
No member of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act
on any matter in which he has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or
financial interest. Whenever any such member shall disqualify himself from
acting on a particular matter, he shall not continue to sit with the Board
on the hearing of such matter nor participate in any discussion or decision
relating thereto.
§ 185-81. Meetings.
§ 185-82. Records.
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70a. and b., the Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall have the power to hear appeals from determinations
by the Zoning Officer and to interpret the Zoning Map or Zoning
Ordinance, upon receiving a proper and complete submission by an
applicant for such type of relief.
B. All such applications shall require a public hearing. Public notice of any
such hearing shall be required as authorized by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12a.
A. Meetings of both the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
shall be scheduled no less often than once a month, and any meeting so
scheduled shall be held as scheduled unless cancelled for lack of
applications for development to process.
B. Special meetings may be provided for at the call of the Chairman or on
the request of any two Board members, which shall be held on notice to
its members and the public in accordance with all applicable legal
requirements.
C. No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being
present.
D. All actions shall be taken by majority vote of the members present at
the meeting, except as otherwise required by a provision of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
E. All meetings shall be open to the public. Notice of all such meetings
shall be given in accordance with the requirements of the Open Public
Meetings Act, Chapter 231 of the Laws of 1975.
§ 185-76 DENNIS CODE § 185-82
1:658
§ 185-83. Notice of decisions.
Any decisions of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment when
acting upon an application for development and any decision of the
governing body when acting upon an appeal shall be given notice in the
following manner:
§ 185-84. Appeal from grant of use variance.
Pursuant to the requirements of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-17, no appeal may be filed
to the Governing Body of the Township of Dennis from the grant of a use
variance by the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
A. Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall
include the names of the persons appearing and addressing the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment and of the persons
appearing by attorney, the action taken by the Planning or Zoning
Board, the findings, if any, made by it and reasons therefor. The minutes
shall thereafter be made available for public inspection during the
normal business hours at the office of the Township Clerk. Any
interested party shall have the right to compel production of the
minutes for use as evidence in any legal proceedings concerning the
subject matter of such minutes.
B. A verbatim recording shall be made of every hearing. The recording of
the proceedings shall be made by either stenographer, mechanical or
electronic means. The municipality shall furnish a transcript or
duplicate recording in lieu thereof on request to any interested party at
his expense.
A. A copy of the decision shall be mailed to the applicant or appellant or, if
represented, then to his attorney without charge, and for a reasonable
charge to any interested party who has requested it, not later than 10
days after the date of the decision.
B. A brief notice of the decision shall be published in the official
newspaper of the municipality if there is one or in a newspaper of
general circulation in the municipality. Such publication shall be
arranged by and paid for by the applicant and shall be published within
two weeks from the date of the decision.
C. A copy of the decision and all submitted documents of record shall be
filed with the Township Clerk.
D. For decisions relating to the Pinelands Area, notice shall be given to the
Pinelands Commission pursuant to Section 185-49 of this chapter.
§ 185-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-84
1:659

ARTICLE IX
Administration and Enforcement
[Amended 7-15-13 by Ord. No. 2013-03]
§ 185-85. Powers and duties of Zoning Officer.
§ 185-86. Administration and enforcement within Pinelands Area.
Within the Pinelands Area, no person shall carry out development without
obtaining approval from an approval agency in accordance with the
procedures set forth in Section 185-49.
§ 185-87. Building permits and procedures.
A. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer of the Township of Dennis to
administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. No structure shall
be erected until a building permit is obtained from the Zoning Officer,
and no structure or lot shall be used in violation of this chapter. It shall
be the duty of the Zoning Officer to keep a record of all applications and
all building permits which are either issued or denied, with notations of
any conditions involved, which data shall form a part of the township
public records. A monthly report of building permits issued shall be
filed with the Tax Assessor.
B. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to inspect the structures and
land in the township. When any violation of this chapter shall be found
by the Zoning Officer, or when any purported violation shall be brought
to his attention, it shall be mandatory upon the Zoning Officer to make
an investigation. In the event that said Inspector determines that a
violation of this chapter does in fact exist, it shall be mandatory upon
the Zoning Officer to serve written notice of said violation by registered
mail or personal service upon the owner, and copies of such notice shall
be delivered to the Township Clerk. In the event that the owner shall fail
to abate said violation within 10 days of the service of such notice, it
shall then be mandatory upon the Zoning Officer to report such fact, in
writing, to the Township Clerk, and to furnish a copy of such report to
the Township Committee.
A. Every application for a building permit shall be accompanied by three
sets of plans drawn in ink or a blueprint showing:
(1) The actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon.
(2) The exact location, size and height of all existing and proposed
structure(s).
(3) The existing or intended use of each structure.
(4) The number of dwelling units the structure is designed to
accommodate.
§ 185-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-87
1:661
§ 185-88. Existing building permits.
Nothing in this chapter shall require any change in the plans, construction,
size or designated use of any building, structure or part thereof for which
any building permit has been granted before the enactment of this chapter,
provided that construction from such plans shall have been started within
six months after the enactment of this chapter and shall be continuously and
diligently pursued to completion; otherwise said permit shall be void.
§ 185-89. Certificates of occupancy.
(5) The number and location of off-street parking spaces and off-street
loading areas.
(6) Within the Pinelands Area, wetlands delineation and soil borings
and such other information with regard to the structures, lot and
neighboring lots as may be necessary to determine and provide for
the enforcement of this chapter; the Building Code and all other
applicable codes and ordinances of the township.
B. The Zoning Officer shall not consider the submitted application for a
building permit to construct the proposed structure(s) until he has
received a written report from the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment stating that the subdivision or site plan in which said
structure is located has been approved or until the legal time period for
action by the Board has expired. Within the Pinelands Area, the Zoning
Officer shall not issue a building permit until the requirements of
Section 185-49 have been met.
C. A building permit shall be granted or denied within 10 days from the
date of a complete application, unless additional time is agreed upon in
writing by the applicant. One copy of such plans shall be returned to the
owner when such plans shall have been approved or denied by the
Zoning Officer, together with such permit as may be granted. All
dimensions shown on these plans relating to the location and size of the
lot to be built upon shall be based on an actual survey of the lot by a
licensed land surveyor in the State of New Jersey. The lot and the
location of the structure(s) thereon shall be staked out on the grounds
before construction is started.
D. All building permits granted shall remain valid for a period of one year.
If the applicant has not completed 25% of the work required, as
determined by the Township Engineer and based on cost, a subsequent
permit shall be required and additional fee be payable. No permit shall
remain effective for greater than two years from the date of issuance of
the initial permit with respect to the project regardless of the
percentage of work completed.
A. No land shall be occupied or used and no structure hereafter erected or
altered shall hereafter be occupied, transferred or used in whole or in
part for any purpose whatsoever until a certificate of occupancy shall
§ 185-87 DENNIS CODE § 185-89
1:662
§ 185-90. Violations and penalties.
have been issued by the Zoning Officer. It shall be the duty of the
Zoning Officer to issue a certificate of occupancy only when he is
satisfied that the structure or part thereof and the proposed use
conform to this chapter and all other applicable codes and ordinances
of the township.
B. A certificate of occupancy shall be granted or denied in writing within
10 days from the date that a written notification is filed with the Zoning
Officer that construction is completed, unless additional time is agreed
upon by the applicant in writing. A fee as provided in Article II of
Chapter 98, Fees, shall be charged for the issuance of each certificate
of occupancy.
C. Should the Zoning Officer decline to issue a certificate of occupancy, his
reasons for doing so shall be so stated on two copies of the application,
and one copy shall be returned to the applicant.
D. Upon notice being served of any condition found to exist in violation of
any provision(s) of this chapter, the Building Code or any other
applicable code or ordinance of the Township with respect to any land
use or structure, the certificate of occupancy for such land use or
structure shall thereupon, without further notice, be null and void, and
a new certificate of occupancy shall be required for any further use of
such structure or land.
E. A monthly report of the certificates of occupancy issued shall be filed
with the Tax Assessor. A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be
kept in the office of the Zoning Officer and copies shall be furnished on
request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the
structure or land affected. The charge for each copy shall be as
provided in Article II of Chapter 98, Fees, except that there shall be no
charge to a municipal agency.
A. Any person, firm or corporation that shall violate any provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof by any Court authorized by law
to hear and determine the matter, be fined such sum not exceeding
$1,000, as such Court, in its discretion, may impose or, if the party so
convicted is a natural person, such person may be imprisoned for such
term not exceeding 90 days, as such Court, in its discretion, may
impose, or be fined a sum not exceeding $1,000, as such Court, in its
discretion, may impose, or such natural person may be both imprisoned
and fined not exceeding the maximum limits set forth herein, as such
Court, in its discretion may impose.
B. Each day that such violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
C. The owner of any building or structure, lot or land or part thereof and/
or the tenant or occupant of any building or structure, lot or land or
part thereof where anything in violation of this chapter shall be placed
§ 185-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-90
1:663
§ 185-91. Action by township.
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, moved or converted or any building, structure or land is used in
violation of or contrary to the provisions of this chapter, the township may
institute an action to enjoin or any other appropriate action or proceeding to
prevent such erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion
or use.
or shall exist or be suffered, allowed or permitted to exist and any
architect, builder, developer, contractor, agent, person or corporation
engaged in connection therewith and who assists in the commission of
any such violation shall each be guilty of a separate violation and, upon
conviction thereof, shall each be liable to the fine or imprisonment, or
both, specified above.
§ 185-90 DENNIS CODE § 185-91
1:664
ARTICLE X
Amendments
[Amended 7-15-13 by Ord. No. 2013-03]
§ 185-92. Procedures.
This chapter may be amended from time to time by the Township Committee
after the appropriate referrals, notices, hearings and other requirements of
law and, where appropriate, in compliance with N.J.A.C. 7:50-3.45.
§ 185-92 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-92
1:665
Part III: Board of Health Legislation
Chapter 191
GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH
§ 185-92 DENNIS CODE § 185-92
1:666
ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code by Board of Health
[Adopted 5-28-1991 as Ord. No. 91-1]
Be it ordained by the Board of Health of the Township of Dennis, in the
County of Cape May and State of New Jersey, as follows:
§ 191-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Board of Health of the
Township of Dennis of a general and permanent nature, as revised, codified
and consolidated into chapters and sections by General Code Publishers
Corp. and consisting of Chapters 191 through 210, are hereby approved,
adopted, ordained and enacted as Part III of the "Code of the Township of
Dennis," hereinafter known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 191-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances of the Board of Health enacted prior to the
enactment of this Code, except such ordinances as are expressly saved from
repeal or continued in force and effect hereinafter.
§ 191-3. When effective.
All provisions of this ordinance and the Code shall take effect 30 days after
the date of the first publication.
§ 191-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Secretary of the Board of Health and shall remain there for use and
examination by the public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and if
this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified as provided by
law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Secretary
of the Board of Health, to be made available to persons desiring to examine
the same during all times while the said Code is in effect.
§ 191-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the Board of
Health to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Township of Dennis" shall
be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the loose-leaf book containing the said Code, as amendments
and supplements thereto.
§ 191-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 191-6
1:667
§ 191-6. Publication; filing.
The Secretary of the Board of Health, pursuant to law, shall cause to be
published, in the manner required, a copy of this adopting ordinance in
a newspaper of general circulation in the township. Sufficient copies of
the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Secretary for inspection
by the public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
publication of this adopting ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of
the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered
to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 191-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Secretary, or someone authorized and directed by
the Secretary, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing
the Code required to be filed in the Secretary's office for the use of the
public. All changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to
the effective date of this codification, which shall be adopted specifically
as part of the Code, shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by
reference until such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements
to said Code book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted herein.
§ 191-8. Altering or tampering with Code; violations and penalties.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code, or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Board of
Health to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not less than $5 nor
more than $500.
§ 191-9. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part
thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not
be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other section or
parts thereof.
§ 191-10. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other section or parts thereof.
§ 191-11. Repeal of ordinances.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Board of
Health and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
§ 191-6 DENNIS CODE § 191-11
1:668
contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
adopting ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 191-12. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 191-11 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
§ 191-13. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
A. Any ordinance of the Board of Health adopted subsequent to November
27, 1989.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance, or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision, or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending,
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property, or any lawful contract or obligation.
G. Any provisions of an ordinance or resolution of the Board of Health
creating employments, positions or offices and fixing salaries and duties
therefor which are not provided in the Code hereby adopted and which
are not in conflict or inconsistent therewith, or any ordinance
pertaining to the salaries and compensation of Board of Health officers
and employees.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances of the Board of Health for
adoption and revision as part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4,
certain grammatical changes and other minor changes were made in
one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the Board of Health
that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the
ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended to read
as such.
B. In addition, the following changes, amendments or revisions are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance
(chapter and section number references are to the ordinances as they
have been renumbered and appear in the Code):
§ 191-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 191-13
1:669
(1) Chapter 201, Public Health Nuisances (Ord. No. H-63-1, adopted
10-14-1963). Section 201-4 (former Sec. 4) is hereby amended to
increase the maximum fine from $100 to $500.
§ 191-13 DENNIS CODE § 191-13
1:670
Chapter 201
PUBLIC HEALTH NUISANCES
§ 201-1. Adoption of standards.
A code defining and prohibiting certain matters, things, conditions or acts
and each of them as a nuisance; prohibiting certain noises or sounds;
requiring the proper heating of apartments; prohibiting lease or rental
of certain buildings; prohibiting spitting in or upon public buildings,
conveyances or sidewalks; authorizing the inspection of premises by an
enforcing official; providing for the removal or abatement of certain
nuisances and recovery of expenses incurred by the Board of Health in
removing or abating such nuisances; and prescribing penalties for
violations is hereby established pursuant to Chapter 188 of the Laws of
1950.87 A copy of said code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof
without the inclusion of the text thereof herein.
§ 201-2. Title of standards.
Said code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey
(1953)."
§ 201-3. Availability of copies.
Three copies of said Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953)
have been placed on file in the office of the Health Officer and the Clerk of
this township upon the introduction of this chapter, and will remain on file
there for the use and examination of the public.
§ 201-4. Violations and penalties.88
Any person who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this
chapter or the code established herein or notice issued pursuant thereto
shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to a penalty of not less than $2 nor
more than $500 for each violation.
Chapter 208
WATER ANALYSIS
§ 208-1. Definitions.
87.Editor's Note: See now N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 et seq.
88.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 191, General Provisions, Art.
I.
§ 191-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 208-1
1:671
§ 208-2. General requirements.
§ 208-3. Requirements for final certification.
The Cape May County Health Department may grant final certification of a
well, provided that the following requirements are met:
A. The words, terms and phrases used in this chapter shall be defined and
have the same meanings as set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:9-2.4 and N.J.A.C.
10:12-4, except as set forth below.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACT — The New Jersey Safe Drinking Water Act, N.J.S.A. 58:12A-1 et
seq., as amended and supplemented from time to time.
AUTHORIZED AGENT — The Cape May County Health Department.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat
or as otherwise permitted by law.
NONPOTABLE WATER SUPPLY — Any water not used or intended to be
used as a potable water supply and permanently identified as such.
PLAT — A map or maps of a subdivision or site plan.
POTABLE WATER SUPPLY — Any water used or intended to be used for
drinking, bathing, culinary or other personal contact purposes.
REGULATIONS — The New Jersey Safe Drinking Water Regulations,
N.J.A.C. 7:10-1 et seq., as amended and supplemented from time to
time.
SALE — Fee-simple title is passed from one person or legal entity by
deed or other means of conveyance.
TRANSFER — A change of possession from one party to another party
either by lease of otherwise for a period in excess of one year.
A. As a condition precedent to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy
for all residential dwelling properties within the Township of Dennis, a
water analysis report as defined in § 208-6 of this chapter shall be filed
with the Township Construction Official, with said report being certified
by the Cape May County Health Department indicating that there is a
safe drinking water supply.
B. Upon the sale or transfer of all properties within the Township of
Dennis for residential purposes, the seller or lessor, prior to settlement
or signing a lease, shall supply to the buyer or lessee a water analysis as
defined in § 208-6 of this chapter indicating safe drinking water as
approved by the Cape May County Health Department.
A. In the case of the location and construction of a new well, the laboratory
analysis of a water sample collected and analyzed in accordance with
§§ 208-4, 208-5 and 208-6 of this chapter does not disclose the presence
§ 208-1 DENNIS CODE § 208-3
1:672
§ 208-4. Requirements for new wells; exemptions.
§ 208-5. Testing procedure; contaminants.
of any of the hazardous contaminants or substances set forth herein in
an amount which exceeds the maximum contaminant level established
under the Act, the Regulations or this chapter for the same or, if no
maximum contaminant level has yet to be established, the Level 1
Interim Action Level concentration for the same established by the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, Division of Water
Resources.
B. All fees due and payable to the Cape May County Health Department
under § 208-11 of this chapter have been paid in full.
A. Before final certification and operation of a new well, other than an
exempt well as defined in Subsection B of this section, the person
owning the lot upon which a new well is located and constructed shall
have a sample of the well water collected and analyzed by a laboratory
certified by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:18-1.1 et seq. to conduct testing for the individual
hazardous contaminants and substances set forth in § 208-5A of this
chapter. The water sample shall be taken as close to the pumping well
as possible. If a sample must be taken following a treatment unit, the
type, size and purpose of the unit shall be reported along with the test
results. In no case shall treatment equipment be installed on a new well
prior to the first sampling. The results of said laboratory analysis shall
be forwarded directly by the laboratory to the Cape May County Health
Department and the Township of Dennis. All samples must be taken
prior to the entry of any filtration system.
B. The following nonpotable water supply wells shall be exempt from the
sampling and analysis requirements established under Subsection A of
this Section and §§ 208-5 and 208-6 of this chapter:
(1) Any nonpotable well, the pumps and lines of which do not enter a
building, crawlspace or garage and are directly connected to a
sprinkler system manifold.
(2) Geothermal groundwater heat pump wells that are constructed and
installed as totally enclosed systems and are incapable of being
used as a potable water supply.
(3) Fire protection wells as defined in the State Uniform Construction
Code, N.J.A.C. 5:23-1.1 et seq., which are incapable of being used
as a potable water supply.
A. The water sample collected under § 208-4 of this chapter shall be
analyzed by a laboratory certified by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection pursuant to NJ.A.C. 7:18-1.1 et seq. to
determine whether any of the following hazardous contaminants and
§ 208-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 208-5
1:673
substances are present in amounts which exceed the maximum
contaminant level established under the Act and the Regulations for the
same or, if no maximum contaminant level has yet to be established,
the Level 1 Interim Action Level concentration for the same established
by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, Division of
Water Resources:
(1) Total dissolved solids.
(2) Bacteria (total coliform).
(3) Nitrates - nitrogen.
(4) Iron.
(5) Manganese.
(6) pH.
(7) Chloride.
(8) Sodium.
(9) Lead.
(10) Mercury.
(11) Benzene.
(12) Carbon tetrachloride.
(13) Chlorobenzene.
(14) Dichlorobenzenes - 1,2 - 1,3 - 1,4.
(15) 1,2 - Dichloroethane.
(16) 1,1 - Dichloroethylene.
(17) 1,2 - Dichloroethylene (cis and trans).
(18) Methylene chrloride.
(19) Tetrachloroethylene.
(20) 1,1,1 - Trichloroethane.
(21) Trichloroethylene.
(22) Vinyl chloride.
B. All water samples shall be collected, tested and analyzed in accordance
with criteria and procedures established by the New Jersey Department
of Environmental protection in N.J.A.C. 7:18-2.1 et seq. Upon request by
the Cape May County Health Department, the laboratory submitting
the test results shall submit proof that it is certified by the New Jersey
§ 208-5 DENNIS CODE § 208-5
1:674
§ 208-6. Submission of results; required information.
The laboratory collecting the sample and performing the water analysis
required under §§ 208-4 and 208-5 of this chapter shall submit the results of
its analysis directly to the Township of Dennis and Cape May County Health
Department with the following information:
§ 208-7. Sale or transfer of real property with well.
Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:18-1.1
et seq. to conduct the tests necessary to determine the presence of the
hazardous contaminants and substances set forth in § 208-5A of this
chapter.
C. In the event that the laboratory analysis of a water sample collected
from a new well reveals the presence of any of the hazardous
contaminants or substances identified in § 208-5A of this chapter in an
amount exceeding the maximum contaminant levels set forth or
incorporated in this chapter for the same, the Cape May County Health
Department must be notified prior to resampling the well for the
purpose of determining resampling procedures.
A. The lot number and block number of the property upon which the well
is located and the reason for the sample, i.e., new construction, sale or
transfer.
B. The name and mailing address of all persons owning the property upon
which the well is located.
C. The laboratory employee or the laboratory's authorized representative
who physically collected the sample from the well.
D. The date and time that the well sample was collected.
E. The specific point of collection of the water sample.
F. The date and time the sample was analyzed by the laboratory.
A. No real property nor any interest in the same shall be sold or
transferred after January 1, 1990, which utilizes a well for its potable
water supply until:
(1) The well water has been sampled and analyzed in accordance with
the procedures set forth in §§ 208-4, 208-5 and 208-6 of this
chapter.
(2) The Cape May County Health Department has certified that the
laboratory analysis of the water sample collected from said well
does not disclose the presence of any of the hazardous
contamination or substances set forth in § 208-5A of this Chapter in
an amount exceeding the maximum contaminant level established
under the Act, the Regulations or this Chapter for the same or, if no
maximum contaminant level has yet to be established, the Level 1
§ 208-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 208-7
1:675
§ 208-8. Administrative policies and procedures.
The Cape May County Health Department, subject to the review of the
Board of Health of the Township of Dennis, shall develop and implement
appropriate policies and procedures for the proper administration of this
chapter.
§ 208-9. Right of entry.
The Township of Dennis and the Cape May County Health Department shall
have access and entry to any property upon which there is located a well,
for the purpose of inspecting and/or testing the same.
§ 208-10. Well closings.
The Township of Dennis and Cape May County Health Department may
order any well which is determined to be polluted or detrimental to the
public health closed until and unless the water is made potable.
§ 208-11. Fees.
The following fees are hereby established:
§ 208-12. Violations and penalties.
Interim Action Level concentration for the same established by the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, Division of
Water Resources.
B. The granting of final certification by the Cape May County Health
Department shall be valid certification until there is a sale or transfer of
the property in question where that sale or transfer is more than one
year after the issuance of said final certification. In the event that said
sale or transfer is within one year or less from the preceding
certification, the transferor need not obtain a new certification.
A. For certification of a water sample analysis by the Cape May County
Health Department, the fee shall be $25.
B. For any requested inspection of a well by the Cape May County Health
Department, the fee shall be $25.
A. In addition to any other liability or penalty imposed by law, any person,
firm, corporation or individual violating the terms of the provisions of
this chapter shall, for a first offense, be subject to a fine, in the Dennis
Township Municipal Court, of not less than $75 nor more than $250. For
a second or subsequent offense, the fine shall be not less than $250 nor
more than $500. A person need not be charged as a second or
subsequent offender to be punished as the same.
B. Each and every day in which a violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter exists shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 208-7 DENNIS CODE § 208-12
1:676
Appendix
Chapter A211
FEES FOR DOCUMENT COPIES
§ A211-1. Fee established. [Amended 10-19-04 by Ord. No. 2004-13]
A fee for copies of all township public documents shall be as follows:
Pages 1 — 10 $0.75 per page
Pages 11 — 20 $0.50 per page
Pages in excess of 20 $0.25 per page
§ A211-2. Deposit of fees collected.
All moneys collected from said fee shall be deposited into the Dennis
Township Clerk Account.
§ A211-3. Fee for Discovery.
Fee for Municipal Discovery is as follows:
Pages 1 — 10 $0.75 per page
Pages 11 — 20 $0.50 per page
Pages in excess of 20 $0.25 per page
Requests made by mail will be assessed a current first class postage rate
and an additional $.25 stationary fee per discovery. Requests will not be
processed unless a note to exceed check covering the amount no greater
than $50 is submitted at the time of your request. No discovery will be
mailed until payment is received. Checks should be made payable to the
Dennis Township Prosecutor.
Chapter A212
RESIDENTIAL GARBAGE PICKUP
§ A212-1. Requirements for residential pickup.
Residential garbage shall be picked up within the township pursuant to the
requirements of Article I of Chapter 112 of this Code.
§ A212-2. Bulk items.
A. Bulk items shall be picked up only in accordance with a schedule to be
enacted by the Township of Dennis. The following items shall be
considered as bulk items:
§ 208-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A212-2
1:677
(1) Stoves.
(2) All types of heaters.
(3) Washers.
(4) Dryers.
(5) Refrigerators.
(6) Freezers.
(7) Dishwashers.
(8) Tables.
(9) Chairs.
(10) Garbage compactors.
(11) Hot-water heaters.
(12) Toilets.
(13) Kitchen and bathroom sinks.
(14) Bathtubs.
(15) Clothes hampers.
(16) Medicine cabinets.
(17) Mirrors.
(18) Couches.
(19) Televisions.
(20) Stereos.
(21) Tools.
(22) End stands.
(23) Utility stands.
(24) Lamps.
(25) Hutches.
(26) Gun cabinets.
(27) China closets.
(28) Humidifiers.
(29) Dehumidifiers.
§ A212-2 DENNIS CODE § A212-2
1:678
§ A212-3. Regular garbage.
The following items shall be considered items of regular garbage and shall
be picked up by regular trash collection routes:
(30)Window air conditioners.
(31) Fans.
(32) Rugs.
(33) Sewing machines.
(34) Irons.
(35) Ironing boards.
(36) Hope chests.
(37) Beds and cots.
(38) Sump pumps.
(39) Playpens.
(40) Highchairs.
(41) Household security gates.
(42) Vacuum cleaners.
(43)Water conditioners.
(44) Pianos.
(45) Children's walkers and foldup swings.
(46) Organizers.
(47) Metal cabinets.
(48) All other related items.
B. These items shall be picked up on bulk trash days and must be at the
curbside the night before or by 6:30 a.m. the day of the pickup.
A. Smoke alarms.
B. Fire extinguishers.
C. Telephones.
D. Extension cords.
E. Clocks.
F. Flowers.
§ A212-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A212-3
1:679
Chapter A213
CABLE TELEVISION AND COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM
§ A213-1. Purpose of the Ordinance.
The municipality hereby grants to Comcast renewal of its non-exclusive
Municipal Consent to place in, upon, across, above, over and under
highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, easements, public ways and public
places in the municipality, poles, wires, cables, underground conduits,
manholes and other television conductors, fixtures, apparatus and
equipment as may be necessary for the construction, operation and
maintenance in the Municipality of a cable television and communications
system.
§ A213-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Such meaning
or definition of terms is supplemental to those definitions of the Federal
Communications Commission ("FCC") rules and regulations, 47 C.F.R.
Subsection 76.1 et seq., and the Cable Communications Policy Act, 47 U.S.C.
Section 521 et seq., as amended, and the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A.
48:5A-1 et seq., and shall in no way be construed to broaden, alter or
conflict with the federal and state definitions:
G. Kitchen cleaning and cooking utensils.
H. Pillows.
I. Linens.
J. Shoes and boots.
K. Hanging baskets.
L. Picture frames.
M. China.
N. Empty paint cans.
O. Hardware.
P. Window curtains, shades and blinds.
Q. Shower curtains.
R. Children's toys, such as trucks, cars and stuffed animals.
S. All related items.
§ A212-3 DENNIS CODE § A213-2
1:680
§ A213-3. Statement of findings.
Public hearings conducted by the Municipality, concerning the renewal of
Municipal Consent herein granted to the Company were held after proper
public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act and the
regulations of the Board adopted pursuant thereto. Said hearings, having
been fully open to the public, and the municipality, having received at said
public hearings all comments regarding the qualifications of the Company
to receive this renewal of Municipal Consent, the Municipality hereby finds
that the Company possesses the necessary legal, technical, character,
financial and other qualifications and that the Company's operating and
construction arrangements are adequate and feasible.
§ A213-4. Duration of franchise.
The non-exclusive Municipal Consent granted herein shall expire 15 years
from the date of expiration of the previous Certificate of Approval issued
by the Board with a 10-year automatic renewal as provided by N.J.S.A.
48:5A-19 and 25, and N.J.A.C. 14:18-13.6.
In the event that the Municipality shall find that the Company has not
substantially complied with the material terms and conditions of this
Ordinance, the Municipality shall have the right to petition the OCTV,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47, for appropriate action, including modification
and/or termination of the Certificate of Approval; provided however, that the
Municipality shall first have given the Company written notice of all alleged
A. TOWNSHIP OR MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Dennis, County of
Cape May, State of New Jersey.
B. COMPANY — The grantee of rights under this Ordinance and is known
as Comcast of South Jersey, LLC.
C. ACT OR CABLE TELEVISION ACT — Chapter 186 of the General Laws
of New Jersey, and subsequent amendments thereto, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1,
et seq.
D. FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
E. BOARD OR BPU — The Board of Public Utilities, State of New Jersey.
F. OFFICE OR OCTV — The Office of Cable Television of the Board.
G. BASIC CABLE SERVICE — Any service tier, which includes the
retransmission of local television broadcast signals as defined by the
FCC.
H. APPLICATION — The Company's Application for Renewal of Municipal
Consent.
I. PRIMARY SERVICE AREA OR PSA — Consists of the area of the
Municipality currently served with existing plant as set forth in the map
annexed to the Company's Application for Municipal Consent.
§ A213-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A213-4
1:681
instances of non-compliance and an opportunity to cure same within 90 days
of that notification.
§ A213-5. Franchise fee.
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act, the Company shall, during
each year of operation under the consent granted herein, pay to the
Municipality 2% of the gross revenues from all recurring charges in the
nature of subscription fees paid by subscribers for cable television
reception service in the Municipality or any higher amount permitted by the
Act or otherwise allowable by law, whichever is greater.
§ A213-6. Franchise territory.
The consent granted under this Ordinance for the renewal of the franchise
shall apply to the entirety of the Municipality and any property
subsequently annexed hereto.
§ A213-7. Extension of service.
The Company shall be required to proffer service to any residence or
business along any public right-of-way in the Primary Service Area, as
set forth in the Company's Application. Any extension of plant beyond the
Primary Service Area shall be governed by the Company's Line Extension
Policy, as set forth in the Company's Application.
§ A213-8. Construction requirements.
A. Restoration. In the event that the Company or its agents shall disturb
any pavement, street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways, or other surface
in the natural topography, the Company shall, at its sole expense,
restore and replace such places or things so disturbed in as good a
condition as existed prior to the commencement of said work.
B. Relocation. If at any time during the period of this consent, the
Municipality shall alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other
way or place the Company, upon reasonable notice by the Municipality,
shall remove, re-lay or relocate its equipment, at the expense of the
Company.
C. Removal or Trimming of Trees. During the exercise of its rights and
privileges under this franchise, the Company shall have the authority to
trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks or other
public places of the Municipality so as to prevent the branches of such
trees from coming in contact with the wires and cable of the Company.
Such trimming shall be only to the extent necessary to maintain proper
clearance of the Company's wire and cables.
§ A213-4 DENNIS CODE § A213-9
1:682
§ A213-9. Customer service.
In providing services to its customers, the Company shall comply with
N.J.A.C. 14:18-1, et seq. and all applicable state and federal statutes and
regulations. The Company shall strive to meet or exceed all voluntary
company and industry standards in the delivery of customer service and
shall be prepared to report on it to the Municipality upon written request of
the Municipal Administrator or Clerk.
§ A213-10. Municipal Complaint Officer.
The Office of Cable Television is hereby designated as the Complaint Officer
for the Municipality pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26(b). All complaints shall
be received and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.5. The
Municipality shall have the right to request copies of records and reports
pertaining to complaints by Municipality customers from the OCTV.
§ A213-11. Local office.
During the term of this franchise, and any renewal thereof, the Company
shall maintain a business office or agent in accordance with N.J.A.C.
14:18-5.1 for the purpose of receiving, investigating and resolving all local
complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions, and
similar matters.
§ A213-12. Performance bonds.
During the life of the franchise the Company shall give to the Municipality
a bond in the amount of $25,000. Such bond shall be to insure the faithful
performance of all undertakings of the Company as represented in its
application for municipal consent incorporated herein.
A. The Company shall continue to comply fully with all applicable state
and federal statutes and regulations regarding credit for outages, the
reporting of same to regulatory agencies and notification of same to
customers.
B. The Company shall continue to fully comply with all applicable state
and federal statutes and regulations regarding the availability of
devices for the hearing impaired and the notification of same to
customers.
C. The Company shall use every reasonable effort to meet or exceed
voluntary standards for telephone accessibility developed by the
National Cable Television Association (NCTA).
D. Nothing herein shall impair the right of any subscriber or the
Municipality to express any comment with respect to telephone
accessibility to the Complaint Officer, or impair the right of the
Complaint Officer to take any action that is permitted under law.
§ A213-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A213-13
1:683
§ A213-13. Subscriber rates.
The rates of the Company shall be subject to regulation as permitted by
federal and state law.
§ A213-14. Commitments by the Company.
§ A213-15. Educational and governmental access.
A. The Company shall provide Expanded Basic or a similar tier of cable
television service on one outlet at no cost to each qualified existing and
future school in the Municipality, public and private, elementary,
intermediate and secondary, provided the school is within 175 feet of
active cable distribution plant. Each additional outlet installed, if any,
shall be paid for on a materials plus labor basis by the school requesting
service.
B. The Company shall provide Expanded Basic or a similar tier of cable
television service at no cost on one outlet to each qualified existing and
future police, fire, rescue squad, emergency management facility, and
public library in the Municipality, provided the facility is located within
175 feet of active cable distribution plant. Each additional outlet
installed, if any, shall be paid for on a materials plus labor basis by the
Municipality.
C. Within six months of the issuance of a Renewal Certificate of Approval
by the BPU, the Company shall provide to the Municipality a one-time
Technology Grant in the amount of $15,000 to meet the technology and/
or cable related needs of the community.
D. Within six months of the issuance of an Automatic Renewal Certificate
of Approval by the BPU, the Company shall provide to the Municipality a
one-time Technology Grant in the amount of $10,000 to meet the
technology and/or cable related needs of the community.
E. The Communications Act of 1934, as amended [47 U.S.C. § 543 (b)],
allows the Company to itemize and/or identify: (1) the amount on the
subscriber bill assessed as a franchise fee and the identity of the
governmental authority to which the fee is paid; (2) the amount on the
bill assessed to satisfy any requirements imposed on the Company by
the cable franchise to support public, educational, and/or governmental
access channels or the use of such channels; and (3) any grants or other
fees on the bill or any tax, assessment, or charge of any kind imposed by
any governmental authority on the transaction between the operator
and the subscriber. The Company reserves these external cost, passthrough
rights to the extent permitted by law.
A. Within 12 months of receipt of a Renewal Certificate of Approval (COA)
by the OCTV, the Company shall provide one channel for Educational
and Governmental ("EG") access for the shared use by Dennis Township
and Woodbine Borough (collectively, "Municipalities") on the most basic
§ A213-13 DENNIS CODE § A213-15
1:684
§ A213-16. Emergency uses.
tier of service offered by the Company in accordance with Section 611
of the federal Cable Act, and as further set forth below. Educational
access message board content shall be provided by the governing
bodies of the Municipalities or other designated educational institution.
Government access bulletin board content shall be provided by the
Municipalities. Unused capacity may be utilized by the Company
subject to the provisions for "fallow time" below.
B. The Company will provide the initial Webus hardware and other
equipment necessary to broadcast EG bulletin board slides. The
Company will not be responsible for the maintenance of any equipment,
computers, or Internet service used by Dennis Township and its
designated EG administrators to access the web based Webus platform.
C. The Company does not relinquish its ownership of or ultimate right of
control over a channel by designating it for EG use. An EG access user
— whether an educational or government user — acquires no property
or other interest by virtue of the use of a channel so designated, and
may not rely on the continued use of a particular channel number, no
matter how long the same channel may have been designated for such
use.
D. The Company shall not exercise editorial control over any educational
or governmental use of channel capacity, except in accordance with
federal law the Company may refuse to transmit any educational or
governmental access program or portion of an educational or
governmental access program that contains obscenity, indecency, or
nudity.
E. The governing bodies of the Municipalities shall be responsible for
developing, implementing, and enforcing rules for EG Access
programming.
F. Educational access. "Educational access" shall mean non-commercial
use for educational purposes that is managed, scheduled, and
programmed by local educational institutions such as public or private
schools, but not "home schools," community colleges, and universities.
G. Government access. "Government access" shall mean noncommercial
use by the governing bodies of the Municipalities, for the purpose of
showing the public local government at work.
H. Company use of fallow time. Because blank or under-utilized EG
channels are not in the public interest, in the event the Municipalities
or other EG access users elect not to fully program their EG access
channel, Company may program unused time on those channels subject
to reclamation by the Municipality upon no less than 60 days written
notice.
§ A213-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A213-16
1:685
§ A213-17. Liability insurance.
The Company shall at all times maintain a comprehensive general liability
insurance policy with a single limit amount of $1,000,000 covering liability
for any death, personal injury, property damages or other liability arising
out of its construction and operation of the cable television system, and an
excess liability (or "umbrella") policy in the amount of $5,000,000.
§ A213-18. Incorporation of the Application.
All of the statements and commitments contained in the Application or
annexed thereto and incorporated therein, and any amendment thereto,
except as modified herein, are binding upon the Company as terms and
conditions of this consent. The Application and other relevant writings
submitted by the Company shall be annexed hereto and made a part hereof
by reference provided same do not conflict with applicable state or federal
law.
§ A213-19. Competitive equity.
Should the Municipality grant a franchise to construct, operate and
maintain a cable television system to any other person, corporation or
entity on terms materially less burdensome or more favorable than the
terms contained herein, the Company may substitute such language that
is more favorable or less burdensome for the comparable provision of this
Ordinance subject to the provisions of N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7.
§ A213-20. Separability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
Ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court
or federal or state agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and its validity or
unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of
the Ordinance.
§ A213-21. Third party beneficiaries.
Nothing in this franchise or in any prior agreement is or was intended to
confer third-party beneficiary status on any member of the public to enforce
the terms of such agreements or franchise.
A. The Company will comply with the Emergency Alert System ("EAS")
rules in accordance with applicable state and federal statutes and
regulations.
B. The Company shall in no way be held liable for any injury suffered by
the Municipality or any other person, during an emergency, if for any
reason the Municipality is unable to make full use of the cable television
system as contemplated herein.
§ A213-16 DENNIS CODE § A213-22
1:686
§ A213-22. Effective date.
This Ordinance shall take effect immediately upon issuance of a Renewal
Certificate of Approval from the BPU.
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of Legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Short Title
Placement
in Code
Supp.
No.
2010-05 10/5/2010 Vacate portion of street Special 26
2010-06 11/16/2010 Guidelines for street
vacations
Ch. 49 26
2010-07 11/16/2010 Administration and
operation of government
procedures
Ch. 41,
Article IV
26
2011-01 2/1/2011 Bond Ordinance Special 26
2011-02 5/3/2011 CAP Ordinance Special 26
2011-03 5/3/2011 Salary Ordinance Special 26
2011-04 6/7/2011 Alcoholic beverages-
Sundays
§ 57-8 26
2011-05 12/6/2011 Grant of easement Special 27
2012-01 3/20/2012 Uniform Construction
Code, exemption from
fees,
80-5.1 27
2012-02 3/20/2012 Dogs-Licenses and tags
required-fees
88-4 27
2012-03 4/16/2012 Dissolve Environmental
Commission; establish
Natural Resources
Committee
Ch. 17 27
2012-04 4/16/2012 Planning Board
(combine with Zoning
Board of Adjustment )
185-67 27
2012-05 4/16/2012 Township Engineer Ch. 35, Art.
VI
27
2012-06 4/16/2012 CAP Special 27
§ A213-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:687
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Short Title
Placement
in Code
Supp.
No.
2012-07 6/4/2012 Continuation of
appointment of
Municipal Engineer
Special 28
2012-08 8/21/2012 Fees for vital statistics Ch. 98, Art. V 28
2012-09 9/4/2012 All-terrain vehicles Ch. 130, Art.
II
28
2012-10 10/16/2012 Salary Special 28
2012-11 12/4/2012 Reappropriation Special 28
2012-12 12/28/2012 Campground permitsmaximum
number
75-11 28
2013-01 2/5/2013 Emergency
appropriation
Special 28
2013-02 5/7/2013 CAP Bank Special 28
2013-03 7/15/2013 Repeal and replace
Chapter 165,
Subdivision of Land and
Chapter 185, Zoning
See Land Use
Volume
28
2013-04 6/18/2014 Charitable solicitation
on roadways
78-1 29
2013-05 Bond Special 29
2014-01 3/4/2014 Dissolve Natural
Resources; establish
Environmental
Commission
Chapter 17 29
2014-02 Special emergency Special 29
2014-03 3/18/2014 Bond Special 29
2014-04 4/28/2014 CAP Special 29
2014-05 5/20/2014 Salary Special 29
2014-06 Not adopted 30
2014-07 9/16/2014 Amends Ch. A213,
Cable Television
Ch. A213 30
2014-08 11/18/2014 Salary and
compensation
Special 30
2014-09 11/18/2014 Amends Ch. 40,
Personnel Policies; 40-2,
cost of coverage (retired
employees); 40-4,
retiree health benefits,
policy established
Ch. 40 30
§ DL-1 DENNIS CODE § DL-1
1:688
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Short Title
Placement
in Code
Supp.
No.
2015-01 3/17/2015 Amends Ch. 80, Uniform
Construction Code;
80-5, fees
Ch. 80 30
2015-02 5/5/2015 CAP Bank Special 30
2015-03 5/5/2015 Bond Special 30
2015-04 6/1/2015 Salary and
compensation
Special 30
2015-05 7/21/2015 Bond Special 30
2015-06 8/3/2015 Amends Ch. 35, Officers
and employees, adds
Article VII, Purchasing
Agent
Ch. 35 30
2015-16 9/1/2015 Salary Special 31
2016-01 5/3/2016 CAP Bank Special 31
2016-02 5/3/2016 Appropriation Special 31
2016-03 5/17/2016 Salary Special 31
2016-04 9/6/2016 Appropriation Special 31
2016-05 9/6/2016 Amends Ch. 23 False
Alarms in entirety
Ch. 23 31
2016-06 10/4/2016 Adds Ch. 146 Property,
Vacant, Abandoned and
Nuisance
Ch. 146 31
2016-07 10/4/2016 Amends Ch. 88 Dogs;
Article II Additional
Regulations for Owners,
Caretakers, Guardians
or Handlers
(88-11-88-16)
Ch. 88 31
2016-08 11/15/2016 Amends Ch. 139, Parks
and Recreation; 139-13,
Fee Schedule
Ch. 139 31
2016-09 12/6/2016 Amends Ch. 44
Purchasing; 44-6
Standard purchasing
procedures
Ch. 44 31
2017-01 Bond Special 32
2017-02 CAP Bank Special 32
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:689
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Short Title
Placement
in Code
Supp.
No.
2017-03 5/23/2017 Amends Ch. 57
Alcoholic Beverages;
57-6 License Fee
Ch. 57 32
2017-04 Bond Special 32
2017-05 8/22/2017 Repeal and replace Ch.
105 Flood Damage
Prevention; 105-1-105-7
Ch. 105 32
2017-06 8/22/2017 Amends Ch. 146
Property, Vacant,
Abandoned and
Nuisance; 146-1, 146-2,
146-5; adds 146-7,
146-8
Ch. 146 32
2017-07 Salary Special 32
2017-08 Reappropriation Capital
Funds
Special 32
2017-09 Reappropriation Capital
Funds
Special 32
2018-01 4/10/2018 Ch. 185 Zoning, Land
Use and Development;
185-7 Definitions
Ch. 185 32
2018-02 CAP Bank Special 32
2018-03 Salary Special 32
2018-04 Bond Special 32
2018-05 5/22/2018 Ch. 72 Business
Licenses; 72-26
Business Licenses,
Peddler’s, Hawker’s and
Vendor’s Licenses,
Application
Ch. 72 32
2018-06 Salary Special 32
2018-07 6/12/2018 Ch. 109 Games of
Chance; adds 109.2
Issuing authority
Ch. 109 32
2018-08 Salary Special 32
2018-09 Salary Special 32
2018-10 11/13/2018 Establishes Ch. 152,
Rental Units, Art. I
Standards of Conduct,
152-1- 152-3
Ch. 152 32
§ DL-1 DENNIS CODE § DL-1
1:690
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Short Title
Placement
in Code
Supp.
No.
2018-11 11/13/2018 Amends Ch. 165
Subdivision of Land,
165-22 Notices to
Pinelands Commission;
Amends Ch. 185 Zoning,
185-7 Definitions,
185-49 Special
Procedures for
Development, 185-58
Water Quality and
Treatment
Ch. 165, Ch.
185
32
2018-12 12/11/2018 Establishes Ch. 162B,
Storm Drains-Improper
Disposal of Waste,
162B-1-162B-6
Ch. 162B 32
2019-01 3/26/2019 Zoning, amends 185-10,
zoning map, amendment
185-10 33
2019-02 3/26/2019 Purchasing, Amends
44-6, Standard
purchasing procedures;
44-7, Emergency
purchases; 44-8,
Availability of funds;
44-9, Responsibility of
vendor
44-6, 44-7,
44-8, 44-9
33
2019-03 3/26/2019 Officers and Employees,
Amends 35-11Powers
and Duties (Township
Administrator)
35-11 33
2019-04 4/9/2019 Parks and Recreation,
amends 139-13, Fee
schedule
139-13 33
2019-05 4/9/2019 Salaries Special 33
2019-06 4/23/2019 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
Special 33
2019-07 6/11/2019 Salaries Special 33
2019-08 5/28/2019 Bond Special 33
2019-09 7/23/2019 Fees, amends 98-5,
Land Use Board fee
schedule
98-5 33
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:691
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Short Title
Placement
in Code
Supp.
No.
2019-10 9/24/2019 Parks and Recreation,
amends 138-1
Prohibited acts
139-1 33
2019-11 12/10/2019 Appropriation Special 33
2020-01 3/10/2020 Salaries Special 33
2020-02 4/14/2020 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
Special 33
§ DL-1 DENNIS CODE § DL-1
1:692