Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 9-20-2010 by Ord. No. 1439-2010]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Borough of Edgewater of
a general and permanent nature adopted by the Mayor and Council of the
Borough of Edgewater, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters
and sections by General Code, and consisting of Chapters 1 through 306,
together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and
enacted as the "Code of the Borough of Edgewater," hereinafter known and
referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede the 1975 Code of the Borough
of Edgewater and all other general and permanent ordinances enacted prior
to the enactment of this Code, except such ordinances as are hereinafter
expressly saved from repeal or continued in force.
§ 1-3. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Borough Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the public
until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance shall
be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the Borough of
Edgewater by impressing thereon the Seal of the Borough, as provided by
law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk of
the Borough, to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Borough of Edgewater"
shall be understood and intended to include such additions and
amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the
Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:3
§ 1-6. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Borough of Edgewater, pursuant to law, shall cause this
Adopting Ordinance to be published, in the manner required, in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. Sufficient copies of the
Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection by the
public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
publication of this Adopting Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of
the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered
to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk or someone authorized and directed by
the Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the
Code required to be filed in his or her office for the use of the public. All
changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-8. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of a fee
authorized by the Borough. The Clerk shall also arrange for procedures for
the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-9. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Borough of
Edgewater to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or
any part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to one or more
of the following: a fine of not more than $2,000, imprisonment for not more
than 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, in the
discretion of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-10. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-6 EDGEWATER CODE § 1-11
1:4
§ 1-11. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-12. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
Adopting Ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-13. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-12 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to June 14, 2010.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
the Borough's indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges or the approval
of the municipal budget.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:5
§ 1-14. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
L. Any ordinance adopting or amending the Zoning Map.
M. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
N. Ordinance Nos. 1420-2009, 1426-2009 and 1427-2010.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the Mayor and Council that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed
had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. Nomenclature. The following changes in nomenclature have been made
throughout the Code:
Change To
State Department of
Health
State Department of Health and Senior
Services
Juvenile and Domestic
Relations Court
Superior Court, Chancery Division, Family
Part
Department of
Conservation
Department of Environmental Protection
Construction Code
Official and Building
Inspector
Construction Official
Construction Department Building Department
C. Statutory references. Throughout the Code, statutory references have
been revised to consistently cite them in the following form: "N.J.S.A.
__________." If a reference was outdated or repealed, it was changed to
reflect the new statute. If a statutory reference appeared in a footnote it
was added to the section's text if appropriate.
D. Violations and penalty sections. Throughout the Code, penalty sections
have been amended (or added) to refer to the general penalty in
Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty. If no penalty section was present
in the original ordinance a section reading as set forth below was
added: §§ 107-5, 121-9, 121-12, 179-6, 188-5, 200-5, 210-6, 226-6,
235-16A, 264-3, 271-17, 293-27, 293-44, 293-47, 293-51, 310-4, 335-3,
335-15B, 335-19, 339-17, 339-38, 344-7, 362-19, 368-4, 368-9, 368-11,
§ 1-13 EDGEWATER CODE § 1-14
1:6
374-17, 380-16, 380-32, 380-35, 386-8, 397-14E, 402-44, 410-10, 421-5,
432-23, 438-5, 444-9.
"Violations of the provisions of this chapter (or article) shall be
punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty."
E. In addition, the changes, amendments or revisions as set forth in
Schedule A attached hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith,
to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance. (Chapter
and section number references are to the ordinances as they have been
renumbered and appear in the Code.)1
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-14E, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 9-20-2010 by Ord. No.
1439-2010." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in
the Borough offices.
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:7

ARTICLE II
General Penalty
[Adopted 9-3-1975 by Ord. No. 580-75; amended in its entirety
9-20-2010 by Ord. No. 1439-2010]
§ 1-15. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is otherwise specifically provided, any person
violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of any chapter
or article of this Code, or of any standard code adopted by such chapter
or article and made a part thereof, shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punishable by one or more of the following: by a fine of not more than
$2,000; by a prison term not to exceed 90 days; and/or by a period of
community service not to exceed 90 days, for each such offense, in the
discretion of the Judge. The continuation of such violation for each
successive day shall constitute a separate offense, and the person or
persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the violation may be
punished as provided above for each separate offense.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:9
Chapter 6
BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
For ordinances adopted by the Board of
Health — See Part III of this Code.
Residency requirements for employees — See
Ch. 37, Art. I.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 41.
Recreation Department — See Ch. 92, Art. I.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 96.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 293.
Trees — See Ch. 421.
§ 1-15 EDGEWATER CODE § 1-15
1:10
ARTICLE I
Board of Health
[Adopted 9-3-1975 by Ord. No. 575-75 (Ch. 45 of the 1975 Code)]
§ 6-1. Establishment of Board.
A local Board of Health shall be created and established and the same is
hereby created and established in said Borough of Edgewater pursuant to
the laws of the State of New Jersey.
§ 6-2. Membership. [Amended 6-21-2004 by Ord. No. 1302-2004]
The Board of Health shall consist of five members, and two alternates, who
shall be appointed in the same manner as are appointive officers of said
Borough and who shall perform such duties as are or may be provided by
law. Alternate members shall be designated at the time of appointment as
"Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2."
§ 6-3. Terms of office. [Amended 6-21-2004 by Ord. No. 1902-2004]
§ 6-4. Filling of vacancies.
Any vacancies occurring shall be filled by appointment in the same manner
in which the original appointments were made, but for the unexpired term
only.
§ 6-5. Adoption of rules; election of President.
The Board of Health shall adopt rules and regulations for its own
government and shall elect a President from its own members.
§ 6-6. Appointment of health officers and staff.
The Board of Health shall appoint a Registrar of Vital Statistics, Secretary
and Health Officer, and may also appoint such other officers or assistants as
said Board of Health may deem necessary. All appointees of said Board of
Health shall be governed by the rules of said Board, and may be removed
for cause by said Board or as provided by the Civil Service Rules of the State
of New Jersey. The marshals and police of the Borough, when on police duty,
shall be special sanitary inspectors, and they shall promptly report to the
A. Except as provided in Subsection B of this section, the term of office of
the members of said Board of Health shall be as follows: one member
thereof shall be appointed for one year; two members thereof shall be
appointed for two years; two members thereof shall be appointed for
three years. After the original appointments, all terms shall be for three
years.
B. The terms of alternate members shall be for two years, except that the
terms of the alternate members first appointed shall be two years for
Alternate No. 1 and one year for Alternate No. 2.
§ 6-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-6
1:11
Board of Health every violation of the health ordinances of the Borough
which may come within their observation or knowledge.
§ 6-6 EDGEWATER CODE § 6-6
1:12
ARTICLE II
Local Assistance Board
[Adopted 9-3-1975 by Ord. No. 576-75 (Ch. 54 of the 1975 Code)]
§ 6-7. Creation of Board; Director of Welfare.
There shall be created and established a Local Assistance Board and the
office of a Director of Welfare, as provided by law.
§ 6-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-7
1:13

ARTICLE III
Shade Tree Board
[Adopted 9-3-1975 by Ord. No. 577-75 (Ch. 89 of the 1975 Code)]
§ 6-8. Board established; membership.
§ 6-9. Term of office.
§ 6-10. Organization; officers; compensation.
The Shade Tree Board shall organize within 60 days after the appointment
of its total membership for the remainder of the then calendar year, and
thereafter annually by the election of one of its members as Chairman and
the appointment of a Secretary, who need not be a member. The members
of the Board and the Secretary shall serve without compensation.
§ 6-11. Filling of vacancies.
Any vacancy occurring by reason of death, resignation or removal of any
member of the Board shall be filled for the unexpired term by the Mayor of
the Borough of Edgewater.
§ 6-12. Scope and responsibilities.
The scope and responsibilities of the Shade Tree Board shall be as follows:
A. The Borough of Edgewater Shade Tree Board is hereby established.
B. The Board shall consist of five members, and two alternates, appointed
by the Mayor of the Borough of Edgewater, who shall be residents of
this municipality and shall serve without compensation. [Amended
6-3-2002 by Ord. No. 1240-2002]
A. The first members of the Board shall be appointed within 90 days after
the effective date of this article, and their terms of office shall
commence on January 1 next succeeding such appointment. [Amended
6-3-2002 by Ord. No. 1240-2002]
(1) Two members shall serve for a term of one year.
(2) Two members shall serve for a term of two years.
(3) One member shall serve for a term of three years.
(4) The two alternate members shall each serve for a term of one year.
B. The term of each appointee shall be designated in his appointment. All
subsequent appointments, except to fill vacancies, shall be for the full
term of three years, to take effect on January 1 next succeeding such
appointment. In the event that the membership of any Board is
increased, the new members shall be appointed in such manner that the
terms shall expire in accordance with the foregoing.
§ 6-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-12
1:15
§ 6-13. Inspection of proposed subdivisions; report to Planning
Board.
§ 6-14. Additional powers.
The Shade Tree Board shall have the power to make contracts and incur
debts, but shall not have the power to adopt ordinances. The Shade Tree
Board, in making contracts or expenditures, shall not exceed the amount
appropriated for such purpose by the governing body.
§ 6-15. Powers of Mayor and Council.
The Mayor and Council shall have the power to:
A. To prepare programs and plans for consideration by the governing body
with respect to the purchase, planting, care, rearing, trimming,
preserving and control of the shade and ornamental trees of the
Borough.
B. To meet with the governing body upon its request for discussion of
programs and recommendations.
C. To consult regularly with the governing body concerning the shade tree
program of the Borough.
D. To encourage arboriculture.
A. When application for a subdivision of land is first submitted to the
Planning Board, the Planning Board will, within one week, advise the
Shade Tree Board of the desired subdivision, whereupon the Board
shall inspect the property involved, noting the number, type and
location of the various trees situate on the land proposed to be
subdivided, their approximate age and density of growth, together with
the topography, and taking into account the necessity for cutting or
filling the land to meet subdivision requirements.
B. Within 10 days after receipt of such information, the Shade Tree Board
shall make a written report of its findings to the Planning Board,
together with any recommendation it might desire to make regarding
the safeguarding of desirable trees during the course of the subdivision
and the erection of buildings in such development.
A. Regulate and control the use of the grounds surrounding the shade and
ornamental trees and shrubbery on public land, so far as may be
necessary for their proper growth, care and protection.
B. Move or require the removal of any tree or part thereof dangerous to
public safety.
C. Administer treatment to or remove any tree situate upon private
property which is believed to harbor a disease or insects readily
communicable to neighboring healthy trees in the care of the
§ 6-12 EDGEWATER CODE § 6-15
1:16
§ 6-16. Assessment of costs.
§ 6-17. Appropriations for expenses.
The Mayor and Council shall annually appropriate such sum as it may
deem necessary for the purchase of trees and shrubbery, the purchase
of necessary equipment and materials and for the cost of services of the
promotion of the work of the Shade Tree Board.
§ 6-18. Member of Council to oversee work.
A member of the Council shall be charged with the duty of overseeing the
program of work undertaken by the Mayor and Council pursuant to this
article. Said member shall make monthly reports to the Borough governing
body on the work undertaken pursuant to the program provided for herein.
§ 6-19. Authority of Mayor and Council not superseded.
Nothing contained in this article shall be held to take away or diminish
any of the powers or authority of the Mayor and Council over the trees or
shrubbery in the Borough of Edgewater within its jurisdiction, or to give
any other commission or board any power or authority with respect to such
trees or shrubbery.
municipality, and enter upon private property for that purpose, with the
consent of the owner thereof, provided the suspected condition is first
confirmed by a certificate of the Department of Agriculture.
A. The initial costs of all trees planted by the Borough, the cost of planting
the same, the cost of the post and boxes or guards used for the
protection of the trees and the cost of the removal of any tree or part
thereof dangerous to public safety shall, if so determined by the
Borough governing body, be a charge upon the real estate in front of
which such tree or trees shall be planted or removed as an
improvement thereof. No charge shall be made against the property or
the owner thereof where a planting to replace a tree or trees previously
planted by the Borough is done, or where a planting is made in
connection with a commemorative ceremony instigated by the Borough,
or where a planting is made in connection with any educational
demonstration.
B. Any cost assessed as provided in this section shall be paid by the owner
to the Borough Clerk. Upon failure of the owner to make payment to the
Borough Clerk, said Borough Clerk shall certify the cost to the Tax
Collector, and the cost assessed shall thereupon become a lien upon
said real estate and shall be included in the next tax bill rendered to the
owner or owners thereof and be collected in the same manner as other
taxes against that property.
§ 6-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-19
1:17

ARTICLE IV
Recreation Advisory Council
[Adopted 3-15-1999 by Ord. No. 1150-99 (Ch. 74 of the 1975 Code)]
§ 6-20. Creation; purposes.
There is hereby created a Recreation Advisory Council in the Borough
of Edgewater. The Recreation Advisory Council shall have as its purpose
the providing of leisure activities, in many different forms, for Borough
residents of all ages. Such activities may include but are not limited to
athletics and related physical activity programs, social functions and
cultural events.
§ 6-21. Composition; terms of office. [Amended 2-18-2003 by Ord.
No. 1263-2003]
The Recreation Advisory Council initially consisted of seven members, all
of whom are required to be residents at the Borough of Edgewater.
Appointments to the Council are made by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Borough Council. The terms of office of the initial Council
were staggered, with three members being appointed for three years, two
members being appointed for two years, and two members being appointed
for one year, retroactive to January 1, 1999. Thereafter, the terms are for
three years. In the event a vacancy occurs on the Council, the term is
to be filled for the unexpired terms in the same manner as the original
appointment. Effective as of the date of this ordinance,2 the size of the
Recreation Advisory Council shall be increased to nine members. One of the
two new members pursuant to this ordinance shall be initially appointed for
a one-year term, retroactive to January 1, 2003, and the term of the other
member appointed shall be for two years, retroactive to January 1, 2003.
Thereafter, the terms shall be for three years.
§ 6-22. Organization.
§ 6-23. Duties.
A. The Recreation Advisory Council shall annually elect a Chairman and
such other officers as the Recreation Advisory Council may deem
necessary.
B. The Recreation Advisory Council may adopt by laws for its
administration and establish rules and regulations for its activities;
provided, however, that such bylaws, rules and regulations shall be
subject to the approval of the Mayor and Borough Council.
A. The Recreation Advisory Council shall advise the coordinator of
scheduling recreational activities in the coordination of recreation
2. Editor's Note: "This ordinance" refers to Ord. No. 1263-2003.
§ 6-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-23
1:19
§ 6-24. Studies; recommendations and reports.
programs, the development of new initiatives, and the management of
existing programs.
B. The Recreation Advisory Council shall advise the coordinator in the
preparation of the annual budget for the Recreation Department.
C. The Recreation Advisory Council shall maintain communication with
recreational quasi-municipal organizations in order to coordinate the
use of facilities and establish consistent policies and cooperation among
the various groups.
D. The Recreation Advisory Council shall develop guidelines for the
recreational use of playgrounds and recreational facilities in the
Borough consistent with rules governing the use thereof as may be
adopted from time to time by the Mayor and Council.
E. The Recreation Advisory Council shall encourage and plan special
entertainment activities for all the citizens of the Borough throughout
the year.
F. The Recreation Advisory Council shall advise the Mayor and Borough
Council of any opportunities or needs that should be addressed in the
area of recreation.
G. The Recreation Advisory Council, shall maintain communication with
other municipal bodies, such as the library and the schools, to minimize
duplication of efforts and to foster joint programs.
A. The Recreation Advisory Council may make recommendations to the
Mayor and Borough Council as to the establishment of any new staff
positions it deems necessary for the successful operation of the
Borough's recreational program. The responsibility for the hiring of
such employees shall be vested with the Mayor and Borough Council
and any such employees shall be under the immediate supervision of
the coordinator of scheduling recreational activities, who in turn shall
be under the supervision of the Borough Administrator.
B. On or before May 15 of each year, the Recreation Advisory Council, in
cooperation with the coordinator of scheduling recreational activities
shall prepare and submit to the Borough Administrator a proposed
budget for the Borough's recreation program. Prior thereto, the
Recreation Advisory Council shall obtain and review budget requests
from each of the various recreational program organizations which
shall be used in the budget preparation process. The budgetary
requests from the various recreational organizations shall also be
submitted to the Borough Administrator for the purpose of
substantiating the Recreation Advisory Council's suggested budget.
C. The Recreation Advisory Council shall also study such matters as may
be referred to it by the Mayor and Borough Council and shall report its
§ 6-23 EDGEWATER CODE § 6-24
1:20
findings and conclusions thereon, in writing, to the Mayor and Borough
Council as soon as reasonably possible.
§ 6-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-24
1:21
Chapter 10
CIVIL SERVICE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Employment benefits and requirements — See
Ch. 37.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 71.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 81.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 96.
§ 10-1. Adoption of statute approved by referendum.
At the election held on November 2, 1948, there was submitted to the voters
of the Borough of Edgewater, hereinafter referred to as "said municipality"
the question of whether or not said municipality should adopt the provisions
of the Civil Service Act of the State of New Jersey, and said adoption
was duly approved and authorized by a majority of the voters of said
municipality.
§ 10-2. Survey of positions completed.
The New Jersey Civil Service Commission, at the request of the Borough of
Edgewater, has completed a survey of all positions within the Borough of
Edgewater.
§ 10-3. Report of survey; description of schedules.
Said Civil Service Commission has forwarded a report of said survey,
consisting of the following schedules.
§ 10-4. Classes of positions created and adopted; copies on file.
The classes of positions and the duties assigned thereto as set forth in
the schedules stated above, three copies of which are filed in the office of
the Borough Clerk, are incorporated herein by reference and are hereby
created and adopted.
A. Schedule 1:
(1) A list of employees, together with the date of last permanent
appointment.
(2) Their present status, salary, title and divisional classification.
(3) Their proposed status, title and divisional classification.
B. Schedule 2: Class specifications in alphabetical order, including
definitions, examples of work, educational and experience
requirements and knowledge and abilities.
§ 6-24 EDGEWATER CODE § 10-4
1:22
Chapter 14
CLAIMS APPROVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bylaws of Mayor and Council — See Ch. A551.
§ 14-1. Submission of bills.
All bills or demands against the Borough shall be fully itemized and written
on the legal form provided by the Borough. The claimant shall be sworn to
the correctness of his demand and shall present the same to the Borough
Clerk not later than the Friday preceding the next regular meeting of the
Council. In order to determine the validity of claims, prevent duplication
of the same and to establish their propriety, delivery slips for all materials,
supplies and equipment shall be presented to the Borough Clerk. All bills
shall be examined and passed by the Borough Clerk before they are
presented to the Committee Chairman for approval.
§ 14-2. Resolution for payment of bills.
The resolution for payment of bill shall direct that warrants be drawn and
charged to the proper accounts.
§ 14-3. Approval of bills; time limit.
All bills authorized to be paid shall be presented to the Mayor for his
approval within five days from the date of adoption of resolution authorizing
payment.
§ 14-4. Method of disbursement of moneys for payments.
The method of disbursing moneys for payment of all claims approved by the
Mayor and Council shall be by check drawn on the treasury of the Borough
with signatures of the Mayor, Treasurer and Borough Clerk affixed.
§ 14-5. Method of payment of salaries.
The method of payment of salaries, wages or other compensation for
services of employees of the Borough shall be by check drawn on the
treasury with the signatures of the Mayor, Treasurer and Borough Clerk
affixed.
§ 14-6. Requirements for paying out moneys.3
The Borough shall not pay out any of its moneys:
3. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 10-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-6
1:23
Chapter 20
COURT, MUNICIPAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 41.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 96.
Access to public records — See Ch. 318.
A. Unless the person claiming or receiving the same shall first present a
detailed bill of items or demand, specifying particularly how the bill or
demand is made up, with the certification of the party claiming payment
that it is correct. The governing body may, by resolution, require an
affidavit in lieu of the said certification, and the Clerk or disbursing
officer of the Borough may take such affidavit without cost; and
B. Unless it carries a written or electronic certification of some officer or
duly designated employee of the Borough having knowledge of the facts
that the goods have been received by, or the services rendered to, the
Borough.
C. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A of this section, upon
adoption by the Local Finance Board of rules adopted pursuant to the
Administrative Procedure Act, P.L. 1968, c. 410 (N.J.S.A. 52:14B-1 et
seq.) that provide for procedures to be followed by local units and under
those circumstances deemed appropriate by the Board, the Borough
shall be permitted to pay out its moneys without requiring a
certification of the party claiming payment as otherwise required by
Subsection A of this section. Such circumstances may include, but shall
not be limited to:
(1) When payment to vendors is required in advance of the delivery of
certain materials or services that cannot be obtained from any
other source at comparable prices;
(2) When ordering, billing and payment transactions for goods or
services are made through a computerized electronic transaction;
or
(3) When claim or demand is less than a threshold set by the Board and
the certification is not readily obtainable by the contracting unit;
but such exceptions shall not include reimbursement of employee
expenses or payment for personal services.
§ 14-6 EDGEWATER CODE § 14-6
1:24
ARTICLE I
Establishment
[Adopted 11-3-1948 by Ord. No. 322; readopted 8-1-1967 by Ord.
No. 476 (§§ 30-1 to 30-5 and 30-6 to 30-10 of the 1975 Code)]
§ 20-1. Court established.
There is hereby established, in accordance with and pursuant to the
authority contained in the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq., a Municipal
Court in and for the Borough of Edgewater.
§ 20-2. Name of Court.
The name of such court shall be "Municipal Court of the Borough of
Edgewater."
§ 20-3. Appointment of Judge; term of office. [Added 3-15-1955 by
Ord. No. 374; readopted 8-1-1967 by Ord. No. 476]
The Judge of the Municipal Court of Edgewater shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council. He shall serve for a term
of three years from the date of his appointment and until his successor is
appointed and qualified.
§ 20-4. Designation of time of holding Court; Judge shall preside.
[Added 3-15-1955 by Ord. No. 374; readopted 8-1-1967 by Ord. No.
476]
The Judge shall designate the days when sessions of said Court will be held
and the hour at which the Court will be in session, subject to the approval
of the Administrative Director of the Courts. He shall preside at sessions of
the Municipal Court of Edgewater.
§ 20-5. Salary of Judge. [Added 3-15-1955 by Ord. No. 374;
readopted 8-1-1967 by Ord. No. 476; amended 9-3-1975 by Ord. No.
581-75]
The Judge shall receive an annual salary as is set forth in the current annual
Salary Ordinance of the Borough of Edgewater.4
§ 20-6. Appointment of Court Administrator. [Added 3-15-1955 by
Ord. No. 374; readopted 8-1-1967 by Ord. No. 4765]
The Court Administrator of the Municipal Court of Edgewater shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council.
4. Editor's Note: Said Salary Ordinance is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
5. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 20-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-7
1:25
§ 20-7. Duties of Court Administrator. [Added 3-15-1955 by Ord. No.
374; readopted 8-1-1967 by Ord. No. 476; amended 2-20-1980 by
Ord. No. 661-806]
The Court Administrator shall keep the records of the Municipal Court of
Edgewater and shall supervise all other judicial work of said Court.
§ 20-8. Salary of Court Administrator. [Added 3-15-1955 by Ord. No.
374; readopted 8-1-1967 by Ord. No. 476; amended 9-3-1975 by
Ord. No. 581-75; 9-20-2010 by Ord. No. 1439-2010]
The Court Administrator shall receive an annual salary as is set forth in the
current annual Salary Ordinance of the Borough of Edgewater.7
§ 20-9. Position of Deputy Court Administrator established. [Added
2-20-1980 by Ord. No. 661-80; amended 9-20-2010 by Ord. No.
1439-2010]
There is hereby established in the Borough of Edgewater the position of
Deputy Court Administrator of the Municipal Court. The Deputy Court
Administrator shall assist the Court Administrator in keeping the records of
the Municipal Court of Edgewater and shall perform such other judicial and
clerical work as directed by the Court Administrator.
§ 20-10. Appointment of Deputy Court Administrator. [Added
2-20-1980 by Ord. No. 661-80; amended 9-20-2010 by Ord. No.
1439-2010]
The Deputy Court Administrator of the Municipal Court of Edgewater shall
be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council.
§ 20-11. Salary of Deputy Court Administrator. [Added 2-20-1980 by
Ord. No. 661-80; amended 9-20-2010 by Ord. No. 1439-2010]
The Deputy Court Administrator shall receive an annual salary as set forth
in the current annual Salary Ordinance of the Borough of Edgewater.8
§ 20-12. Court Seal. [Added 9-3-1975 by Ord. No. 581-75]
The Municipal Court shall have an official seal which shall bear the impress
of the name of the Court.
§ 20-13. Location of Court. [Added 9-3-1975 by Ord. No. 581-75]
The Municipal Court shall be located in the Borough Hall.
6. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
7. Editor's Note: Said Salary Ordinance is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
8. Editor's Note: Said Salary Ordinance is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 20-7 EDGEWATER CODE § 20-13
1:26
ARTICLE II
Municipal Prosecutor
[Adopted 12-18-1984 by Ord. No. 800-84 (§ 30-5.1 of the 1975
Code)]
§ 20-14. Creation of office.
There is hereby created the office of Municipal Prosecutor of the Borough
of Edgewater.
§ 20-15. Duties of Municipal Prosecutor. [Amended 3-20-2017 by
Ord. No. 1541-2017]
The Municipal Prosecutor shall be an attorney at law of the State of New
Jersey and shall prosecute on behalf of the Borough of Edgewater any
case to be tried before the Municipal Judge of the Borough of Edgewater
whenever requested by the governing body of the Borough of Edgewater,
Borough Attorney, the Chief of Police and/or Police Director of the Borough
of Edgewater and the Municipal Judge of the Borough of Edgewater, and
the Municipal Prosecutor shall perform such other legal duties as may be
assigned to him by the governing body.
§ 20-16. Appointment; term of office.
The Municipal Prosecutor shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of the Council. He shall serve for a period of one year and until
his successor is appointed and qualified.
§ 20-17. Salary. [Amended 9-20-2010 by Ord. No. 1439-2010]
The Municipal Prosecutor shall receive an annual salary as is set forth in
the annual Salary Ordinance of the Borough of Edgewater.
§ 20-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-17
1:27

ARTICLE III
Public Defender
[Adopted 12-18-1984 by Ord. No. 800-84 (§§ 30-5.2 and 30-5.3 of
the 1975 Code)]
§ 20-18. Municipal Public Defender.
§ 20-19. Application fee for use of services of Municipal Public
Defender. [Added 4-18-1994 by Ord. No. 1028-94; amended
2-18-1998 by Ord. No. 1116-98]
Any applicant applying for representation by the Municipal Public Defender
shall be required to pay an application fee of $200. Such fee shall be
required to be paid upon application or within the discretion of the
Municipal Court Judge over a period not to exceed four months. The
Municipal Court Judge shall have the right to waive the fee, or part of
the fee, only upon a clear and convincing showing that the application fee
represents an unreasonable burden on the person seeking representation.
A. Creation of office. There is hereby created the office of Municipal Public
Defender of the Borough of Edgewater.
B. Duties of Municipal Public Defender. The Municipal Public Defender
shall provide for the legal representation of any person charged with a
motor vehicle or disorderly persons offense or with the violation of any
law, ordinance or regulation of a penal nature where there is a
likelihood that the person so charged, if convicted, will be subject to
imprisonment or, in the opinion of the court, any other consequence of
magnitude, where such defendant is deemed to be indigent and does
not have the present financial ability to secure competent legal
representation as provided by law. The Judge of the Municipal Court
shall determine whether a defendant satisfies the criteria in order to
provide representation to be rendered by the Municipal Public
Defender.
C. Appointment; term of office. The Municipal Public Defender shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council. He
shall serve for a term of one year and until his successor shall have been
appointed and qualified.
D. Salary. The Municipal Public Defender shall receive an annual salary as
is set forth in the annual Salary Ordinance of the Borough of
Edgewater.9
9. Editor's Note: Said Salary Ordinance is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 20-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-19
1:29
Chapter 22
CREDIT CARD PAYMENTS
§ 22-1. Purpose and authority.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 and 40:49-2, the Borough of Edgewater hereby
authorizes all departments to accept credit card payments for municipal
fees, effective May 1, 2017.
§ 22-2. Credit card authorization.
Effective May 1, 2017, the Borough of Edgewater shall accept credit card
payments for municipal fees. The credit card payment program shall be
implemented and supervised by the Administrator in conjunction with the
IT Department.
§ 22-3. Convenience fee.
The convenience fee for credit card payments shall be 2.75% of the overall
fee.
Chapter 26
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 45.
Police Department — See Ch. 81.
Public Works Department — See Ch. 87.
§ 26-1. Emergency Management Coordinator.
In the Borough of Edgewater there is hereby created the position of
Emergency Management Coordinator, who shall be appointed by the Mayor
from among the residents of the municipality. The Emergency Management
Coordinator, subject to fulfilling the requirements of this section, shall
serve for a term of three years. As a condition of his appointment and
his right to continue for the full term of his appointment, the Emergency
Management Coordinator shall have successfully completed at the time of
his appointment or within one year immediately following his appointment
the current approved home study course and the basic emergency
management workshop. The failure of the Emergency Management
Coordinator to fulfill such requirement within the period prescribed shall
disqualify the Coordinator from continuing in the office of Coordinator and
thereupon a vacancy in said office shall be deemed to have been created.
§ 20-19 EDGEWATER CODE § 26-2
1:30
§ 26-2. Removal of Emergency Management Coordinator.
The Governor may remove the Emergency Management Coordinator at any
time for cause. In such event, the Mayor of the Borough shall appoint a new
Emergency Management Coordinator with the approval of the Governor. If
the Mayor shall not appoint an Emergency Management Coordinator within
10 days after such office shall become vacant, the Governor may appoint
a temporary Emergency Management Coordinator, who shall serve and
perform all of the duties of that office until such time as a new Emergency
Management Coordinator shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
approval of the Governor.
§ 26-3. Deputy Emergency Management Coordinator.
Each Emergency Management Coordinator shall appoint a Deputy
Municipal Emergency Management Coordinator with the approval of the
Mayor. Wherever possible, such deputy shall be appointed from among the
salaried officers or employees of the municipality.
§ 26-4. Duties of Emergency Management Coordinator.
The Emergency Management Coordinator shall be responsible for the
planning, activating, coordinating, and the conduct of emergency
management operations within this municipality.
§ 26-5. Proclamation of state of local disaster emergency within
municipality.
Whenever, in his opinion, a disaster has occurred or is imminent in the
Borough of Edgewater, the Emergency Management Coordinator shall
proclaim a state of local disaster emergency within the Borough. The
Emergency Management Coordinator, in accordance with regulations
promulgated by the State Director of Emergency Management, shall be
empowered to issue and enforce such orders as may be necessary to
implement and carry out emergency management operations and to protect
the health, safety, and resources of the residents of the municipality.
§ 26-6. Aid in time of disaster or emergency.
No representative of the Borough shall request aid in time of disaster
or emergency directly from noncontiguous municipalities nor shall the
Borough send personnel or equipment into a disaster-stricken municipality
unless and until such aid has been directed by the County Emergency
Management Coordinator or his deputies. Specific exemptions from the
action of this section may be granted only by authority of the State Director
of Emergency Management.
§ 26-7. Local Emergency Management Council.
A. There is hereby created in the Borough of Edgewater an Emergency
Management Council. The Emergency Management Council shall be
§ 26-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-7
1:31
§ 26-8. Other Borough agencies or instrumentalities.
The Borough of Edgewater is authorized to create by resolution any other
agencies or instrumentalities that may be needed in order to meet the
problems presented by any emergency as defined by this act, not at
variance with such rules and regulations as shall be established by the
Governor. Any such agencies heretofore or hereafter established shall
immediately conform to the rules and regulations that may be adopted and
promulgated by the Governor.
§ 26-9. Officers to perform duties in accordance with rules and
regulations.
An officer of the Borough who is charged with duties pertaining to
emergency management planning shall perform his duties in accordance
with rules and regulations promulgated by the Governor.
§ 26-10. Violations as disorderly conduct; penalty; prosecution.
composed of not more than 15 members who shall be appointed by
the Mayor and shall hold office at the will and pleasure of the Mayor.
The Emergency Management Coordinator shall be a member and shall
serve as chairman of the Emergency Management Council. The
Emergency Management Council shall assist the Borough in
establishing the various local volunteer agencies needed to meet the
requirements of all local emergency management activities in
accordance with rules and regulations established by the Governor in
pursuance of the provisions of this act. The Emergency Management
Council is authorized, within the limits of appropriations, to establish
an adequate organization to assist in supervising and coordinating the
emergency management activities of the Borough. It shall be lawful
for the members of the Emergency Management Council also to be
members of other agencies created because of any emergency.
B. Any emergency management council heretofore appointed shall
become the Emergency Management Council provided for in this act
and shall thereafter continue to function as such local Emergency
Management Council, subject to the provisions of this act.
A. No person shall:
(1) Commit any unauthorized or otherwise unlawful act during the
threat or imminence of danger in any emergency that jeopardizes
the health, welfare and safety of the people;
(2) Commit any unauthorized or otherwise unlawful act during the
threat or imminence of danger during any emergency that
contributes to the loss of or destruction to property;
(3) Hamper, impede, or in any way interfere with any person who is
performing any function authorized under this chapter;
§ 26-7 EDGEWATER CODE § 26-10
1:32
Chapter 31
EMINENT DOMAIN
§ 31-1. Limitation on use of eminent domain powers.
The Borough shall not employ the power of eminent domain so as to deprive
owner-occupiers of residential real properties of such ownership rights in
the absence of a specified purpose:
Chapter 37
(4) Drive any motor vehicle in a prohibited area during a blackout or
while an air-raid alert is in progress or in any other manner
contrary to the rules and regulations covering any period of danger
or any emergency;
(5) Go within a prohibited area contrary to rules and regulations;
(6) Refuse to obey the lawful orders of any air raid warden, civilian
protection worker, or other person who is duly authorized to
perform any act or function during the threat or imminence of
danger or any emergency;
(7) Refuse to cooperate with any air raid warden, civilian protection
worker, or other person who is duly authorized to perform any act
or function in connection with activities during the threat or
imminence of danger or any emergency;
(8) Violate any order, rule or regulation adopted by the Governor and
promulgated as provided by this chapter; or
(9) Violate any other provision of this act declared herein to be
unlawful.
B. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall be
adjudged a disorderly person and shall be subject to imprisonment for a
term not to exceed six months or shall pay a fine not to exceed $1,000
or to both a fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court.
C. Prosecution for the imposition of a penalty pursuant to this section shall
be commenced in the Edgewater Municipal Court. The state shall be
required to prove all elements of the offense beyond a reasonable doubt
in order to obtain a conviction.
A. To transfer the property to public ownership for the creation of a public
use including, but not limited to, a road, hospital, military base, sewer,
water line, sidewalk, right-of-way, flood control, park, open space,
erosion control mechanism and the like; or
B. To transfer the property to private owners for the specific purpose of
making the same available for public use.
§ 26-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 31-1
1:33
EMPLOYMENT BENEFITS AND REQUIREMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 41.
Mayor and Council — See Ch. 65.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 71.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 77.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 96.
§ 31-1 EDGEWATER CODE § 31-1
1:34
ARTICLE I
Residency Requirements
[Adopted 9-4-1974 by Ord. No. 560-74 (Ch. 77 of the 1975 Code)]
§ 37-1. Residency required; exceptions; definition.
§ 37-2. Investigations of residence authorized.
The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Edgewater, or a duly appointed
agent, is hereby authorized to investigate into the residency of any officer,
employee or appointee to any board and to require the officer, employee or
appointee to any board to produce proof of bona fide residence.
§ 37-3. Notice of charges of nonresidence; hearing.
The officer, employee or appointee to any board shall be given a ten-day
notice setting forth the charge that he is not a bona fide resident of the
Borough of Edgewater. The notice shall also set forth the time and place of
hearing to be held by the Mayor and Council, and the officer, employee or
appointee to any board shall be entitled to a full hearing.
A. All officers, employees or appointees to any board employed by the
Borough of Edgewater, other than those having a statutory exemption,
are hereby required as a condition of their being initially hired or
appointed, to have their place of abode in the Borough of Edgewater
and to have a bona fide residence therein. Any statutory requirement
governing members of any body which mandates residency shall not be
deemed affected by this section. [Amended 10-21-2002 by Ord. No.
1251-2002]
B. A "bona fide resident," for the purpose of this article, is a person having
a permanent domicile within the Borough of Edgewater and one which
has not been adopted with the intention of again taking up or acquiring
a previous residence outside of the Borough of Edgewater.
C. Excluded from the operation and effect of this article are all those
employees that had been hired and were working for the Borough of
Edgewater prior to the passage of Ord. No. 560-74.10 [Added
9-16-1975 by Ord. No. 582-75]
D. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A of this section, the
Mayor and Council may appoint an officer or employee who is not a
bona fide resident of the Borough of Edgewater when, in the sole and
exclusive discretion of the governing body, the qualifications of such
appointee are deemed to be superior to other candidates, or when such
person is deemed to be the most suitable candidate for the position.
[Added 10-21-2002 by Ord. No. 1251-2002]
10.Editor's Note: This article, adopted 9-9-1974.
§ 37-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-4
1:35
§ 37-4. Failure to appear or comply with requirements cause for
dismissal.
Failure of any officer, employee or appointee to any board of the Borough
of Edgewater, other than those who have a statutory exemption, to appear
at the time and place of the hearing set forth in the notice or to comply
with the residence requirements shall be sufficient cause for his removal or
discharge from his service of the Borough of Edgewater.
§ 37-4 EDGEWATER CODE § 37-4
1:36
ARTICLE II
First-Aid Training
[Adopted by 3-17-1981 by Ord. No. 682-81 (Ch. 43 of the 1975
Code)]
§ 37-5. Certification required; time limit.
Any individual appointed to a full-time position in the Borough of
Edgewater, subsequent to the enactment of this article, shall, as a condition
of his employment becoming permanent, complete advanced first-aid and
cardiopulmonary resuscitation courses and be awarded certification for
both courses. Such certification shall be attained within one year from
the date of the individual's appointment. The Mayor and Council may, for
compelling reasons, extend the time for the aforesaid certification. As used
herein, the term "full-time employee" shall mean any persons working in a
position for a period of 35 hours or more per week.
§ 37-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-5
1:37

ARTICLE III
Defense and Indemnification
[Adopted 11-15-1983 by Ord. No. 768-83 (Ch. 31 of the 1975 Code)]
§ 37-6. Provision of legal defense; exceptions.
Whenever an officer or employee of the Borough of Edgewater is a
defendant in any action or legal proceeding arising out of or incidental to
the performance of his duties, the Mayor and Council shall provide the
officer or employee with the necessary defense or, at its option, means for
the defense of such action or proceeding and shall hold the said officer
or employee harmless from any payment, settlement or judgment resulting
from the proceedings, except in the following situations:
§ 37-7. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OFFICER AND EMPLOYEE — Any person appointed to any position by the
Mayor and Council or by any other boards or agencies of the Borough, and
shall also include the Mayor and members of the Council.
§ 37-8. Municipal Constables excluded.
Nothing in this article shall be deemed to afford any protection to persons
appointed as Municipal Constables.
A. Where the action has been brought by the municipality itself against the
said officer or employee.
B. Where the officer or employee has been specifically found by the trier of
fact in proceedings, civil or criminal, to have acted with actual fraud,
actual malice or wilful misconduct.
C. Where the officer or employee is found to have acted in violation of the
Municipal Code of Ethics.
§ 37-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-8
1:39

ARTICLE IV
Direct Deposit
[Added 7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 1507-2014]
§ 37-9. Direct deposit mandatory.
All full-time employees and elected public officials who receive
compensation from the Borough of Edgewater are mandated to have direct
deposit of their compensation as of July 1, 2014, in accordance with Chapter
28 P.L. 2013, as defined under N.J.S.A. 52:14-15f (b).
§ 37-10. Exemption for seasonal and temporary employees.
Seasonal and temporary employees who are employed by the Borough of
Edgewater are exempt from the direct deposit mandate.
§ 37-11. Exemption requests for full-time employees.
Municipal employees and elected public officials may request an exemption
from the direct deposit mandate, in writing, addressed to the Borough of
Edgewater Administrator. Such requests will be presented to the governing
body for its consideration within 30 days. The governing body may grant
such an exemption by resolution and only for good cause.
§ 37-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-11
1:41
Chapter 41
ETHICS, CODE OF
§ 41-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OFFICIAL — Includes the Mayor and Councilmen; Borough Clerk, Borough
Treasurer, Tax Assessor, Tax Collector, Borough Attorney, Borough
Engineer, Borough Auditor and the assistant or assistants to any of them;
and any other elected or appointed official of any board, commission or
agency and advisory board, whether paid or unpaid, created by the Mayor
or the governing body of the Borough of Edgewater.
§ 41-2. Conflict of interest prohibited.
No official, whether paid or unpaid, shall engage in any business or
transaction or shall have a financial or other personal interest, direct or
indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his official
duties in the public interest or would tend to impair his independence of
judgment or action in the performance of his official duties.
§ 41-3. Employment incompatible with official duties prohibited.
No official shall engage in or accept private employment or render services
for private interests when such employment is incompatible with the proper
discharge of his official duties or would tend to impair his independence of
judgment or action in the performance of his official duties.
§ 41-4. Representing private interests prohibited.
No official shall represent private interests before the Borough Council
or before any board, commission or agency of the Borough. He shall not
represent private interests in any action or proceeding against the interests
of the Borough in any litigation to which the Borough is a party.
§ 41-5. Disclosure of interest in transactions with Borough
required.
Any official who has a financial interest in any transaction or contract with
the Borough, or in the sale or purchase of real estate, materials, supplies
or services to or from the Borough, shall make known to the Mayor and
Council in writing such interest in any matter on which he may be called to
act in his official capacity. He shall refrain from voting upon or otherwise
participating in the transaction or the making of such contract, sale or
purchase.
§ 41-6. Interest in legislation.
§ 37-11 EDGEWATER CODE § 41-6
1:42
§ 41-7. Board of Ethics created; powers and duties.
The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Edgewater is hereby created as
a Board of Ethics under this chapter and said Board shall render advisory
opinions with respect to any question arising under this Code of Ethics.
Such opinions shall be rendered upon written request of the official
concerned with the possible violation of the terms and conditions herein set
forth.
Chapter 45
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency management — See Ch. 26.
First-aid squad — See Ch. 49.
Police Department — See Ch. 81.
Alarm devices — See Ch. 117.
Dangerous buildings — See Ch. 147.
Fire lanes — See Ch. 200.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 204.
A. No Councilman or member of the governing body or of any agency
thereof shall vote for the adoption or defeat of any legislation or for the
payment or nonpayment of any indebtedness owing or allegedly owing
by the Borough in which he has any financial or other personal interest
direct or indirect, nor shall any official recommend or lobby for the
adoption or defeat of any legislation or for the institution or defeat of
any legal or quasi-legal action whatever in which he has or may have a
financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect.
B. Any official who has or may have such interest in such legislation,
indebtedness or action, and who participates in discussion with or gives
an official opinion to the Borough Council or agency with respect
thereto, shall disclose on the records of the Borough Council or agency
the nature and extent of such interest.
§ 41-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 41-7
1:43

ARTICLE I
Volunteer Fire Department
[Adopted 4-4-1967 by Ord. No. 474; readopted 8-1-1967 by Ord. No.
476 (Ch. 41, Art. V, of the 1975 Code)]
§ 45-1. Creation of Department. [Amended 11-13-1995 by Ord. No.
1063-95]
There is hereby created a Volunteer Fire Department in the Borough of
Edgewater. The purpose of such formation is to protect life and property
from fire, to respond to all fire alarms and to respond to any other
emergency at which their presence is deemed necessary. It shall be
coextensive with the territorial jurisdiction of the Borough of Edgewater,
and it may consist of two companies. The Mayor and Council may, from time
to time by resolution, increase the number of companies in said Volunteer
Fire Department.
§ 45-2. Membership. [Amended 3-20-1984 by Ord. No. 777-84;
11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 1063-95; 11-8-2010 by Ord. No. 1447-2010]
§ 45-3. Qualifications for membership; exceptions; filing of
schedule. [Amended 2-3-1970 by Ord. No. 512-70; 12-2-1975 by
Ord. No. 589-75; 11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 1063-95]
A. The membership of each of said volunteer fire companies shall be not
less than 15 nor more than 70 members. Any increase in membership
above the maximum herein provided shall be made only after the Mayor
and Council shall have adopted a resolution providing for such an
increase in membership.
B. The active firefighter status of any member shall terminate on the day
before such member's 70th birthday, if not terminated sooner, on which
date the member shall be placed on the list of inactive members or shall
be classified as a permanent retiree. As used in this section, the term
"inactive member" shall have that meaning as set forth in the bylaws of
the Edgewater Volunteer Fire Department.
A. No person shall hereafter become a member of the Volunteer Fire
Department unless, at the time of the member's appointment and
confirmation by the Mayor and Council, the member shall be a resident
of or employed full time by a company located within the Borough of
Edgewater for at least one year, a citizen of the United States, of good
moral character, between the ages of 18 and 55 years and shall have
submitted to a physical examination by a physician and presented to the
Mayor and Council a certificate from said physician certifying as to the
member's physical fitness. Notwithstanding anything to the foregoing,
an otherwise qualified individual who does not meet the residency or
employment qualifications set forth above may be considered for
membership if:11
§ 45-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-3
1:45
(1) The individual has a direct relative (defined as sibling, parent,
grandparent or aunt/uncle) who is a member of the Volunteer Fire
Department; or
(2) The individual is a member of the Junior Firefighters Auxiliary.
B. In the event that the applicant is an active firefighter, whether this
status was attained while a resident of this municipality or of any other
municipality, or if the applicant has been a member of a paid, partially
paid or volunteer fire department in another municipality or in another
state for at least seven years, the maximum age shall be 70 years
instead of 55 years of age. [Amended 5-16-2011 by Ord. No.
1455-2011]
(1) For all members aged 70 and above, a yearly confidential medical
evaluation shall be required and conducted in accordance with the
National Fire Protection Association standard 1582, Chapter
7.4-7.7, or any successor standards. Specifically, the following
components shall be required:
(a) A complete medical history including completion of the
occupational safety and health administration medical
respirator questionnaire;
(b) Physical examination of all major body systems;
(c) Blood and urine tests to determine cholesterol, diabetes, and
chemical exposure;
(d) Audiometric and vision examination to determine status in
relation to the approved standard;
(e) Pulmonary function test to determine status in relation to the
approved standard; and
(f) A resting EKG followed by a stress EKG if medically indicated.
(2) Firefighters who do not meet the objective standards as described
included in their job description will be offered an opportunity to
correct the deficiencies and be retested or, as an alternative, their
designation of active status will be changed to inactive status.
C. In the event that the applicant is an active firefighter of any other
municipality within the State of New Jersey, or if the applicant had been
an active member of a fire department in another municipality within
the last two years, within the State of New Jersey, the one-year
residency requirement shall be waived.
D. A schedule giving the name, date of admission and place of residence of
each member, signed by the Chief of the Fire Department, shall be filed
with Secretary of the Fire Department.
11.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 45-3 EDGEWATER CODE § 45-4
1:46
§ 45-4. Application for membership. [Amended 11-13-1995 by Ord.
No. 1063-95]
Every person seeking to join the Volunteer Fire Department shall make
application to the company which the prospective member decides to join,
and after approval of such application by the Chief of the Fire Department
and confirmation by the Mayor and Council, the applicant shall become a
member of the Volunteer Fire Department.
§ 45-5. Approval of application. [Amended 11-13-1995 by Ord. No.
1063-95]
The Chief of the Fire Department shall present to the Mayor and Council
at a Council meeting the name of each person seeking membership in
the Volunteer Fire Department during the month preceding such meeting,
setting forth the age and place of residence of such person. If the Mayor
and Council shall thereupon by resolution approve of the application, the
applicant's name shall be entered upon the register to be kept for that
purpose by the Borough Clerk and to be known as the "Register of the
Volunteer Fire Department of the Borough of Edgewater," which book shall
contain the name of the member, the place of residence and the date of the
member's admission to the Volunteer Fire Department. Upon such approval,
a certificate signed by the Mayor and attested by the Borough Clerk shall be
issued to each person whose name shall be so registered, stating that such
person is a duly qualified member of the Volunteer Fire Department of the
Borough of Edgewater.
§ 45-6. Denial of application; hearing; appeal. [Amended
11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 1063-95]
Any applicant who has been rejected by the company to which the applicant
has made application may appeal to the Mayor and Council within 30 days
after such rejection, by filing with the Borough Clerk a written statement
setting forth the grounds upon which the applicant believes the application
has been unfairly dealt with and such other facts that may be proper and
pertinent to the issue. The Mayor and Council shall inform the applicant
and all interested persons of the date set for a hearing. At the hearing,
the Mayor and Council, after considering all relevant proof offered by the
applicant and by any other person that the Mayor and Council shall request
or permit to testify, shall determine whether or not the applicant shall be
admitted to membership, and its decision shall be final.
§ 45-7. Organization of new fire company. [Amended 11-13-1995 by
Ord. No. 1063-95]
Whenever any body of citizens shall organize a company for fire services as
provided herein, shall make application in writing to the Mayor and Council
to be admitted to membership in the Volunteer Fire Department and shall
file with the Borough Clerk a list giving the names of the proposed officers
and members of said company, with the age, place of residence and date
§ 45-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-7
1:47
of admission of each member, certified by the Secretary thereof, the Mayor
and Council may, by resolution, approve such application and accept the
services of said company. Said officers and members of said company shall
thereupon become members of said Volunteer Fire Department and shall
have their names entered upon the register to be kept as directed above,
and a certificate shall be issued to each person so registered.
§ 45-8. Absence from Borough; leave of absence. [Amended
11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 1063-95]
Any member of the Volunteer Fire Department shall have the right to
request and obtain a special leave of absence from the Chief of the Fire
Department, which leave of absence shall be approved by a majority of the
member's company. This leave of absence may be renewed, from time to
time, in the same manner as set forth above. This section shall not apply to
those members serving in the Armed Forces of the United States.
§ 45-9. Remuneration for members. [Amended 12-15-1981 by Ord.
No. 711-81; 11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 1063-95]
The members of the Volunteer Fire Department shall receive an annual
payment as set forth by resolution of the Borough of Edgewater, which
sum shall be paid to such members as shall be entitled, on the first day of
December in each year, to cover any losses that may incur in attending fires,
as set forth hereafter; provided, however, that no member of the Volunteer
Fire Department shall be entitled to receive such sum unless the member
shall have been a member in good standing for four months prior to the
first day of December in each year and unless the member has performed
at least 48 points of the service requirements as shall be defined by the
rules and regulations of the Volunteer Fire Department, which rules and
regulations must be approved by the Mayor and Council before they shall
become effective.
§ 45-10. Election of officers; eligibility. [Amended 2-3-1970 by Ord.
No. 512-70; 11-23-1976 by Ord. No. 603-76; 12-15-1981 by Ord. No.
711-81; 10-8-1985 by Ord. No. 826-85]
A. The Edgewater Volunteer Fire Department shall elect a Chief, who shall
be elected by the members in good standing of all companies at an
election to be held at the last meeting of each calendar year. No person
shall be eligible to be elected to the office of Chief of the Volunteer Fire
Department unless such member has served as Deputy Chief for one
year, or served as Captain for at least two years, or has previously
served as Chief.
B. The Edgewater Volunteer Fire Department shall elect a Deputy Chief,
who shall be elected by the members in good standing of all companies
at an election to be held at the last meeting of such calendar year. No
person shall be eligible to serve as Deputy Chief of the Volunteer Fire
§ 45-7 EDGEWATER CODE § 45-10
1:48
§ 45-11. Adoption of constitution and bylaws. [Amended 11-13-1995
by Ord. No. 1063-9512]
Each company shall have the power to adopt such constitution and bylaws
for its government and management as shall not be inconsistent with the
laws of the United States, the State of New Jersey or the Borough of
Edgewater or with the rules and regulations which may be adopted or
approved by the Mayor and Council. The constitution and bylaws of each
company shall be uniform with those of every other company of the
Volunteer Fire Department so far as they relate to fines for nonattendance
at fires and drills and for any special orders made by the Chief of the Fire
Department, Deputy Chief of the Fire Department, Fire Captains or Fire
Lieutenants, within the scope of their authority. The constitution and bylaws
of any company shall not become effective until they have been submitted
to and approved by the Chief of the Fire Department and the Mayor and
Council. The approval of the bylaws of the Volunteer Fire Department by
the Mayor and Council shall be done by ordinance. Upon adoption of the
bylaws by ordinance, the bylaws shall be effective and shall operate as the
rules and regulations of the Volunteer Fire Department, and the same shall
be binding upon each officer and member of the Department.
§ 45-12. Responsibilities of Chief of Volunteer Fire Department.
[Amended 11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 1063-95]
Department unless such member has served as Captain for at least one
year.
C. Each Volunteer Fire Company shall have one Fire Captain. No person
shall be eligible to serve as Captain of the Volunteer Fire Department
unless a member has served as Lieutenant for at least two years or
previously served as Captain.
D. Each Volunteer Fire Company shall have four Fire Lieutenants. To be
eligible to serve as Lieutenant, a member must have been a member of
the Edgewater Volunteer Fire Department for at least two years.
E. Officers shall be elected by the members in good standing of each
company at an election to be held at the last meeting of the calendar
year. These officers shall hold office for one year or until their
successors are elected and qualified.
F. Each elected officer of the Volunteer Fire Department shall become
qualified to assume the duties of their office immediately upon approval
of the member's election by the Mayor and Council. In the event that
the Mayor and Council shall for any reason fail to confirm the election
of the Fire Chief, Deputy Chief, Captain or Lieutenants, the Mayor and
Council shall appoint an individual to hold office until such officers are
elected by the companies and confirmed by the Mayor and Council.
12.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 45-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-12
1:49
§ 45-13. Chain of command; duties of firefighters. [Amended
12-15-1981 by Ord. No. 711-81; 4-2-1985 by Ord. No. 809-85;
4-16-1985 by Ord. No. 811-85; 11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 1063-95]
§ 45-14. Removal of equipment and apparatus from Borough.
[Amended 10-16-1979 by Ord. No. 656-79; 11-13-1995 by Ord. No.
1063-95]
Except in the case of fire-related or other emergency or in the ordinary
course of duty within the East Bergen Mutual Aid Area, no apparatus
belonging to the Fire Department of the Borough of Edgewater shall be
taken out of the Borough limits by any member without the approval of
the Mayor and Council and the consent of the Chief of the Volunteer Fire
Department. In the event that such approval is given, any equipment so
removed from the Borough shall be returned immediately in the case of an
alarm or fire within the Borough and, in all other cases, immediately after
the occasion for its absence shall have ended.
§ 45-15. Breach of rules and regulations; disciplinary action;
hearing. [Amended 11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 1063-95]
For any minor breach of the rules and regulations of the Volunteer Fire
Department, which breach does not involve the direct disobedience of a
superior's order, the member may be fined or otherwise disciplined as the
member's company shall determine. For any major breach of the rules
and regulations of the Volunteer Fire Department by a member of said
A. The Chief of the Volunteer Fire Department of the Borough of
Edgewater shall exercise command over all members of the Fire
Department of the Borough of Edgewater and shall have responsibility
for their discipline, training and efficiency.
B. The Deputy Chief of the Volunteer Fire Department of the Borough of
Edgewater shall be subordinate to the Chief and shall assume command
of all members in the absence of the Chief.
A. The chain of command of the Fire Department of the Borough of
Edgewater shall be Chief of the Fire Department, Deputy Chief, Senior
Captain, Junior Captain, First Lieutenant, Second Lieutenant, Third
Lieutenant, Fourth Lieutenant, Past Chief by number of times as Chief
and Senior member by number of years of service.
B. It shall be the duty of every member to attend and, under the direction
of the superior officers, to endeavor to save life and property at every
fire alarm, when ordered by the Chief of the Fire Department or the
person acting in the Chief's capacity, whether said fire alarm is within
or without the Borough of Edgewater; to answer in person all fire
alarms and work requirements and manage the same under the orders
of the Chief of the Fire Department or other superior officer; and to
report for duty or practice or parade whenever ordered by the
member's superior officer.
§ 45-12 EDGEWATER CODE § 45-15
1:50
Department or for the direct disobedience of a superior's order, the Captain,
or officer acting in that capacity, of the company to which the member
belongs or the Chief of the Fire Department may temporarily suspend the
member from duty pending a hearing upon the charges before the Mayor
and Council. The Captain, or other officer acting in that capacity, of the
company to which the member belongs shall make a written complaint, a
copy of which shall be personally served upon the member, to the Chief of
the Fire Department, who shall thereupon, after examining said complaint,
forward the same to the Mayor and Council indicating the member's
remarks thereon. Thereupon the Mayor and Council, after giving
reasonable notice to the member, shall conduct a hearing with respect to
said complaint and, if the charges contained therein are sustained, the
Mayor and Council may suspend or expel said person from the Volunteer
Fire Department.
§ 45-16. Monthly reports. [Amended 11-13-1995 by Ord. No.
1063-95]
It shall be the duty of each Volunteer Fire Captain to submit a monthly
report to the Chief of the Fire Department, showing the condition of such
officer's company and of any apparatus or equipment being used by said
company and any other matters concerning said company which such
officer may deem necessary. The Chief of the Fire Department shall
thereupon forward copies of said report to the Mayor and Council,
indicating thereon any recommendations relating to the company.
§ 45-17. Death benefits. [Added 9-8-1976 by Ord. No. 598-76]
In the event of the death of any active member of the Edgewater Volunteer
Fire Department who is not entitled to, and who has previously waived,
the benefits, including the death benefit, of the New Jersey State Fireman's
Association, the widow or next of kin as designated by the active volunteer
fireman shall be entitled to receive from the Borough of Edgewater an
amount equal to that amount provided by the New Jersey State Fireman's
Association at the date of the demise of said active volunteer fireman of the
Edgewater Volunteer Fire Department.
§ 45-18. Insurance coverage. [Added 3-20-1984 by Ord. No. 777-84]
A. The Borough shall provide a policy of life insurance in the amount of
$15,000 for every active member of the Edgewater Volunteer Fire
Department, with a maximum amount as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:14-37.
[Amended 9-20-2010 by Ord. No. 1439-2010]
B. The Borough shall continue to provide a policy of life insurance in the
amount of $10,000 for every member of the Edgewater Volunteer Fire
Department on inactive status or permanently retired, provided that
said member had previously been an active member of the Department
for a period of at least 10 years.
§ 45-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-18
1:51

ARTICLE II
Reimbursement Program for Volunteer Fire Department and
Volunteer First-Aid Squad
[Adopted 12-20-1988 by Ord. No. 907-88 (Ch. 41, Art VA, of the
1975 Code)]
§ 45-19. Standards for reimbursement. [Amended 2-22-1989 by
Ord. No. 912-89; 3-18-2002 by Ord. No. 1229-2002; 10-20-2003 by
Ord. No. 1264-2003; 12-17-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-019]
A. Any member of the Edgewater Volunteer Fire Department shall be
eligible to receive an additional allowance above and beyond any
clothing allowance previously fixed by resolution or ordinance based on
responses to fire alarm calls as set forth in the following schedule:
Monthly Percentage of
Responses Time Period
Monthly Stipend
Amount
(1 company meeting and 1 company drill must be made in the quarter
to receive the stipend)
30% to 44%
07:00-14:59 $100
15:00-22:59 $100
23:00-06:59 $100
45% to 59%
07:00-14:59 $200
15:00-22:59 $200
23:00-06:59 $200
60% to 74%
07:00-14:59 $300
15:00-22:59 $300
23:00-06:59 $300
75% and higher
07:00-14:59 $400
15:00-22:59 $400
23:00-06:59 $400
B. The additional allowance as set forth in Subsection A of this section
shall not be applicable to probationary members, who shall be limited
to a monthly stipend amount of $100 until such time as the probationary
period terminates.
§ 45-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-20
1:53
§ 45-20. Payments not to constitute salary.
The payment set forth in § 45-19 of this article shall constitute
reimbursement for various expenses which may be incurred by members of
the Volunteer Fire Department or Volunteer First-Aid Squad in the faithful
performance of their duties and shall not be considered as salary.
§ 45-21. Clothing allowance to be continued.
All members of the Volunteer Fire Department and Volunteer First-Aid
Squad shall continue to be entitled to receive such annual clothing
allowance as shall be fixed and determined by the Mayor and Council
regardless of the number of alarms or calls made or responded to.
§ 45-22. Use of affordable housing unit to preclude participation.
Any member of the Volunteer Fire Department or Volunteer First-Aid Squad
who leases, purchases or otherwise occupies an affordable housing unit
owned or maintained by the Borough of Edgewater, or any agency or
subdivision thereof, shall not be entitled to the reimbursement allowance
established pursuant to § 45-19 of this article.
§ 45-23. Verification of attendance; waiver to be executed.
A. The Chief of the Volunteer Fire Department and the Captain of the
Volunteer First-Aid Squad shall institute a procedure for verification of
attendance which shall be approved annually by the Mayor and Council.
Such procedure shall include but shall not be limited to a requirement
that each volunteer personally sign a roster after each alarm or call,
indicating his/her attendance at such alarm or call, with such
signatures to be witnessed by an officer of a company or squad. Each
member of the Volunteer Fire Department or Volunteer First-Aid Squad
shall maintain on file a specimen of his/her signature, and forms utilized
in recording attendance shall be subject to random and periodic audit
under the direction of the Borough Clerk.
B. No member of the Volunteer Fire Department or Volunteer First-Aid
Squad shall be entitled to any payment hereunder until he/she shall first
have executed a waiver to be prepared by the office of the Borough
Clerk, which shall provide that the member waives any claim to
pension, civil service or employment status of any kind whatsoever as a
result of receiving payment under the provisions of this article.
C. An individual who is a member of both the Volunteer Fire Department
and Volunteer First Aid Squad shall, when responding to a call, receive
credit dependent upon the vehicle or piece of equipment in which such
person responded. The foregoing shall not preclude a member of both
the Volunteer Fire Department and Volunteer First Aid Squad from
receiving a stipend in each such capacity, provided that such person has
satisfied the criteria for compensation under § 45-19. [Added
2-22-1989 by Ord. No. 912-89]
§ 45-20 EDGEWATER CODE § 45-24
1:54
§ 45-24. Payment to be quarterly.13
Payments as provided in this article shall be made quarterly and shall be
calculated and made within the calendar month immediately following the
preceding quarter.
§ 45-25. Annual reports to be submitted.
The Chief of the Volunteer Fire Department and the Captain of the
Volunteer First-Aid Squad shall annually report on the effect of such
payment on the membership in attendance and such other information as
may be required by the Mayor and Council concerning the operation of the
Volunteer Fire Department and the Volunteer First-Aid Squad.14
13.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
14.Editor's Note: Original § 41-33.10, Effective date; termination of program, which
immediately followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 45-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-25
1:55

ARTICLE III
Junior Firefighters Auxiliary
[Adopted 10-16-2000 by Ord. No. 11-99-2000 (Ch. 41, Art. VI, of the
1975 Code)15]
§ 45-26. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADVISORS — Qualified members who are appointed by the Chief to oversee
the JFA.
CHIEF — The Chief of the Edgewater Volunteer Fire Department.
DEPARTMENT — The Edgewater Volunteer Fire Department.
JFA — The Edgewater Volunteer Fire Department Junior Firefighters
Auxiliary.
§ 45-27. Creation of Auxiliary.
There is hereby created an Edgewater Volunteer Fire Department Junior
Firefighters Auxiliary (hereinafter "JFA") within the Volunteer Fire
Department.
§ 45-28. Membership; residency.
There shall be permitted a maximum of 16 members in the JFA. Application
for membership shall be on a form as approved by the Chief of the
Department. An individual seeking membership in the JFA must reside
within the Borough of Edgewater for a minimum of six months prior to
the date of application for membership. An applicant shall be required to
be at least 16 years of age and less than 18 years of age. The application
for membership shall be accompanied by a statement from the applicant's
parent or guardian consenting to the applicant's membership in the JFA.
A member of the JFA may continue in membership for a period of six
months after such member's 18th birthday. Any member of the JFA no
longer residing within the Borough shall be required to resign, and if such
resignation is not received within 30 days, such member shall automatically
cease to be a member of the JFA.
§ 45-29. Bylaws.
The members of the JFA shall be governed by the bylaws, which shall be
subject to the approval of the Mayor and Council. Such bylaws shall be
prepared by the Volunteer Fire Department.
15.Editor's Note: Former Article VI, Fire Cadet Program, adopted 5-7-1974 by Ord. No.
554-74, as amended, was repealed 11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 1063-95.
§ 45-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-30
1:57
§ 45-30. Clothing allowance.
Members of the JFA shall be entitled to receive a clothing allowance,
provided that the member compiles the requisite point requirement as
established by the bylaws, which shall be consistent with the practice
applicable to the Volunteer Fire Department. The amount of the clothing
allowance shall be further subject to the approval of the Mayor and Council.
§ 45-31. Restrictions on activities.
No member of the JFA shall perform duties which would expose such
member to danger and hazards experienced by regular firefighters. No
member of the JFA shall enter a fire or hazardous area until such site or
incident is declared under control and safe by the Incident Commander.
§ 45-30 EDGEWATER CODE § 45-31
1:58
ARTICLE IV
Participation in East Bergen Firefighters Mutual Aid Association
[Adopted 5-21-2012 by Ord. No. 1470-201216]
§ 45-32. Authorization.
The Municipality of Edgewater Fire Department is authorized to participate
in the East Bergen Firefighters Mutual Aid Association (EBFMAA).
§ 45-33. Participating municipalities.
For the purpose of this agreement, the EBFMAA consists of the following
municipalities: Cliffside Park, Edgewater, Englewood, Englewood Cliffs,
Fairview, Fort Lee, Leonia, Palisades Park, Ridgefield, Tenafly, and Other
municipality(ies) or agency(ies) as may meet the criteria for admission as
set forth by the EBFMAA.
§ 45-34. Assistance to Borough.
Whenever, in the opinion of the Fire Chief or ranking officer of a fire or
other emergency situation within the jurisdiction of the Fire Department,
additional equipment or manpower is needed in Edgewater to control an
emergency situation, the EBMFAA can be contacted to supply such
equipment and manpower.
§ 45-35. Assistance to member municipalities.
Whenever a member town of the EBFMAA requests assistance, Edgewater
Fire Department will supply the requested assistance, if the Fire Chief or
ranking officer feels sufficient resources remain within the municipality
or steps have been taken to supply such resources to provide local fire
protection coverage.
§ 45-35.1. Assistance to municipalities outside association.
The Fire Chief or ranking officer can provide assistance as requested by
municipalities outside the EBFMAA group if such requests fall within the
guidelines of applicable state statutes, county guidelines or Office of
Emergency Management (OEM) requests, if the Fire Chief or ranking
officer feels sufficient resources remain within the Borough or steps have
been taken to supply such resources to provide local fire protection
coverage.
§ 45-35.2. Provision of services.
Edgewater Fire Department shall contribute to the EBFMAA mission
statement so as to provide a broad array of fire services with competence
16.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. IV, Participation in East Bergen
Mutual Aid System, adopted 12-20-1955 by Ord. No. 385; readopted 8-1-1967 by Ord. No.
476, as amended.
§ 45-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-35.2
1:59
and professionalism and to provide a safe environment for firefighters and
the people of our communities through the effective and efficient utilization
of the National Incident Management System (NIMS) as adopted by the
New Jersey State Division of Fire Safety and the EBFMAA dispatching
procedures.
§ 45-35.3. Out-of-county responses.
For an out-of-county response, the EBFMAA will follow the New Jersey Fire
Service Resource Emergency Deployment Act. Refer to N.J.S.A. 52:14E-18,
Out-of-county fire service resources.
§ 45-35.4. Authority to establish regulations, execute agreements
and expend funds.
The Mayor and Council shall, by resolution, make rules and regulations
governing the participation of the Edgewater Fire Department in the
EBFMAA and may also, by resolution, authorize the execution of such
agreements, the performance of such other acts and the expenditure of such
funds as may be required to effectuate the purposes of this agreement.
§ 45-35.2 EDGEWATER CODE § 45-35.4
1:60
ARTICLE V
Credit for Health Benefits
[Adopted 4-5-1999 by Ord. No. 1152-99 (Ch. 41, Art. VIII, of the
1975 Code)]
§ 45-36. Employees entitled to benefits.
Any employee of the Borough of Edgewater who has reached the age of
62 years or older, and who has been a member of the Volunteer Fire
Department or Volunteer First-Aid Squad for a minimum of 20 years and
15 years of Borough employment shall be entitled to a credit of one year
for each five years of service as a volunteer for the purpose of qualifying
for coverage for health benefits and the payment thereof by the Borough
upon their retirement. The use of such credit shall be limited to payment for
health benefits and not for pension or any other purpose.
§ 45-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-36
1:61

ARTICLE VI
Length of Service Awards Program
[Adopted 10-16-2000 by Ord. No. 1193-200017 (Ch. 41, Art. IX, of
the 1975 Code)]
§ 45-37. Program created.
A Length of Service Awards Program (LOSAP) is hereby created in
accordance with Chapter 388 of the Laws of 1997, to reward members of
the Edgewater Volunteer Fire Department and Edgewater Volunteer First
Aid Squad for their loyal, diligent and devoted services to the residents of
the Borough of Edgewater.
§ 45-38. Contributions; administration.
The LOSAP shall provide for fixed annual contributions to a deferred income
account for each volunteer member that meets the criteria set forth below;
that such contributions shall be made in accordance with a plan that shall
be established by the Borough of Edgewater pursuant to P.L. 1997, c. 388;
and that such plan shall be administered in accordance with the laws of
the State of New Jersey, the United States Internal Revenue Code and this
article.
§ 45-39. Eligibility; vesting.
The LOSAP shall provide for annual contributions to each member that
meets the criteria as follows:
A. Any volunteer who accumulates 100 points in a calendar year will be
considered an active volunteer for that year and therefore eligible for
the full benefit amount.
B. To be eligible, the volunteer must complete all requirements mandated
by law.
C. The annual contributions shall be:
(1) Six hundred dollars for the year 2001.
(2) Nine hundred dollars for the year 2002.
(3) One thousand one hundred fifty dollars for the year 2003 and
thereafter.
D. Five years of service are required for vesting.
E. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-185f, the maximum annual contribution
may be increased, from time to time, without public hearing or public
question, by resolution, provided such increased contribution does not
exceed a number calculated by multiplying the original contribution as
17.Editor's Note: This ordinance was subject to a mandatory referendum and was approved
by voters at the general election held 11-7-2000.
§ 45-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-39
1:63
§ 45-40. Credit for prior service. [Amended 10-21-2002 by Ord. No.
1252-2002]
The LOSAP shall provide for contributions as credit for no more than 10
years of prior years of service for each eligible volunteer at the rate of $600
per year.
§ 45-41. Cost of program.
The estimated cost of the program has been calculated as follows:
§ 45-42. Point system.
Each active volunteer member shall be credited with points for volunteer
services provided to the Edgewater Volunteer Fire Department and the
Edgewater Volunteer First Aid Squad in accordance with the following
schedule:
approved by public question by the consumer price index factor as
more particularly detailed in the aforesaid salary provision. [Added
5-15-2006 by Ord. No. 1335-2006]
A. For regular annual service:
(1) Forty-nine thousand two hundred dollars for year 2001.
(2) Seventy-three thousand eight hundred dollars for year 2002.
(3) Ninety-four thousand three hundred dollars for year 2003 and
thereafter.
B. For prior years' service, an estimated $32,742 per year with
contribution in accordance with law. [Amended 10-21-2002 by Ord.
No. 1252-2002]
A. Volunteer Fire Department: Schedule A.18
B. Volunteer First Aid Squad: Schedule B.19
18.Editor's Note: Schedule A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
19.Editor's Note: Schedule B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 45-39 EDGEWATER CODE § 45-42
1:64
ARTICLE VII
Emergency Standby Services
[Adopted 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 1521-2015]
§ 45-43. Designation of members.
The Captain of the First Aid Squad and the Chief of the Fire Department of
the Borough of Edgewater are authorized to designate certain members to
be on emergency standby services in the event of anticipated weather, fire
or other emergencies.
§ 45-44. Designation to be fair and equitable.
The Chief of the Fire Department and the Captain of the First Aid Squad
shall designate those persons to serve on emergency standby in a fair and
equitable manner.
§ 45-45. Compensation. [Amended 3-19-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-002]
Those persons designated and serving as emergency standby as either fire
or first aid members shall be paid at the rate of $20 hour.
§ 45-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-45
1:65

ARTICLE VIII
Key Lock Box Emergency Access System
[Adopted 8-19-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-008]
§ 45-46. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTOMATIC DIALER — A device that automatically dials and relays a
prerecorded message to a central station or the Fire Department and/or
Police Department.
AUTOMATIC FIRE SUPPRESSION SYSTEM — A system or assembly of
piping, valves, controls, and sprinklers, which are designed and installed
to comply with the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) standards,
which utilize water, foam, carbon dioxide, or other gas to automatically
react to suppress fire.
CENTRAL STATION — An office of a private company to which remote
alarm and supervisory signaling devices are transmitted and where
personnel are in attendance at all times to supervise the circuits and
investigate signals.
FIRE OFFICIAL — The official responsible for enforcing the uniform fire
code of the State of New Jersey or his/her designee.
KEY LOCK BOX — A secure rapid entry system that is designed to be used
by emergency personnel in the event of an emergency to gain entry into a
structure by using the enclosed owner-provided key(s). This box is usually
mounted on the exterior of the building in a location that is specified by the
Fire Official. All boxes shall be UL (Underwriters Laboratories) certified,
Knox-Box® brand, and approved by the Fire Official.
STANDPIPE SYSTEM — A wet or dry system of piping, valves, outlets and
related equipment designed to provide water at specified pressures and
installed exclusively for the fighting of fires.
§ 45-47. Structures to be equipped with a key lock box.
Unless otherwise determined in writing by the Fire Official, the following
structures shall be equipped with a key lock box of a type and size and at a
location approved by the Fire Official:
A. All new commercial buildings shall be equipped with a key lock box
prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
B. All existing commercial buildings constructing additions, major
renovations, or changes of use that require Borough Zoning or Planning
Board approval, shall be equipped with a key lock box prior to the
issuance of any necessary permits.
§ 45-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-47
1:67
§ 45-48. Key lock box contents.
C. All existing commercial buildings with new occupancies by tenants
shall be equipped with a key lock box prior to the issuance of a
certificate of continued occupancy.
D. Each building protected by an automatic fire suppression and/or
standpipe system and not manned 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
E. Each building protected by an automatic fire alarm system (automatic
dialer, central station, external audible/visual alarm) and not manned
24 hours a day, seven days a week.
F. Multifamily residential structures that have restricted access through
locked doors but have a common corridor for access to the living units,
including but not limited to condominium buildings.
G. Schools, whether public or private.
H. Governmental structures and nursing care facilities, unless the building
is staffed or open 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
A. The property owner is required at all times to keep a key(s) in the key
lock box that will allow access to the structure. The key lock box shall
contain, but not be limited to, the following items as designated by the
Fire Official:
(1) Labeled keys to locked points of ingress and egress, whether in
interior or exterior of such buildings;
(2) Labeled keys to the locked mechanical rooms;
(3) Labeled keys to locked elevator rooms and controls;
(4) Labeled keys to any fence or secured areas;
(5) Labeled keys to areas of the building where fire alarm panels and
fire protection systems are located;
(6) Labeled keys to any other areas that may be required by the Fire
Official;
(7) A card containing the emergency contact names and phone
numbers for such buildings;
(8) Floor plans of the rooms within the building showing locations of
shut-offs;
(9) Hazardous materials information; and
(10) An inventory of the keys.
B. The property owner shall notify the Fire Official when any or all of the
locks or keys have been changed and shall keep the immediate area of
the key lock box free and clear of any and all obstructions.
§ 45-47 EDGEWATER CODE § 45-49
1:68
§ 45-49. Registration and installation of key lock boxes.
The property owner shall apply for a registration for a key lock box on forms
provided by and obtained from the Fire Official. A registration is required
prior to the installation of a key lock box in order to verify the proper size,
mounting location and installation of said key lock box. The key lock box
shall be installed at a location approved by the Fire Official. No key lock
box shall be installed, voluntarily or otherwise, without first obtaining the
approval of the Fire Official. The property owner shall be responsible for the
cost to purchase, install, and maintain the key lock box.
§ 45-50. Compliance.
All existing buildings required to have a key lock box shall comply with this
article one year from its effective date. All newly constructed buildings not
yet occupied or buildings currently under construction and all buildings or
businesses applying for a certificate of occupancy shall comply immediately
upon passage of this article. In any event, the owner of any structure in the
Borough shall comply with this article within 60 days from receipt of written
notice from the Fire Official. The cost of purchasing and installing, along
with any cost associated with implementation of the program at a specific
property, will be borne by the property owner.
§ 45-51. Violations and penalties.
Any property owner failing to comply with this article shall be subject to a
fine of not more than $300 for each day of violation or noncompliance.
§ 45-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-51
1:69
Chapter 49
FIRST-AID SQUAD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Reimbursement program for services — See
Ch. 45, Art. II.
§ 45-51 EDGEWATER CODE § 45-51
1:70
ARTICLE I
Volunteer First-Aid Squad
[Adopted 4-21-1981 by Ord. No. 686-81 (Ch. 44 of the 1975 Code)]
§ 49-1. Establishment of Squad; function. [Amended 10-8-1985 by
Ord. No. 827-85]
§ 49-2. Constitution and bylaws.
The Volunteer First-Aid Squad shall have the power to adopt such
constitution and bylaws for its government and management as shall not be
inconsistent with the laws of the United States, the State of New Jersey or
the Borough of Edgewater or with the rules and regulations which may be
adopted or approved by the Mayor and Council. The constitution and bylaws
shall not become effective until they have been submitted to and approved
by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Edgewater.
§ 49-3. Membership requirements.
A. There is hereby established in the Borough of Edgewater a Volunteer
First-Aid Squad. The Mayor and Council may appoint one of its
members to serve as liaison between the governing body and the
Volunteer First-Aid Squad.
B. It shall be the function of the Volunteer First-Aid Squad to render
ambulance and first-aid service in emergencies and when called upon in
accordance with the bylaws and rules and regulations established by
the Mayor and Council for the governance of said Squad.
A. No person shall become a member of the Volunteer First-Aid Squad
unless, at the time of his or her appointment, confirmation or election
by the Mayor and Council, he or she shall be a resident of the State of
New Jersey, a citizen of the United States, the holder of a valid license
to operate a motor vehicle in the State of New Jersey, of good moral
character, between the ages of 18 and 55 years and shall have
submitted to a physical examination and presented to the Mayor and
Council a physician's certificate indicating such person's physical
fitness.
B. An individual's membership in the Volunteer First-Aid Squad shall
terminate upon the date of his or her 65th birthday.
C. Every person seeking to become a member of the Volunteer First-Aid
Squad shall first make application to the Squad, and after approval of
such application by the membership and subsequent confirmation by
the Mayor and Council, such person shall become a member in good
standing of the Volunteer First-Aid Squad.
D. Any applicant who has been rejected by the Volunteer First-Aid Squad
may appeal to the Mayor and Council within 30 days after such
rejection, by filing with the Borough Clerk a written statement setting
§ 49-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 49-3
1:71
§ 49-4. Classes of members.
forth fully the grounds upon which such person believes the application
was denied and other facts that may be proper and relevant to such
issue. The Mayor and Council shall inform the applicant of the date set
for a hearing. At the hearing, the Mayor and Council, after considering
all relevant evidence, shall determine whether or not the applicant shall
be admitted to membership, and such decision shall be final. In the
event of a vacancy in any office, the Squad shall hold an election for
such office and such person elected by the active members shall, after
confirmation by the Mayor and Council, enter into the performance of
the duties thereof.
A. There shall be five classes of members in the Volunteer First-Aid Squad,
which classes are as follows:
(1) Active members shall be those members who hold a current
American National Red Cross standard first-aid certificate and who
have been elected to full active membership.
(2) Active associate members shall be those members who have not yet
completed the standard first-aid training course, but who have
been assigned to limited active duty in order to fill the required
quota of the squad.
(3) Inactive associate members shall consist of those who have
signified their intention of becoming active members of the squad
and who are qualified in all respects, except that they may not have
completed the standard first-aid training course and have not been
assigned to active duty.
(4) Drivers shall consist of those active members who have completed
a defensive driving course.
(5) Medical advisory membership shall consist of local physicians who
have agreed to serve in an advisory capacity to the Squad and who
shall be appointed by the active membership on a year-to-year
basis.
B. All associate members shall qualify as active members within one year
from the date of their becoming associate members, unless granted an
extension of time by the Squad membership.
C. Appointments to active membership shall be made from the associate
membership list in the order of their election as associate members.
D. All members and employees of the Squad shall be subject to all laws of
the State of New Jersey, which have been or may be in the future
enacted concerning the conduct, benefit and protection of members of
a volunteer ambulance and first-aid squad.
§ 49-3 EDGEWATER CODE § 49-5
1:72
§ 49-5. Officers.
The officers of the Volunteer First-Aid Squad shall consist of a Chief, a
Captain, a Lieutenant and a Secretary/Treasurer, who shall be active
members in good standing. The officers shall be elected annually by the
active members of the Squad in the manner prescribed by the Squad's
bylaws, and upon their confirmation by the Mayor and Council, such officers
shall commence the performance of their duties and hold office for a term
of one year or until their successors have been qualified.
§ 49-6. Duties of officers.
§ 49-7. Establishment of Youth Squad; purpose. [Added 5-18-1982
by Ord. No. 721-82]
There is hereby established in the Volunteer First-Aid Squad a Youth Squad
to work with the Volunteer First-Aid Squad in the emergency and
nonemergency care and transportation of the sick and injured of the
Borough of Edgewater.
§ 49-8. Requirements for membership in Youth Squad. [Added
5-18-1982 by Ord. No. 721-82]
A. The Chief shall be in charge of the actual operation of the Volunteer
First-Aid Squad. He or she shall preside at all meetings of the Squad,
appoint all committees, call special meetings and shall be responsible
for the good order of the equipment used by the Squad. The Chief shall
conduct and be in charge of all drill meetings and shall supervise,
prepare and post all duty rosters and shall supervise the preparation of
reports of all Squad activities.
B. The Captain shall assist the Chief in the performance of the duties of
such office and in the absence of the Chief, shall perform all his or her
duties.
C. The Lieutenant shall be third-in-command of the Squad and shall
perform the duties of the Chief when both the Chief and the Captain are
absent.
D. The Secretary/Treasurer shall keep an accurate record of all meetings
of the Squad, shall notify all members of meetings and shall keep and
answer all correspondence addressed to the Squad and shall make a
monthly report of the Squad's activities to be submitted to the liaison
designated by the governing body. In addition, the Secretary/Treasurer
shall be the custodian of all funds of the Squad other than those set
forth for the Squad in the local municipal budget of the Borough. Such
officer shall also keep an accurate record of all deposits made by the
Squad in any bank accounts established by it and shall sign all properly
drawn checks and shall additionally keep an accurate account of all
receipts and expenditures made on behalf of the Squad.
§ 49-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 49-8
1:73
§ 49-9. Duty restrictions for Youth Squad members. [Added
5-18-1982 by Ord. No. 721-82]
A. No person shall become a member of the Volunteer First-Aid Youth
Squad unless at the time of his or her appointment he or she shall be a
resident of the State of New Jersey, a citizen of the United States, of
good moral character and at least 16 years of age, but shall not have
reached his or her 18th birthday. An applicant for membership shall
also have submitted to a physical examination and present to the Mayor
and Council a physician's certificate indicating such person's physical
fitness. Such person shall also be required to obtain permission from his
or her parent or guardian in writing before becoming a member.
B. Every person seeking to become a member of the Youth Squad shall
first make application to the Youth Squad, and upon approval by the
Youth Squad, the application shall be submitted to the Volunteer First-
Aid Squad, and after approval of such application by the membership
and subsequent confirmation by the Mayor and Council, such person
shall become a member in good standing of the Volunteer First-Aid
Squad.
C. All members of the Youth Squad shall be required to complete first-aid
courses and obtain appropriate certification as is established by the
constitution and bylaws of the Volunteer First-Aid Squad.
D. An individual's membership in the Youth Squad shall terminate upon
the date of his or her 18th birthday; provided, however, that upon
reaching the age of 18 such member may submit an application for
membership to the Volunteer First-Aid Squad for its review and
approval and subsequent approval by the Mayor and Council. During
the period of time from which the Youth Squad member submits an
application for membership in the Volunteer First-Aid Squad and the
time a decision is rendered on such application by the Mayor and
Council, the member shall be permitted to function as a Youth Squad
member.
A. Only those members of the Youth Squad who have met the minimum
training required for membership shall be permitted to perform the
duties of members of the Youth Squad. No Youth Squad member shall
be permitted to drive the ambulance, to be a crew chief or to ride on the
same crew as another Youth Squad member.
B. A member of the Youth Squad shall be required to ride as a fourth
member on an ambulance crew until the Volunteer First-Aid Squad
determines that such member is capable of being a third member of the
crew. No member of the Youth Squad shall be permitted to ride in the
back of the ambulance when a patient is being transported, unless an
active member of the First-Aid Squad is present.
§ 49-8 EDGEWATER CODE § 49-10
1:74
§ 49-10. Youth Squad constitution and bylaws. [Added 5-18-1982 by
Ord. No. 721-82]
The Volunteer First-Aid Youth Squad shall have the power to adopt such
constitution and bylaws for its government and management as shall not
be inconsistent with the laws of the United States, State of New Jersey or
the Borough of Edgewater or with the rules and regulations which may be
adopted or approved by the Mayor and Council. The constitution and bylaws
shall not become effective until they have been submitted to and approved
by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Edgewater.
§ 49-11. Apparatus and equipment.
All apparatus and equipment of the Volunteer First-Aid Squad shall be
and remain the property of the Borough of Edgewater, and the costs of
operation, maintenance, repair and replacement shall be as provided for
in the local municipal budget. No one other than a member of the corps,
duly licensed under the laws of the State of New Jersey to operate a motor
vehicle, shall operate any of the ambulance apparatus of the Borough.
Except in the case of an emergency call, no apparatus belonging to the
Borough utilized by the Volunteer First-Aid Squad shall be removed from
the Borough limits by any member of the Squad without the approval
of the Mayor and Council. In the event that any such approval is given,
any equipment so removed from the Borough limits shall be returned
immediately in the case of an alarm within the Borough and, in all other
cases, immediately after the occasion for its absence shall have ended.
§ 49-12. Compensation; requirements. [Amended 4-15-2002 by Ord.
No. 1234-2002]
The members of the Volunteer First-Aid Squad shall be entitled to receive a
stipend, subject to the following requirements:
A. A member shall be entitled to earn a maximum stipend of $700 per
month. One-half of the maximum stipend, or the sum of $350, shall be
earned by a member for working one evening from 6:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m. during the period beginning on Sunday night and ending Thursday
night each week. One-half of the stipend, or $350, shall be earned by
working the required weekend shifts as designated by the officers.
[Amended 12-17-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-018]
B. The following additional requirements must be satisfied in order to earn
the maximum stipend of $400 per month:
(1) All members of the Volunteer First-Aid Squad shall be required to
work the same number of shifts per month.
(2) Each crew chief is responsible for completing crew chief sheets and
providing them on a timely basis to the Captain of the Volunteer
First-Aid Squad or his/her designee.
§ 49-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 49-12
1:75
§ 49-13. Payment for schooling and training. [Added 12-1-1992 by
Ord. No. 998-92]
Upon the completion of six months of service as a member of the Volunteer
First-Aid Squad, a member shall receive reimbursement for the expense
associated with course work necessary to obtain the requisite certification
as a member of the First-Aid Squad. No member shall be entitled to receive
such reimbursement unless he or she shall have been a member in good
standing for at least six months prior to the time of such reimbursement.
§ 49-14. Donations to be deposited in squad account.
Any donations, gratuities or gifts of money made to the Squad shall be
deposited in the Squad's bank account and shall be used for Squad
purposes.
(3) Members shall be required to advise by telephone their crew chief
as to their on-duty status.
(4) The Captain shall assign crew chiefs for all weekend shifts.
C. Members failing to achieve the maximum stipend may receive a pro
rata payment for time served in meeting scheduling requirements.
§ 49-12 EDGEWATER CODE § 49-14
1:76
ARTICLE II
Billing and Payment for EMS services
[Adopted 9-20-2010 by Ord. No. 1445-201020]
§ 49-15. Purpose and intent.
§ 49-16. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DEPENDENT —
EMS PROVIDER — The Borough of Edgewater Volunteer First-Aid Squad,
Borough of Edgewater paid EMTs, and any public or private provider of
EMS services authorized to operate within the Borough of Edgewater.
EMS SERVICES — Ambulance services and emergency medical services,
performed by any EMS provider in the Borough of Edgewater, whether paid
or volunteer, public or private.
RESIDENT — Any individual whose legal domicile is within the Borough of
Edgewater. Verification of domicile shall be based on voter registration, a
State of New Jersey driver's license, proof of filing a State of New Jersey
income tax return from a Borough of Edgewater address or other proofs
accepted under federal guidelines.
A. The provision of EMS services by EMS providers in the Borough of
Edgewater is funded primarily by local taxes, and the Borough of
Edgewater recognizes the need to bill for the provision of EMS services
in order to aid in the provision of those services.
B. It is in the best interest of the residents of Edgewater to establish
billing and payment procedures in order to minimize any out-of-pocket
expenses for Borough residents.
C. No person requiring EMS services shall be denied services due to a lack
of insurance or an inability to pay.
Any individual who is the spouse or an unemancipated child (natural,
adopted or stepchild) of a taxpayer or resident as defined below;
A.
Any unemancipated child for whom the taxpayer or resident has been
appointed legal guardian;
B.
Any individual who resides in a permanent domicile of the taxpayer or
resident and is claimed as a dependent for federal income tax purposes;
or
C.
Any individual who resides in the permanent domicile of the taxpayer
or resident and who is deemed to be a dependent under the health
insurance policy of the taxpayer or resident.
D.
20.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 1-1-2011.
§ 49-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 49-16
1:77
TAXPAYER — Any individual listed on the deed of ownership of any property
located within the municipal boundaries of the Borough of Edgewater and
their dependents as defined above. In the case of a corporation or
partnership, only those individuals retaining a twenty-five-percent-orgreater
ownership shall be considered a taxpayer. For the purpose of
determining a twenty-five-percent-or-greater ownership, adult married or
civil union partners may combine their ownership. A taxpayer's dependent,
as defined above, shall be considered a taxpayer.
§ 49-17. Billing for service.
§ 49-18. Billing to insurance companies and/or persons served;
fees.
The Borough of Edgewater may contract with a professional medical billing
service for the collection of payment for services rendered by the Borough
of Edgewater First-Aid Squad or Borough of Edgewater paid EMTs. Said bill
shall be issued to the insurance company for the person served, if any, or
directly to the person served if insurance coverage is not available. Fees to
be charged for EMS services shall be as follows:
A. All patients, whether or not residents of the Borough of Edgewater, and/
or their financially responsible parties, insurers or carriers will be billed
for EMS services provided by an EMS provider according to the fee
schedule established herein or at rates established by the Borough of
Edgewater from time to time.
B. A patient who receives EMS services is obligated, at the time of service
or as soon as practicable thereafter, to provide the EMS provider with
all pertinent insurance and payment information to facilitate the billing
of third-party payment sources for services rendered. The Borough or
EMS provider may, at its option, and shall, where required by law, bill
insurers or carriers on a patient's behalf, or accept payment on an
assignment basis.
C. All patients who are not residents or taxpayers of the Borough of
Edgewater shall be liable for any copayment or deductible amounts not
satisfied by public or private insurance, and the Borough or EMS
provider shall make reasonable collection efforts for all such balances.
The Borough may bill any applicable coinsurance carriers for such
amounts. Exceptions include only those instances where the Borough or
EMS provider has knowledge of a particular patient's indigence or
where the Borough has made a determination that the cost of billing
and collecting such copayments or deductibles exceeds or is
disproportionate to the amounts to be collected.
A. For ambulance transportation: $600;
B. Per loaded mile for basic life support (BLS) mileage: $14;
C. Fee for oxygen administration: $75;
§ 49-16 EDGEWATER CODE § 49-18
1:78
§ 49-19. Maintenance of records.
The Borough of Edgewater and, if applicable, its professional medical billing
service shall maintain accurate records of all Borough of Edgewater EMS
requests for service, service calls, and EMS services approved and/or
rendered by the Borough of Edgewater First-Aid Squad or other Edgewater
EMS provider. All other EMS providers shall maintain accurate records of
same for all requests for service, service calls, and services approved and/
or rendered by the EMS provider while on duty, as well as all other records
required by the Borough. Said records shall include pertinent information
about the general nature of the call and shall identify the complete name,
mailing address, place of domicile, location and telephone numbers of all
persons requesting and receiving EMS services, as well as all pertinent and
available insurance information.
§ 49-20. Payment.
Persons receiving a bill for EMS services shall make payment to the
Borough, its professional medical billing service or the EMS provider who
rendered EMS services, as appropriate, within 30 days, or provide proof
that they have submitted a claim to their insurance carrier for payment
within 30 days of receipt of request of a bill. These provisions shall be
subject to the following:
D. For automatic external defibrillator (AED) pads: $75; and
E. For cervical collars: $25.
A. Persons receiving EMS services who have health insurance to cover
ambulance and emergency medical services are expected to cooperate
with the appropriate billing entity to secure full payment for services
rendered.
B. In the event the health insurance company of a taxpayer or resident
does not pay the bill in full, the EMS provider will accept such partial
payment to the extent on the insured's policy limits, including
deductible and coinsurance requirements, as payment in full.
C. In the event a taxpayer or resident of the Borough of Edgewater does
not have health insurance, payment shall not be required.
D. Due to the time requirements for the preparation and processing of
insurance claims, interest shall not be charged on Borough of
Edgewater EMS billings.
E. After providing EMS services, the Borough shall transmit all pertinent
billing information to the Borough's professional medical billing service
for collection as set forth in Subsection F below. The professional
medical billing service shall be responsible for receipt of payment and
proper recordkeeping of its collections as provided in its contract with
the Borough of Edgewater. Payments received by the professional
medical billing service shall, thereafter, be transmitted electronically to
§ 49-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 49-20
1:79
a designated account of the Borough of Edgewater to be administered
by the Borough of Edgewater Chief Financial Officer (CFO). In addition,
the professional medical billing service shall simultaneously transmit
a transport report to the Borough of Edgewater First-Aid Squad or its
designee for its review and approval and transmit a copy to the Borough
CFO or his or her designee. The Squad shall prepare a reconciliation
report and shall monitor the operations of the professional medical
billing service, including billing activities and receipt of funds.
F. The professional medical billing service shall be responsible for the
initial billing and two follow-up billings. Costs associated with the
professional medical billing service shall be as provided in its contract
with the Borough of Edgewater. After three attempts to collect said
claim, the professional medical billing service shall notify the Borough
of Edgewater and relinquish rights to that billing, unless otherwise
directed by the Borough Administrator. The Borough of Edgewater may
turn said delinquent accounts over to a collection agency that will be
compensated on a percent of cash collections of the delinquent
accounts. The Borough of Edgewater reserves the right to determine
that a bill is uncollectible and should be written off.
G. The Borough of Edgewater may, either directly or through any thirdparty
billing agency with which it has contracted for billing and/or
collections for emergency medical services, make arrangements with
patients and/or their financially responsible party for installment
payments of bills or forgive any bill or portion thereof so long as the
Borough determines that the financial condition of the patient requires
such an arrangement and the patient and/or financially responsible
party has demonstrated a willingness to make good-faith efforts
towards payment of the bill.
H. A patient, including a Borough resident, for whom the Borough of
Edgewater has not received payment from a third-party payer on
assignment and who receives payment directly from a third-party payer
for EMS services rendered by the Borough of Edgewater First-Aid
Squad or other Edgewater EMS provider is obligated to remit such
monies to the Borough in the event the Borough has not been paid for
services rendered. Patients who do not remit such monies may be held
liable for costs of collection in addition to the charges for emergency
medical services rendered. Any person who shall violate the terms and
provisions of this section shall also, upon conviction, be subject to the
penalties provided in the general penalty provision of this Code.21
I. Payment procedures for all other EMS providers shall be as set forth in
the contract between the Borough and said EMS provider.
21.Editor's Note: See Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II, General Penalty.
§ 49-20 EDGEWATER CODE § 49-20
1:80
Chapter 52
FISCAL YEAR
§ 52-1. Revert to calendar year.
The municipality shall revert to a calendar year commencing January 1,
2010, utilizing a transition year from July 1, 2009 to December 31, 2009.
§ 52-2. Application and approval.
The Borough Administrator, Chief Financial Officer, Borough Auditor and
other appropriate officials are hereby authorized and directed to make the
required application to the Finance Board and prepare and execute any
documents necessary in connection with such application and approval.
Chapter 55
HOUSING AUTHORITY
§ 49-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-2
1:81

ARTICLE I
Creation
[Adopted 2-4-1969 by Ord. No. 501-69 (Ch. 48, Art. I of the 1975
Code)]
§ 55-1. Creation of Authority.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Local Housing Authorities Law, as
amended, of the State of New Jersey, a body corporate and politic, to be
known as the "Housing Authority of the Borough of Edgewater," be and the
same is hereby created and established.
§ 55-2. Copy of provisions to be filed with state.
The Clerk be and he hereby is authorized and directed to file a certified
copy of this article with the Commissioner of the State Department of
Conservation and Economic Development.
§ 55-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-2
1:83

ARTICLE II
Function as Redevelopment Agency
[Adopted 6-18-1985 by Ord. No. 816-85 (Ch. 48, Art. II of the 1975
Code)]
§ 55-3. Authorization to act as redevelopment agency.22
The Housing Authority of the Borough of Edgewater be and the same
is hereby designated, constituted, authorized and empowered to act as
the Redevelopment Agency of the Borough of Edgewater pursuant to the
provisions of Chapter 100 of the Laws of 1949 of the State of New Jersey,
and any other law appertaining thereto and to have and possess all rights,
powers, privileges and immunities conferred by said legislation upon such
redevelopment agency. The Housing Authority of the Borough of Edgewater
is authorized and empowered to act pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40A:12A-1 et seq., known as the "Local Redevelopment and Housing Law."
§ 55-4. Authorization to act as public agency.
The Housing Authority of the Borough of Edgewater be and the same
is hereby designated, constituted, authorized and empowered to act as
the authorized public agency pursuant to the provisions of the Federal
Housing Act of 1949 for the purpose of redeveloping and rehabilitating
blighted areas in the Borough of Edgewater or areas in the process of
becoming blighted and to have and possess all rights, powers, privileges
and immunities conferred by said legislation upon such authorized public
agency.
§ 55-5. Authorization to act as public housing agency.
The Housing Authority of the Borough of Edgewater be and the same is
hereby designated, constituted, authorized and empowered to act as the
authorized public housing agency pursuant to the provisions of the Federal
Housing Act of 1949 for the purpose of providing low-rent housing for
families of low income wherever the needs of such families are not being
adequately met by private enterprise and to have and possess all rights,
powers, privileges and immunities conferred by said legislation upon said
authorized public housing agency.
§ 55-6. Filing of provisions.
The Borough Clerk be and he hereby is authorized and directed to file a
certified copy of this article with the appropriate departments, agencies or
officials of the State of New Jersey and the federal government.
22.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 55-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-6
1:85
Chapter 65
MAYOR AND COUNCIL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bylaws of Mayor and Council — See Ch. A551.
§ 55-6 EDGEWATER CODE § 55-6
1:86
ARTICLE I
Election of Mayor and Council
§ 65-1. Method of election. [Amended 9-3-1975 by Ord. No. 581-75]
A Mayor and six Councilmen shall be elected as provided by law.
§ 65-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 65-1
1:87

ARTICLE II
Mayor
§ 65-2. Term of office. [Amended 7-6-1971 by Ord. No. 528-71]
The Mayor shall hold office for a term as provided by New Jersey state
statute.
§ 65-3. Powers and duties.
The Mayor shall see that the laws of the State of New Jersey and the
ordinances of the Borough of Edgewater are faithfully executed, and shall
recommend to the Council such measures as he may deem necessary or
expedient for the welfare of the Borough. He shall maintain peace and good
order and have the power to suppress all riots and tumultuous assemblies
in the Borough.
§ 65-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 65-3
1:89

ARTICLE III
Council
§ 65-4. Term of office.
Councilmen shall hold office for three years.
§ 65-5. President of Council to preside at meetings.
The President of the Council shall preside at all meetings of the Council
when the Mayor does not preside.
§ 65-6. Right of President of Council to debate and vote.
The President of the Council shall have the right to debate and vote on all
questions before the Council.
§ 65-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 65-6
1:91
Chapter 71
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Civil service — See Ch. 10.
Borough Clerk — See Ch. 27.
Residency requirements for employees — See
Ch. 37, Art. I.
First-aid certification requirements — See Ch.
37, Art. II.
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 37,
Art. III.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 41.
Fire Department — See Ch. 45.
Mayor and Council — See Ch. 65.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 77.
Police Department — See Ch. 81.
Public Works Department — See Ch. 87.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 96.
§ 65-6 EDGEWATER CODE § 65-6
1:92
ARTICLE I
Construction Official
[Adopted 7-19-1938 by Ord. No. 284; readopted 8-1-1967 by Ord.
No. 476 (Ch. 14 of the 1975 Code)]
§ 71-1. Creation of office; term of office; removal.
The office of Construction Official23 is hereby created. The term of the
Construction Official shall be for one year from January 1 of the year in
which he is appointed and until his successor is appointed and qualifies. The
Mayor and Council may, by a majority vote, remove such official for cause
after reasonable notice and hearing.
§ 71-2. Powers and duties.
§ 71-3. Duty to perform inspections; right of entry.
The Construction Official shall have the right, and it shall be his duty,
to inspect all buildings in course of construction, erection, alteration or
repair, and, also, any and all buildings or structures which he has reason to
A. It shall be the duty of the Construction Official to enforce the provisions
of the Zoning Ordinance24 and of all other chapters relating to the
construction, alteration, repair or maintenance of all buildings,
structures and signs within the Borough. He shall perform all of the
duties imposed upon the Zoning Officer and shall issue all permits for
the construction, alteration, repair or maintenance of buildings,
structures and signs required by the Zoning Ordinance or by other
chapters.
B. The Construction Official shall:
(1) Keep a record of all applications for permits and all proceedings
thereon and shall preserve all specifications and plans and
amendments filed in connection with any application for a permit.
(2) Keep a record of all permits issued, of all inspections made and all
permits revoked.
(3) Keep a full and complete record of all buildings or structures
erected, altered or repaired.
(4) Keep a record of all fees paid and shall pay over such fees to the
Collector of the Borough at least once in each month.
(5) Make a report to the Mayor and Council at its first meeting in each
month, setting forth the number of applications filed, the number of
permits granted, the amount of fees and such other information as
may be from time to time requested.
23.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
24.Editor's Note: See Ch. 240, Land Use and Development.
§ 71-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-3
1:93
believe may be unsafe or dangerous, and, also, at all proper times to enter
upon private property and the buildings thereon for the purpose of making
necessary inspection for the proper enforcement of the various ordinances
of this Borough and the laws of this state applicable thereto. No person shall
interfere with him in the performance of such duties or prevent him from
making any inspection during reasonable hours.
§ 71-4. Additional powers and duties.
The Construction Official shall, in addition to the duties herein specifically
enumerated, perform such other duties as may from time to time be
prescribed by a resolution of the Mayor and Council.
§ 71-5. Salary. [Amended 9-3-1975 by Ord. No. 581-75]
The Construction Official shall receive such salary as is set forth in the
current annual Salary Ordinance of the Borough of Edgewater.
§ 71-3 EDGEWATER CODE § 71-5
1:94
ARTICLE II
Attorney
[Adopted 3-15-1955 by Ord. No. 374; readopted 8-1-1967 by Ord.
No. 476 (Ch. 9 of the 1975 Code)]
§ 71-6. Appointment. [Amended 9-3-1975 by Ord. No. 581-75]
As provided by law, a Borough Attorney shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the advice and consent of the Council.
§ 71-7. Powers and duties. [Amended 9-3-1975 by Ord. No. 581-75]
The Borough Attorney shall render legal services to the Mayor and Council
of the Borough of Edgewater and perform such other duties as the Mayor
and Council may from time to time assign.
§ 71-8. Retaining fee; fees for other services.
The annual retaining fee of the Borough Attorney shall be as prescribed
by ordinance of the Mayor and Council and shall be exclusive of fees for
services rendered during the year which are evidenced by a bill properly
sworn to as required by law and approved by resolution of the Mayor and
Council.
§ 71-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-8
1:95

ARTICLE III
Clerk
[Adopted 3-15-1955 by Ord. No. 374; readopted 8-1-1967 by Ord.
No. 476 (Ch. 27 of the 1975 Code)]
§ 71-9. Position created.25 [Amended 9-3-1975 by Ord. No. 581-75]
As provided by law, there is hereby created the office of Borough Clerk.
25.Editor's Note: Two additional sections, one of which set forth the duties of the Borough
Clerk and the other of which established his salary, were repealed 9-3-1975 by Ord. No.
581-75. The provisions are covered by statute.
§ 71-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-9
1:97

ARTICLE IV
Tax Assessor
[Adopted 3-15-1955 by Ord. No. 374; readopted 8-1-1967 by Ord.
No. 476 (Ch. 93 of the 1975 Code)]
§ 71-10. Election of Assessor; term of office. [Amended 9-3-1975 by
Ord. No. 581-75]
As provided by law, there shall be elected a Tax Assessor of the Borough of
Edgewater, for a term of four years.
§ 71-11. Duties.
The Assessor shall perform such duties in relation to the assessment of
taxes as are prescribed by law and the Council may by ordinance or
resolution require.
§ 71-12. Salary. [Amended 9-3-1975 by Ord. No. 581-75]
The Assessor shall receive an annual salary as is set forth in the current
annual Salary Ordinance of the Borough of Edgewater.
§ 71-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-12
1:99

ARTICLE V
Tax Collector
[Adopted 3-15-1955 by Ord. No. 374; readopted 8-1-1967 by Ord.
No. 476 (Ch. 95 of the 1975 Code)]
§ 71-13. Election of Collector; term of office. [Amended 9-3-1975 by
Ord. No. 581-75]
As provided by law, there shall be elected a Tax Collector of the Borough of
Edgewater, whose term shall be four years, subject to statutory provisions
providing tenure.
§ 71-14. Duties.
§ 71-15. Salary. [Amended 9-3-1975 by Ord. No. 581-75]
The Collector shall receive an annual salary as is set forth in the current
annual Salary Ordinance of the Borough of Edgewater.
A. The Collector shall enter in suitable books to be kept for the purpose
the sums received by him each day for taxes, with the names of the
persons on whose account the same shall have been paid, shall keep a
record and account of the finances of the Borough and shall, within 60
days after the end of the fiscal year or when otherwise required by the
Council, make and furnish a report thereof, with a detailed and true
statement of all moneys received and disbursed by him and for what
purposes, from the commencement of his official year to the date of his
report, or for such period as the Council may require, and a list of
delinquent taxpayers for the previous year.
B. The Collector shall act as Treasurer of the Borough.
§ 71-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-15
1:101

ARTICLE VI
Tax Searcher
[Adopted 3-15-1955 by Ord. No. 374; readopted 8-1-1967 by Ord.
No. 476 (Ch. 97 of the 1975 Code)]
§ 71-16. Appointment.
The Tax Searcher of the Borough of Edgewater shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council.
§ 71-17. Duties. [Amended 9-3-1975 by Ord. No. 581-75]
He shall, when required by the Mayor and Council, furnish reports relating
to property taxes in the Borough of Edgewater as are or may be required by
law or as directed by the Mayor and Council.
§ 71-18. Salary. [Amended 9-3-1975 by Ord. No. 581-75]
The compensation of the Tax Searcher shall be an annual salary as is set
forth in the current annual Salary Ordinance of the Borough of Edgewater.
§ 71-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-18
1:103

ARTICLE VII
Engineer
[Adopted 12-17-1974 by Ord. No. 565-74 (Ch. 34 of the 1975 Code)]
§ 71-19. Position to be appointive.26
The position of Borough Engineer shall be an appointive position pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:87-15 and the amendments thereto.27
§ 71-20. Duties.
The appointed Borough Engineer shall perform all functions as set forth
and required by the ordinances of the Borough of Edgewater and the
amendments thereto, in addition to all those functions as may be required
by state, county and local law.
26.Editor's Note: Former § 34-1, Full salaried position abolished, which immediately preceded
this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
I).
27.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:87-15 was repealed by L.1987, c. 379, § 1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.
§ 71-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-20
1:105

ARTICLE VIII
Deputy Borough Clerk
[Adopted 7-2-1975 by Ord. No. 571-75 (Ch. 28 of the 1975 Code)]
§ 71-21. Position created; appointment.
The position of Deputy Borough Clerk is hereby created. The Deputy
Borough Clerk shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent
of the Council.
§ 71-22. Powers and duties.
During the absence or disability of the Borough Clerk, the Deputy Borough
Clerk shall have all the powers of the Borough Clerk and shall perform the
functions and duties of such office.
§ 71-23. Compensation.
The compensation of the Deputy Borough Clerk shall be an annual salary as
prescribed by the annual Salary Ordinance of the Mayor and Council.
§ 71-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-23
1:107

ARTICLE IX
Police Communications Clerks
[Adopted 8-3-1976 by Ord. No. 597-76 (Ch. 32 of the 1975 Code);
amended in its entirety 7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 1508-2014]
§ 71-24. Position created; number to be determined.
There is hereby created the position of Police Communications Clerk for
assignment to the Edgewater Police Department. The number of Police
Communications Clerks shall be determined by the Mayor and Council.
§ 71-25. Police Communications Clerks considered civilian
employees.
The Police Communications Clerks assigned to the Police Department shall
not be members thereof and shall be considered civilian employees of the
Borough of Edgewater.
§ 71-26. Duties.
The duties of the Police Communications Clerks shall be such as may, from
time to time, be established by regulations promulgated by the Police Chief
of the Borough with the prior consent of the Mayor and Council.
§ 71-27. Salaries.
The Police Communications Clerks shall be paid such wages as shall, from
time to time, be established under an appropriate ordinance of the Borough.
§ 71-28. Amount of wages.
The wages of the Police Communications Clerks shall be set forth in the
current annual Salary Ordinance of the Borough of Edgewater.
§ 71-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-28
1:109

ARTICLE X
Code Enforcement Officer and Trainee
[Adopted 12-20-1977 by Ord. No. 623-77; amended in its entirety
4-15-2002 by Ord. No. 1231-2002 (Ch. 12 of the 1975 Code)]
§ 71-29. Positions created.
There shall be created the positions of Borough Code Enforcement Officer
and Borough Code Enforcement Officer Trainee in the Borough of
Edgewater. The number of staff in these positions may be determined by the
Mayor and Council from time to time as it may deem necessary to promote
the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Borough.
§ 71-30. Appointment.
Persons holding the positions of Borough Code Enforcement Officer and
Borough Code Enforcement Officer Trainee shall be appointed by the
governing body.
§ 71-31. Responsibilities.
A. It shall be the responsibility of each person holding the position of
Borough Code Enforcement Officer and Borough Code Enforcement
Officer Trainee to enforce the following enumerated ordinances as set
forth in the Code of the Borough of Edgewater: [Amended 9-20-2010
by Ord. No. 1439-2010]
(1) Chapter 129, Art. I, Dogs.
(2) Chapter 293, Parks and Recreation Areas.
(3) Chapter 314, Property Maintenance.
(4) Chapter 380, Streets and Sidewalks.
B. It shall also be the responsibility of each Borough Code Enforcement
Officer and/or Borough Code Enforcement Officer Trainee to enforce
any and all ordinances of the Edgewater Board of Health as authorized
by ordinance or resolution of the Board of Health.
C. Although the primary responsibility of each Borough Code Enforcement
Officer and/or Borough Code Enforcement Officer Trainee shall be
enforcing the above-enumerated ordinances, other municipal
employees and officials may and shall also enforce said ordinances, and
the delegation of this enforcement duty to each Borough Code
Enforcement Officer or Borough Code Enforcement Officer Trainee
shall not preclude others from enforcing said ordinances.
§ 71-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-32
1:111
§ 71-32. Salary and hours.
The salary and the amount of hours to be worked by each Borough Code
Enforcement Officer or Borough Code Enforcement Officer Trainee shall be
fixed by the Mayor and Council.
§ 71-33. Supervision; work schedule. [Amended 3-16-2009 by Ord.
No. 1402-2009]
Persons holding the position of the Borough Code Enforcement Officer or
Borough Code Enforcement Officer Trainee shall be under the supervision
of the Borough Administrator. The work schedule of these positions shall
be determined by the Borough Administrator. The Borough Administrator
has the authority to adjust the work schedule for these positions as he/she
deems necessary in order to promote the health, safety and welfare of the
citizens of the Borough.
§ 71-34. Reports.
The Borough Code Enforcement Officer and Borough Code Enforcement
Officer Trainee shall submit a written report to the governing body each
calendar month or whenever requested.
§ 71-32 EDGEWATER CODE § 71-34
1:112
ARTICLE XI
Deputy Tax Collector
[Adopted 7-12-1988 by Ord. No. 895-88 (Ch. 96 of the 1975 Code)]
§ 71-35. Position created; appointment.
The position of Deputy Tax Collector is hereby created. The Deputy Tax
Collector shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of
the Council.
§ 71-36. Powers and duties.
During the absence or disability of the Tax Collector, the Deputy Tax
Collector shall have all the powers of the Tax Collector and shall perform
the functions and duties of such office.
§ 71-37. Compensation.
The compensation of the Deputy Tax Collector shall be an annual salary
as is set forth in the current annual Salary Ordinance of the Borough of
Edgewater.
§ 71-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-37
1:113

ARTICLE XII
Clerk/Typist
[Adopted 1-17-1994 by Ord. No. 1024-9328 (Ch. 4 of the 1975
Code29)]
§ 71-38. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Clerk/Typist.
§ 71-39. Appointment.
The Clerk/Typist shall be appointed by the Mayor and Council.
§ 71-40. Duties.
The Clerk/Typist shall perform such duties as may be designated by the
Mayor and Council and shall be under the direction and supervision of the
Borough Clerk.
§ 71-41. Salary.
The salary of the Clerk/Typist shall be as set forth in the current Salary
Ordinance of the Borough of Edgewater.
28.Editor's Note: Section 5 of this ordinance repealed former Ch. 61, Payroll Clerk/Accounts
Payable, adopted 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 999-92.
29.Editor's Note: Former Ch. 4, Account Clerk, Senior Stenographer, adopted 4-16-1974 by
Ord. No. 553-74, as amended, was repealed 11-23-1976 by Ord. No. 601-76.
§ 71-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-41
1:115

ARTICLE XIII
Public Safety Coordinator
[Adopted 6-19-1995 by Ord. No. 1054-95 (Ch. 68 of the 1975 Code)]
§ 71-42. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Public Safety Coordinator in the
Borough.
§ 71-43. Duties.30
The Public Safety Coordinator shall be responsible for the scheduling of
members of the paid Emergency Medical Service, planning and scheduling
coverage for ambulance service and such other duties as may be prescribed
from time to time by the Mayor and Council.
§ 71-44. Salary.31
The Public Safety Coordinator shall be paid an annual salary as set forth in
the current annual Salary Ordinance of the Borough of Edgewater.
30.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
31.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 71-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-44
1:117

ARTICLE XIV
Administrator
[Adopted 1-22-1997 by Ord. No. 1084-97; amended in its entirety
2-19-2008 by Ord. No. 1384-200832 (Ch. 7 of the 1975 Code)]
§ 71-45. Position created.
The position of Borough Administrator is hereby created in accordance with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-136 through 40A:9-138, inclusive.
§ 71-46. Appointment; term of office; removal.
The Borough Administrator shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of the Council. In the event that the Mayor fails to nominate
such Borough Administrator within 30 days after the office is created or
after the office should become vacant or in the event that the Council fails
to confirm any nomination made by the Mayor, then, after the expiration of
such 30 days, the Borough Council shall appoint the Borough Administrator
by a majority of at least three affirmative votes, the Mayor having no vote
thereon except in case of a tie. The Administrator shall serve at the pleasure
of the governing body and may be removed from office in accordance with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-138.
§ 71-47. Powers and duties.
The Borough Administrator shall perform such duties as established by
statute and as may be prescribed from time to time by the Mayor and
Council. In addition, the Borough Administrator shall:
A. Serve as chief administrative officer of the Borough and be responsible
to the governing body for the proper and efficient administration of the
municipal services and business affairs of the Borough.
B. Serve as the personnel officer of the Borough and be responsible for
recommending the appointment and removal of Borough personnel,
except as otherwise provided by law. The Borough Administrator shall
provide for a centralized personnel system, including provision for the
evaluation, promotion or disciplining of all employees, and may
authorize the head of a department to supervise and control employees
as appropriate according to the operation of the Borough. The Borough
Administrator shall report at the next regular meeting of the governing
body any action taken pursuant to this section. The Borough
Administrator will represent the governing body in negotiating
collective bargaining agreements.
C. Serve as the budget officer and prepare and submit before the close of
the fiscal year, or at such time as the governing body shall determine, a
proposed budget for the next fiscal year and an explanatory budget
32.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Ch. 40, Financial Officer, Chief,
adopted 9-11-1995 by Ord. No. 1057-95.
§ 71-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-47
1:119
§ 71-48. Compensation.
The compensation to be paid to the Borough Administrator shall be as set
forth in the annual Salary Ordinance of the Borough.
message. The Borough Administrator shall be responsible for advising
the governing body as to a timetable and schedule for budget
processing so as to conform to statutory requirements. In addition, the
Borough Administrator shall coordinate with the Chief Financial Officer
in preparation of the budget for the fiscal year.
D. Inform the governing body as to the conduct of Borough affairs,
submitting whatever report the governing body shall request, and
making such recommendations to the governing body as he/she deems
necessary and advisable for the welfare of the Borough. In cooperation
with the Chief Financial Officer, the Borough Administrator shall see
that the governing body is regularly informed about the condition of the
Borough finances. The Borough Administrator shall anticipate problems
that may develop and advise the governing body accordingly, outlining
possible solutions or preventive measures.
E. Submit to the governing body, as soon as possible after the close of the
fiscal year, a complete written report of the administrative activities of
the Borough for the preceding year.
F. Recommend the employment of experts and consultants to perform
work and render advice in connection with the operation of dedicated
utilities or work projects in the Borough, subject to approval by the
governing body.
G. Attend to the letting of contracts, in due form of law, and supervise the
performance and faithful execution of these contracts, except insofar as
such duties are expressly imposed upon some other officer or official by
statute or by action of the governing body. He shall ensure compliance
with the provisions of all franchises, leases, permits and privileges
granted by the Borough.
H. Study and keep the governing body informed as to federal, state and/or
county aid projects and any other services or possible grants for which
the Borough may qualify. The Borough Administrator shall coordinate
the application procedures and shall provide liaison for such aid, grants
or direction of the governing body.
I. Provide liaison with the Borough Attorney and any other legal counsel
engaged by the Borough and with other professional staff, as the
governing body may direct.
§ 71-47 EDGEWATER CODE § 71-48
1:120
ARTICLE XV
Land Use Administrator
[Adopted 9-29-1997 by Ord. No. 1104-97 (Ch. 51 of the 1975 Code)]
§ 71-49. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Land Use Administrator in the
Borough of Edgewater.33
§ 71-50. Appointment; term of office.
The Land Use Administrator shall be appointed by the Mayor and Council.
The term of office shall be for one year, commencing on January 1 of each
year.
§ 71-51. Duties and responsibilities.
The Land Use Administrator shall have the following duties and
responsibilities:
A. The Land Use Administrator shall review and process applications for
any land use approval required by statute or ordinance, including but
not limited to site plans, subdivisions, variances, conditional uses and
change of use approvals.
B. The Land Use Administrator shall determine the appropriate land use
agency which is required to consider and determine filed applications.
C. The Land Use Administrator shall be responsible for reviewing
applications for land use agency approval and shall determine whether
such applications are complete. In connection therewith, the Land Use
Administrator shall be responsible for providing the certification as to
completeness required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3. In the event that an
application for development is incomplete, the Land Use Administrator
shall notify the applicant, in writing, of the deficiencies in such
application within 45 days from the date of submission of the
application.
D. The Land Use Administrator shall be responsible for developing
agendas for the respective land use agencies consistent with the
directives from each board. In addition, the Land Use Administrator
shall attend meetings of both the Planning Board and Board of
Adjustment, advise such boards on matters relating to development and
construction and be responsible for publishing the decisions of land use
agencies as required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10i.
E. The Land Use Administrator shall review development applications and
may advise the appropriate land use agencies regarding the nature of
33.Editor's Note: The Land Use Administrator in the Borough is the Zoning Officer; see Ch.
240, Land Use and Development.
§ 71-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-51
1:121
§ 71-52. Salary.
The compensation to be paid to the Land Use Administrator shall be as set
forth in the annual Salary Ordinance of the Borough.
the application and its consistency to or deviation from applicable
zoning and land use regulations.
§ 71-51 EDGEWATER CODE § 71-52
1:122
ARTICLE XVI
School Crossing Guard
[Adopted 10-20-1997 by Ord. No. 1107-97 (Ch. 82 of the 1975
Code)]
§ 71-53. Establishment of position.
There is hereby established the position of adult school crossing guard in
the Borough of Edgewater. The number of adult school crossing guards shall
be determined on an annual basis by the Mayor and Council.
§ 71-54. Appointment; term. [Amended 3-20-2017 by Ord. No.
1541-2017]
Adult school crossing guards shall be appointed by the Mayor and Council,
which appointment shall be for a term of one year in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-154.1. Prior to the appointment of an individual
to said position, the Chief of Police and/or Police Director shall ascertain the
eligibility of the application and make a report to the governing body and
Borough Administrator of the suitability of said applicant for appointment
to said position.
§ 71-55. Qualifications for appointment.
An applicant for the position of adult school crossing guard shall be
required to be a citizen and resident of the State of New Jersey, be of sound
body and of good health, shall be of good moral character and shall not have
been convicted of any criminal offense involving moral turpitude.
§ 71-56. Duties of position. [Amended 3-20-2017 by Ord. No.
1541-2017]
An adult school crossing guard shall not have the right to bear firearms
or the power of arrest and shall be under the supervision and direction of
the Chief of Police and/or Police Director or his designee. An adult school
crossing guard shall only perform the duties of such position within the
Borough of Edgewater and shall comply with the rules and regulations
applicable to the conduct and decorum of the regular police officers of the
Borough.
§ 71-57. Salary.
The position of adult school crossing guard shall be paid a salary as shall be
set forth in the annual Salary Ordinance of the Borough of Edgewater.
§ 71-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-57
1:123

ARTICLE XVII
Building Maintenance Worker
[Adopted 5-3-1999 by Ord. No. 1157-99 (Ch. 15 of the 1975 Code)]
§ 71-58. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Building Maintenance Worker.
§ 71-59. Appointment.
The Building Maintenance Worker shall be appointed by the Mayor and
Council.
§ 71-60. Powers and duties.
The Building Maintenance Worker shall perform such duties as shall be
designated by the Mayor and Council and shall be under the direction and
supervision of the designee of the Mayor and Council.
§ 71-61. Salary.
The salary of the Building Maintenance Worker shall be as set forth in the
current Salary Ordinance of the Borough of Edgewater.
§ 71-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-61
1:125

ARTICLE XVIII
Tax Clerk/Payroll Clerk
[Adopted 5-3-1999 by Ord. No. 1158-99 (Ch. 94 of the 1975 Code)]
§ 71-62. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Tax Clerk/Payroll Clerk.
§ 71-63. Appointment.
The Tax Clerk/Payroll Clerk shall be appointed by the Mayor and Council.
§ 71-64. Powers and duties.
The Tax Clerk/Payroll Clerk shall perform such duties as shall be designated
by the Mayor and Council and shall be under the direction and supervision
of the Chief Finance Officer.
§ 71-65. Salary.
The salary of the Tax Clerk/Payroll Clerk shall be as set forth in the current
Salary Ordinance of the Borough of Edgewater.
§ 71-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-65
1:127

ARTICLE XIX
(Reserved)34
§ 71-66. through § 71-69. (Reserved)
34.Editor's Note: Former Art. XIX, Assistant Municipal Recycling Coordinator, adopted
2-12-2001 by Ord. No. 1207-2001 (Ch. 76A of the 1975 Code), was repealed 9-20-2010 by
Ord. No. 1440-2010.
§ 71-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-66
1:129

ARTICLE XX
Purchasing Agents
[Adopted 4-21-2003 by Ord. No. 1270-2003; amended in its entirety
2-19-2008 by Ord. No. 1383-2008 (Ch. 72, Art. I of the 1975 Code)]
§ 71-70. Positions created.
There are hereby created the positions of Purchasing Agent, Assistant
Purchasing Agent and Purchasing Assistant.
§ 71-71. Appointment.
The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council, shall appoint the
Purchasing Agent, Assistant Purchasing Agent and the Purchasing
Assistant.
§ 71-72. Duties.
§ 71-73. Salary.
The salaries of the Purchasing Agent, Assistant Purchasing Agent and the
Purchasing Assistant shall be set forth in accordance with the Salary
Ordinance of the Borough of Edgewater.
A. The Purchasing Agent shall act as the Borough Purchasing Agent, set
up a central purchasing system, and be responsible for monitoring all
Borough purchasing activities to assure that purchases are made in
accordance with statutory requirements. The Purchasing Agent is
assigned the authority, responsibility and accountability for the
purchasing activities of the contracting unit. This system shall be
established in order to provide a current record of all budgetary
accounts and to assure the availability of funds for purchases in
accordance with the budget. When directed by the governing body, the
Purchasing Agent shall provide a report of purchasing activities and
statutes. The Purchasing Agent shall issue rules and regulations
governing the requisition and purchase of all municipal supplies and
equipment, as deemed necessary.
B. The Assistant Purchasing Agent and the Purchasing Assistant shall
perform such duties as shall be designated by the Mayor and Council.
§ 71-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-73
1:131

ARTICLE XXI
Privacy Officer
[Adopted 8-11-2003 by Ord. No. 1280-2003 (Ch. 67 of the 1975
Code)]
§ 71-74. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Privacy Officer.
§ 71-75. Appointment.
The Privacy Officer shall be appointed by the Mayor and Council.
§ 71-76. Duties.
The Privacy Officer shall perform such duties as shall be designated by the
Mayor and Council and shall be under the direction and supervision of the
Mayor and Council.
§ 71-77. Salary.
The salary of the Privacy Officer shall be as set forth in the current Salary
Ordinance of the Borough of Edgewater.
§ 71-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-77
1:133

ARTICLE XXII
Emergency Medical Technician
[Adopted 10-16-2006 by Ord. No. 1351-2006 (Ch. 33B of the 1975
Code)]
§ 71-78. Establishment of position; appointment; number.
There is hereby created and established the position of Emergency Medical
Technician within the Borough of Edgewater. An Emergency Medical
Technician shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent
of the Borough Council. The number of persons appointed to such position
shall be as authorized from time to time by resolution adopted by the Mayor
and Council.
§ 71-79. Requirements of position.
A person appointed to the position of Emergency Medical Technician shall
hold the following licenses and certifications:
§ 71-80. Duties and responsibilities. [Amended 3-20-2017 by Ord.
No. 1541-2017]
A person appointed to the position of Emergency Medical Technician shall
perform such duties and responsibilities as may be designated by the Chief
of Police and/or Police Director or Mayor and Council.
§ 71-81. Salary.
The salary of the position of Emergency Medical Technician shall be as set
forth in the current annual Salary Ordinance of the Borough of Edgewater.
A. A driver's license valid in the State of New Jersey.
B. A current and valid Emergency Medical Technician certification issued
by the New Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services.
C. A current and valid CPR certification (community level or professional
level) issued by the American Red Cross, American Heart Association,
or the National Safety Council.
§ 71-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-81
1:135

ARTICLE XXIII
Municipal Housing Liaison
[Adopted 8-13-2007 by Ord. No. 1370-2007 (Ch. 57 of the 1975
Code)]
§ 71-82. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to create the administrative mechanisms
needed for the execution of the Borough of Edgewater's responsibility to
assist in the provision of affordable housing pursuant to the Fair Housing
Act of 1985.
§ 71-83. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity responsible for administering the
affordability controls of some or all units in the affordable housing program
for the Borough of Edgewater to ensure that the restricted units under
administration are affirmatively marketed and sold or rented, as applicable,
only to low- and moderate-income households.
MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON — The employee charged by the governing
body with the responsibility for oversight and administration of the
affordable housing program for the Borough of Edgewater.
§ 71-84. Establishment of Municipal Housing Liaison position and
compensation; powers and duties.
A. Establishment of position of Municipal Housing Liaison. There is hereby
established the position of Municipal Housing Liaison for the Borough
of Edgewater.
B. Subject to the approval of the Council on Affordable Housing (COAH),
the Municipal Housing Liaison shall be appointed by the governing
body and may be a full- or part-time municipal employee.
C. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight and
administration of the affordable housing program for the Borough of
Edgewater, including the following responsibilities which may not be
contracted out, exclusive of Subsection F, which may be contracted out:
(1) Serving as the Borough of Edgewater's primary point of contact for
all inquiries from the state, affordable housing providers,
administrative agents, and interested households;
(2) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in the Borough of
Edgewater's fair share plan;
(3) Compiling, verifying, and submitting annual reports as required by
COAH;
§ 71-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-84
1:137
(4) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
administrative agents, as applicable; and
(5) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring, and affirmative marketing as
offered or approved by COAH.
D. Subject to approval by COAH, the Borough of Edgewater may contract
with or authorize a consultant, authority, government or any agency
charged by the governing body, which entity shall have the
responsibility of administering the affordable housing program of the
Borough of Edgewater, except for those responsibilities which may not
be contracted out pursuant to Subsection C above. If the Borough of
Edgewater contracts with another entity to administer all or any part of
the affordable housing program, including the affordability controls and
affirmative marketing plan, the Municipal Housing Liaison shall
supervise the contracting administrative agent.
E. Compensation. Compensation shall be fixed by the governing body at
the time of the appointment of the Municipal Housing Liaison.
F. Administrative powers and duties assigned to the Municipal Housing
Liaison.
(1) Affordability controls.
(a) Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed
restrictions and mortgages for recording at the time of
conveyance of title of each restricted unit;
(b) Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for its
control period, including the recorded deed with restrictions,
recorded mortgage and note, as appropriate;
(c) Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and
cancellation of the mortgage note are effectuated and properly
filed with the appropriate county's register of deeds or county
clerk's office after the termination of the affordability controls
for each restricted unit;
(d) Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and
(e) Ensuring the issuance of continuing certificates of occupancy
or certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10.
(2) Resale and rental.
(a) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information between owners and the
administrative agent regarding the availability of restricted
units for resale or rental; and
§ 71-84 EDGEWATER CODE § 71-84
1:138
(b) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information to low- and moderate-income
households regarding the availability of restricted units for
resale or re-rental.
(3) Processing request from unit owners.
(a) Reviewing and approving requests from owners of restricted
units who wish to take out home equity loans or refinance
during the term of their ownership;
(b) Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices
from owners of restricted units who wish to make capital
improvements to the units that would affect the selling price,
such authorizations to be limited to those improvements
resulting in additional bedrooms or bathrooms and the cost of
central air-conditioning systems; and
(c) Processing requests and making determinations on requests
by owners of restricted units for hardship waivers.
(4) Enforcement.
(a) Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted units,
at the earliest point of contact in the processing of the project
or development, written acknowledgement of the requirement
that no restricted unit can be offered or in any other way
committed to any person, other than a household duly certified
to the unit by the administrative agent; and
(b) Providing annual reports to COAH as required.
(5) The administrative agent shall have authority to take all actions
necessary and appropriate to carry out its responsibilities
hereunder.
§ 71-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-84
1:139

ARTICLE XXIV
Recycling Coordinator
[Adopted 9-20-2010 by Ord. No. 1440-2010]
§ 71-85. Creation of position.
The position of Municipal Recycling Coordinator is hereby created.
§ 71-86. Appointment.
The Municipal Recycling Coordinator shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the consent of the Council after the applicant has passed the civil service
test for Municipal Recycling Coordinator.
§ 71-87. Duties.
The duties of the Municipal Recycling Coordinator shall be as outlined in
the approved job description by the Mayor and Council and shall be under
the direct supervision of the Superintendent of Public Works. The Municipal
Recycling Coordinator must maintain a current Certified Recycling
Professional Certificate.
§ 71-88. Salary.
The salary of the Municipal Recycling Coordinator shall be as set forth in
the current Salary Ordinance of the Borough of Edgewater.
§ 71-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-88
1:141
Chapter 77
PERSONNEL POLICIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Civil service — See Ch. 10.
Employment benefits and requirements — See
Ch. 37.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 41.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 96.
§ 71-88 EDGEWATER CODE § 71-88
1:142
ARTICLE I
Personnel Manual
[Adopted 4-20-1998 by Ord. No. 1120-98 (Ch. 61, Art. I of the 1975
Code)]
§ 77-1. Adoption of manual.
A document entitled "Borough of Edgewater Personnel Policies and
Procedures," a copy of which is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk,
is hereby adopted and shall govern personnel policies and practices
applicable to Borough employees.
§ 77-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-1
1:143

ARTICLE II
Adoption Procedures for Personnel Practices
[Adopted 11-25-2003 by Ord. No. 1287-2003 (Ch. 61, Art. II of the
1975 Code)]
§ 77-2. Establishment of titles for public employment and salary
ranges for Borough employees.
The Mayor and Council shall by ordinance establish titles for public
employment by the Borough and salary ranges for Borough employees. Said
titles shall conform to the New Jersey Civil Service Act (N.J.S.A. 11A:1-1 et
seq.) and regulations promulgated by the New Jersey State Department of
Personnel, when and where applicable.
§ 77-3. Adoption and amendment of personnel policies and
procedures; applicability.
The Borough shall by resolution adopt and amend from time to time
personnel policies and procedures including rules concerning the hiring
and termination of employees, terms and conditions of employment, and
regulations required to comply with applicable federal and state
employment-related law. The personnel policies and procedures adopted
pursuant to said resolution(s) shall be applicable to all officials, appointees,
employees, prospective employees, volunteers and independent contractors
of the Borough.
§ 77-4. Implementation and enforcement.
The Borough Administrator shall be responsible to implement and enforce
the personnel practices adopted by ordinance or resolution authorized
pursuant to this section. If there is a conflict between said personnel
practices and any duly adopted and lawful collective bargaining agreement,
personnel services contract or federal or state law, the terms and conditions
of that contract or law shall prevail. In all other cases, the practices adopted
pursuant to this article shall prevail.
§ 77-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-4
1:145

ARTICLE III
Eligibility for Defined Contribution Retirement Program
[Adopted 8-11-2008 by Ord. No. 1392-2008 (Ch. 79, Art. I of the
1975 Code)]
§ 77-5. Positions deemed eligible.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2, the following positions are deemed to be
eligible for and shall participate in the Defined Contribution Retirement
Program, unless otherwise permitted to participate in the Public Employees'
Retirement System ("PERS") in accordance with the terms of P.L. 2007, c.
92, and/or Section A and B of Local Finance Notice 2008-10, or as may be
prohibited from such participation owing to the fact that they are employed
pursuant to a professional services agreement:
§ 77-6. Positions exempt from membership.
Individuals serving in the following positions are exempt from Defined
Contribution Retirement Program membership, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
43:15C-2:
A. Borough Administrator.
B. Borough Attorney.
C. Labor Counsel.
D. Rent Leveling Board Attorney.
E. Municipal Prosecutor.
F. Municipal Public Judge(s).
G. Municipal Public Defender.
H. Special Tax Counsel.
I. Municipal Bond Counsel.
J. Borough Auditor.
K. Borough Engineer.
L. Municipal Court Administrator.
M. Superintendent of Recreation.
N. DPW Superintendent.
A. Certified Health Official.
B. Tax Collector.
C. Chief Financial Officer.
§ 77-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-6
1:147
§ 77-7. Exceptions.
If an individual is appointed to one of the positions listed in § 77-5 and
the individual is not serving in a position as described in § 77-6 above,
the Pension Certifying Officer of the municipality may determine that the
individual is not required to join the Defined Contribution Retirement
Program if that individual:
§ 77-8. Interpretation.
This article shall be implemented, construed and subject to the aforesaid
Chapter 92 of the Laws of 2007 (N.J.S.A. 43:15C-1 et seq.), as amended from
time to time, and any regulations or guidance documents from the Local
Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
D. Construction Code Official.
E. Qualified Purchasing Agent.
F. Tax Assessor.
G. Municipal Planner.
H. Registered Municipal Clerk.
I. Licensed Uniform Sub-Code Inspector.
J. Principal Public Works Manager.
A. Was an active participant in the Public Employee Retirement System on
July 1, 2007, and continuously since that time; or
B. Has been appointed pursuant to a valid promotional process;
C. Is appointed on a temporary, interim, or "acting" basis to a position
requiring state certification as set forth in § 77-6 herein, and is in
pursuit of the required certification; or
D. Meets such other exceptions that may be approved by the Local
Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
§ 77-6 EDGEWATER CODE § 77-8
1:148
Chapter 81
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Residency requirements for employees — See
Ch. 37, Art. I.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 41.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 96.
Fees for public records — See Ch. 318.
§ 77-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-8
1:149

ARTICLE I
Organization
[Adopted 10-5-1954 by Ord. No. 369; readopted 8-1-1967 by Ord.
No. 476(Ch. 66, Art. I of the 1975 Code)]
§ 81-1. Composition of Department. [Amended 9-6-1960 by Ord. No.
425; readopted 8-1-1967 by Ord. No. 476; amended 5-5-1970 by
Ord. No. 515-70; 12-21-1976 by Ord. No. 605-76; 10-17-2005 by
Ord. No. 1322-2005; 9-20-2010 by Ord. No. 1439-2010; 3-20-2017
by Ord. No. 1541-2017]
§ 81-2. Chief of Police: authority; duties regarding payroll.
[Amended 3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 1541-2017; 11-13-2017 by Ord.
No. 1559-2017]
The Chief of Police shall be the executive officer of the Department, subject
to such rules, regulations and orders as may be prescribed by the Borough
Council, and it shall be his duty to prepare a payroll biweekly showing the
number of employees of the Police Department and the amount due to each,
which payroll shall be submitted to the Borough Council for certification
as to its correctness. Each payroll shall show and contain the rank of each
person, the time for which each person is entitled for payment and the
amount of the payroll, and it must be certified to by the Chief of Police. The
salary of every member and employee of the Police Department shall be due
and payable biweekly.
§ 81-3. Powers and duties of Chief of Police. [Amended 3-19-1997
by Ord. No. 1091-97; 3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 1541-2017; 11-13-2017
by Ord. No. 1559-2017]
The Borough shall appoint a Chief of Police, who shall have all of the powers
set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, and he shall be directly responsible to the
appropriate authority for the efficiency and routine day-to-day operations
A. The Police Department of the Borough of Edgewater shall consist of:
one Chief of Police; one Captain; three Lieutenants; six Sergeants; and
24 patrol officers to preserve the public peace and enforce all of the
laws of the United States, the State of New Jersey and the Borough of
Edgewater. [Amended 11-13-2017 by Ord. No. 1559-2017]
B. The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Edgewater shall determine if
all such ranks, number of ranks and/or number of patrol officers are
necessary, and the fact that such positions are authorized shall not
mandate the filling of all such positions.
C. The Mayor and Council shall, from time to time, determine the number
of police officers as well as temporary officers and members in an
emergency to be appointed to these positions, and shall further
determine their compensation.
§ 81-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-3
1:151
thereof. Pursuant to the policies established by the appropriate authority,
he shall:
§ 81-4. Powers and duties of Captains. [Amended 5-5-1970 by Ord.
No. 515-70; 12-21-1976 by Ord. No. 605-76; 10-17-2005 by Ord. No.
1322-2005; 3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 1541-2017; 11-13-2017 by Ord.
No. 1559-2017]
The Captain shall be second in command in the Department. The Captain
shall, in the absence of the Chief of Police, temporarily or otherwise,
perform all the duties of the Chief of Police, subject to the limitations
of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118. When the Chief of Police is on duty, the Captain
shall perform such other duties as may be imposed upon him by the Chief
of Police pursuant to the aforementioned statute. In addition, the job
description of the Captain's position as identified in the New Jersey
Department of Personnel Job Specifications is incorporated into the powers
and duties of the Captain.
§ 81-5. Powers and duties of Lieutenants. [Amended 5-5-1970 by
Ord. No. 515-70; 10-17-2005 by Ord. No. 1322-2005; 3-20-2017 by
Ord. No. 1541-2017; 11-13-2017 by Ord. No. 1559-2017]
The Lieutenants shall be next in rank to the Captain. When the Captain
is off duty or is detailed as Acting Chief, the senior Lieutenant, in terms
of length of service as a Lieutenant, shall perform all duties and assume
all responsibilities and functions of the Captain, subject to the limitations
of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118. When a Captain is on duty, the Lieutenant shall
perform such other duties as may be imposed upon him by the Chief
of Police consistent with the aforementioned statute. In addition, the job
description of the Lieutenant's position as identified in the New Jersey
A. Administer and enforce rules and regulations and special emergency
directives for the disposition and discipline of the force and its officers
and personnel.
B. Have, exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties of the
force.
C. Prescribe the duties and assignments of all subordinates and other
personnel.
D. Delegate such of his authority as he may deem necessary for the
efficient operation of the force to be exercised under his direction and
supervision.
E. Report at least monthly to the appropriate authority in such form as
shall be described by such authority on the operation of the force
during the preceding month and make such other reports as may be
requested by such authority.35
35.Editor's Note: Former § 81-3.1, Police Director, added 3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 1541-2017,
which immediately followed this section, was repealed 11-13-2017 by Ord. No. 1559-2017.
§ 81-3 EDGEWATER CODE § 81-5
1:152
Department of Personnel Job Specifications is incorporated into the powers
and duties of the Lieutenant.
§ 81-6. Detective Bureau; purpose. [Amended 9-6-1960 by Ord. No.
425; readopted 8-1-1967 by Ord. No. 476]
The purpose of the Detective Bureau of the Edgewater Police Department is
to detect, apprehend, arrest and convict offenders against the law.
§ 81-7. Assignment to head of Detective Bureau; term. [Amended
9-6-1960 by Ord. No. 425; readopted 8-1-1967 by Ord. No. 476;
amended 5-5-1970 by Ord. No. 515-70; 3-20-2017 by Ord. No.
1541-2017; 11-13-2017 by Ord. No. 1559-2017]
Whenever necessary, the Chief of Police shall assign an officer to be in
charge of the Detective Bureau. The term of the assignment shall be at the
discretion of the Chief of Police.
§ 81-8. Assignment of patrolmen to Detective Bureau. [Amended
9-6-1960 by Ord. No. 425; readopted 8-1-1967 by Ord. No. 476;
amended 3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 1541-2017; 11-13-2017 by Ord. No.
1559-2017]
The patrolmen of the Detective Bureau shall be assigned by the Chief of
Police as required.
§ 81-9. Powers and duties of Sergeants. [Amended 10-17-2005 by
Ord. No. 1322-2005; 3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 1541-2017; 11-13-2017
by Ord. No. 1559-2017]
The Sergeant shall be next in rank to the Lieutenant. The Sergeant on
duty shall take responsibility for the shift that is assigned to him or her. In
addition, the Sergeant shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed
by the Chief of Police pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118. In addition, the
job description of the Sergeant's position as identified in the New Jersey
Department of Personnel Job Specifications is incorporated into the powers
and duties of the Sergeants.
§ 81-10. Qualifications of officers and members. [Amended 9-3-1975
by Ord. No. 581-75; 9-20-2010 by Ord. No. 1439-2010]
Each officer and member of the Police Department shall be a citizen of the
United States. He must be of good moral character, in good health, sound in
body and mind and able to read and write the English language intelligently.
No person shall be appointed an officer or member of the Police Department
who has been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude which would in
the judgment of the Mayor and Council be prejudicial to the morale of the
Department or who is less than 21 or more than 35 years of age at the time
of his appointment, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-127.
§ 81-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-11
1:153
§ 81-11. Tenure of employment; grounds for removal.
The officers and members of the Department shall severally hold their
respective offices and continue in their respective employment during good
behavior, efficiency and residence in the Borough of Edgewater, unless
removed or dismissed for just cause as hereinafter provided. No person
shall be removed from office or employment in the Department for political
reasons or for any other cause than incapacity, misconduct, nonresidence
or disobedience of just rules and regulations established or which may be
established for the Department.
§ 81-12. Discipline procedure. [Amended 3-20-2017 by Ord. No.
1541-2017]
No person, whether officer or member of the Department, shall be
suspended, removed, fined or reduced from office or employment therein,
except after just cause, as hereinabove provided, and then only after written
charge or charges or the cause or causes of complaint shall have been
preferred against such officer or member, signed by the person or persons
making such charge or charges and filed in the office of the Clerk of the
Borough of Edgewater, and after the charge or charges shall have been
publicly examined by the Mayor and Council upon reasonable notice to the
person charged. It is the intent to give every person against whom a charge
or charges for any cause may be preferred a fair trial upon said charge
or charges and every reasonable opportunity to make his defense. In the
event that any officer or member of the Department shall be suspended
pending trial on the charges, such trial shall commence as provided by law
unless such delay is reasonably requested by or consented to by the officer
charged.
§ 81-13. Designation of appropriate authority. [Added 11-10-1997
by Ord. No. 1105-97; 3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 1541-2017; 11-13-2017
by Ord. No. 1559-2017]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, the Borough Administrator is designated
as the appropriate authority to whom the Chief of Police shall be directly
responsible and which shall be empowered to adopt rules and regulations,
consistent with this provision, for the government of the police force.
§ 81-11 EDGEWATER CODE § 81-13
1:154
ARTICLE II
Department Regulations
[Adopted 10-5-1954 by Ord. No. 369; readopted 8-1-1967 by Ord.
No. 476 (Ch. 66, Art. II of the 1975 Code)]
§ 81-14. Specific grounds for removal.
Any officer or member of the Police Department, upon being found guilty of
any of the following charges, may be removed from office or employment
therein by the vote of a majority of the members of the Council present,
provided that at least three affirmative votes shall be required for such
purpose, the Mayor to have a vote thereon only in case of a tie vote.
A. Incapacity, misconduct or nonresidence.
B. Intoxication or under the influence of any drug or other compound
while on or off duty.
C. Willful disobedience of orders.
D. Indecent, profane or harsh language.
E. Disrespect of a superior officer.
F. Absence without leave or absence from post of duty without excuse.
G. Failure to pay debts.
H. Immorality, indecency or lewdness.
I. Incapacity, either physical or mental, lack of energy or gross ignorance
of the laws and regulations of the Police Department.
J. Visiting, except on police business, any gambling house, poolroom or
house of ill fame, or visiting while in uniform or on duty, except on
police business, any saloon or liquor store.
K. Violation of any criminal law.
L. For making known any proposed action or movement of the Police
Department, or the contents of any order, other than to persons
immediately concerned in their execution.
M. Conduct unbecoming an officer and a gentleman.
N. Conduct subversive to good order and the discipline of the Police
Department.
O. Publicly commenting on the official action of a superior officer.
P. Failure to report a known violation of law or accepting a bribe or favor
as a consideration either for the performance or nonperformance of his
duty.
§ 81-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-14
1:155
§ 81-15. Suspension to be without compensation; exception.
When any member of the Police Department is suspended from office and
afterwards reinstated, he shall not receive any pay for the period of
suspension, unless otherwise ordered by the Mayor and Council.
§ 81-16. Examination of charges; penalty in lieu of dismissal.
All charges against members of the Police Department shall be thoroughly
examined by the Mayor and Council; and upon any member of the
Department being convicted by the Mayor and Council of any violation of
any rules, regulations or orders of the Department, the Mayor and Council
may, in lieu of dismissal from the Department, impose such penalty as in its
judgment is warranted by the character of the offense.
§ 81-17. Adoption of rules, regulations and Police Manual.
[Amended 2-18-1992 by Ord. No. 982-92]
Q. Visiting any place of amusement while in uniform except on police
business.
R. Failure to attend a drill or the school of instruction at the time fixed or
whenever ordered.
S. Soliciting anyone to intercede with the Chief of Police and/or Police
Director, the Mayor and Council or any superior officer in relation to
promotion, disposition of pending charges or any findings of a trial
before the Mayor and Council. [Amended 3-20-2017 by Ord. No.
1541-2017]
T. Neglecting duty, refusing to do duty or evading duty of any kind,
whenever necessity requires, whether at the police station or elsewhere
and whether in uniform or not.
U. For the disobedience of any rule or regulation established or which may
be hereafter established for the Police Department.
A. The Mayor and Council shall make such rules and regulations
concerning the conduct and duties of the members and the kinds of
uniforms and insignia to be worn by them and concerning such other
matters as may be necessary for the proper regulation of the Police
Department, and when the same have been adopted by the Mayor and
Council, they shall be known as the "Rules and Regulations for the
Governing of the Police Department of the Borough of Edgewater" and
shall be binding upon each officer and member of the Department.
B. The Mayor and Council hereby adopts the Police Manual of the
Edgewater Police Department, which establishes the basic duties and
responsibilities of members and supervisors of the Police Department.
Copies of the Police Manual shall be kept on file in the office of the
Borough Clerk and in the office of the Chief of Police and/or Police
§ 81-14 EDGEWATER CODE § 81-17
1:156
§ 81-18. Distribution of copies of rules, regulations and Police
Manual. [Amended 2-18-1992 by Ord. No. 982-92]
§ 81-19. Off-duty traffic details. [Amended 4-1-2002 by Ord. No.
1232-2002]
Director. [Amended 10-17-2005 by Ord. No. 1322-2005; 3-20-2017
by Ord. No. 1541-2017]
A. Each member of the Police Department shall be presented with a copy
of the Rules and Regulations of the Police Department. The rules shall
show what his duty shall be on all occasions, and any neglect by any
member of the Police Department to carry out each and every rule and
regulation as aforesaid shall be held to be sufficient cause for his
dismissal.
B. Each member of the Police Department shall be provided with a copy of
the Police Manual, which establishes the duties and responsibilities of
members and supervisors of the Police Department. [Amended
10-17-2005 by Ord. No. 1322-2005]
A. Any request for the hiring of off-duty police officers for a traffic control
detail or for any other purpose shall be submitted to the Police Chief or
his/her designee for review and approval. The Police Chief will
determine the appropriate means of satisfying the request.
B. The operation of such off-duty details shall be in accordance with
procedures established by the Chief of Police and/or Police Director.
[Amended 3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 1541-2017]
C. A party seeking to utilize off-duty police officers for a traffic or other
detail shall submit the following information to the Chief of Police and/
or Police Director: [Amended 3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 1541-2017]
(1) The date and number of days for the detail, the location of the
detail, the nature of the detail, construction or event, and the
specific hours for each date.
(2) The party shall indicate the number of officers required and
whether a police vehicle will be necessary.
(3) The submission shall be accompanied by any request for road
closings and/or detours.
(4) In addition, the request will be accompanied by the name and
address of the party seeking to utilize off-duty police officers,
telephone number, and billing information.
D. Parties requesting to utilize off-duty police officers shall be required to
comply with the following:
(1) There shall be a four-hour minimum payment for each officer
assigned to an off-duty detail.
§ 81-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-19
1:157
(2) Any cancellation of a scheduled off-duty detail must be provided at
least four hours prior to the starting time by notice to the Police
Department main desk. Failure to comply with this requirement
shall subject the party requesting the off-duty detail to a minimum
payment of four hours for each officer assigned.
(3) The party requesting the detail shall be required to deposit with the
Borough in escrow the estimated cost for the off-duty detail, as
determined by the Chief of Police and/or Police Director or his/her
designee, no later than 4:00 p.m. prior to the date of the detail.
[Amended 3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 1541-2017]
(4) An application and agreement shall be required to be completed by
the party requesting the detail, which shall be submitted to the
Chief or his/her designee. The request for the off-duty detail must
then be approved by the Chief or his/her designee.
E. The following payment schedule shall be applicable to off-duty details:
(1) The hourly rate shall be established at $90 per hour for any officer,
regardless of rank. A daily administrative fee of $25 shall be paid to
the Borough for administrative expenses for every day a police
officer is scheduled. [Amended 3-18-2008 by Ord. No.
1386-2008; 7-15-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-004]
(2) The minimum payment for an officer working an off-duty detail
shall be four hours.
(3) Should an officer work from between four hours to eight hours, the
officer will be paid for eight hours' work.
(4) For an officer working from eight hours to 10 hours, the officer will
be paid for 10 hours' work. An officer will be paid for hours worked
in excess of 10 hours for the actual number of hours worked.
(5) The fee of $50 per vehicle shall be charged for these off-duty details
during the first eight-hour period. Off-duty details exceeding eight
hours shall be charged an additional fee of $25 per vehicle.
[Amended 3-18-2008 by Ord. No. 1386-2008]
§ 81-19 EDGEWATER CODE § 81-19
1:158
ARTICLE III
Salaries
[Adopted 9-15-1953 by Ord. No. 354; readopted 8-1-1967 by Ord.
No. 476 (Ch. 66, Art. III of the 1975 Code)]
§ 81-20. Salaries of members and officers of Department.36
[Amended 9-3-1975 by Ord. No. 581-75]
Amounts of salaries of members and officers of the Police Department shall
be as set forth in the current annual Salary Ordinance of the Borough of
Edgewater.
36.Editor's Note: Two additional sections, one of which referred to the statutory provisions
regulating the determinations of salaries by referendum and the other of which provided
that members and officers of the Police Department be given credit for prior time of
service, were repealed 9-3-1975 by Ord. No. 581-75.
§ 81-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-20
1:159

ARTICLE IV
Hours of Employment
[Adopted 9-20-1949 by Ord. No. 327; readopted 8-1-1967 by Ord.
No. 476 (Ch. 66, Art. IV of the 1975 Code)]
§ 81-21. Adoption of work schedule.
A referendum vote held on November 8, 1949, pursuant to the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40:11-13.4, provides that the provisions of Chapter 341 of the
Laws of 1948 are adopted.37 In accordance with such act, the hours of
employment of members of the Police Department of the Borough of
Edgewater shall not exceed eight consecutive hours in any one day nor 40
hours in any one week, provided that in case of an emergency the officer,
board or other official having charge or control of the Police Department
shall have full authority to summon and keep on duty any and all such
members during the period of emergency.
37.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:11-13.4 was repealed by L. 1971, c. 197. See N.J.S.A. 40A:14-132
for current statutory provisions for the adoption of an eight-hour day and forty-hour week
for the uniformed members and officers of a Municipal Police Department.
§ 81-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-21
1:161

ARTICLE V
Special Law Enforcement Officers
[Adopted 7-11-2005 by Ord. No. 1317-200538 (Ch. 66, Art. V of the
1975 Code)]
§ 81-22. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of special law enforcement officers
in the Borough of Edgewater, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40A:14-146.10.
§ 81-23. Qualifications for membership.
No person shall be appointed as a special law enforcement officer unless
he/she is a citizen of the United States; at least 18 years of age; able to
read, write and speak the English language well and intelligently and has
a high school diploma or its equivalent; is physically qualified in body and
of good health; is of good moral character; and has not been convicted
of any criminal offense involving dishonest or moral turpitude; and has
successfully undergone the same psychological testing of its full-time police
officers in the municipality.
§ 81-24. Application for appointment.
Every person seeking appointment as a special law enforcement officer
shall make application to the Mayor and Council, which body shall have
exclusive jurisdiction over the final determination of the applicant's
qualifications.
§ 81-25. Appointments.
A. The determination of the total number of men/women who shall be
appointed as special law enforcement officers shall be within the
discretion of the Mayor and Council. All appointments to the position of
special law enforcement officers shall be made by the passage of a
resolution by the Mayor and Council. Appointment as a special law
enforcement officer shall not thereby make the appointee a member of
the regular police force.
B. Before any special law enforcement officer is appointed pursuant to this
act, the Chief of Police and/or Police Director shall ascertain the
eligibility and qualifications of the applicant and report these
determinations in writing to the appointing authority. [Amended
3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 1541-2017]
C. The Mayor and Council may make appointments for full-or part-time
positions. Each appointment shall be for a one-year term.
38.Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Art. V, Special Police, adopted 5-2-1967
by Ord. No. 475; readopted 8-1-1967 by Ord. No. 476; and amended 9-3-1975 by Ord. No.
581-75.
§ 81-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-26
1:163
§ 81-26. Conformance with rules and regulations; fingerprinting
required; training; classifications; uniforms.
§ 81-27. Carrying weapons restricted.
No special law enforcement officers classified as Class I shall carry a
revolver or other weapon when on or off duty.
§ 81-28. Assignments. [Amended 3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 1541-2017]
The assignments of special law enforcement officers shall be to perform
such assignments in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.11a(1), Class One,
in the Borough of Edgewater as determined by the Chief of Police and/or
Police Director. Special law enforcement officers shall have the power to
issue summonses in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.11a(1), Class One.
§ 81-29. Compensation.
Salaries for special law enforcement officers are set forth by salary
ordinance and will be paid in accordance with the salary ordinance in
existence at the time of officer's appointment.
A. Every special law enforcement officer while on duty shall be under the
supervision and direction of the ranking officer of the regular Police
Department of the Borough of Edgewater, and he/she shall comply with
the rules and regulations promulgated by the Mayor and Council for the
general conduct and decorum of the regular members of the Police
Department.
B. Every special law enforcement officer shall be fingerprinted, and his/
her fingerprints shall be filed with the Division of State Police and the
Federal Bureau of Investigation.
C. No person may commence his/her duties as a special law enforcement
officer unless he/she has successfully completed a training course
approved by the Mayor and Council.
D. The special law enforcement officers shall be designated as Class One
officers as defined in N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.11 of this act.
E. Uniforms. Every special law enforcement officer, prior to the
commencement of his/her duties, shall be furnished with a uniform
which shall identify the officer's function. The uniform shall include, but
not be limited to, a hat and appropriate badges which shall bear an
identification number or name tag and the name of the local unit. The
uniform shall also include an insignia which clearly indicates the
officer's status as a special law enforcement officer and the type of
certification issued to that officer.
§ 81-26 EDGEWATER CODE § 81-29
1:164
ARTICLE VI
Police Guard
[Adopted 10-21-2002 by Ord. No. 1250-2002 (Ch. 66, Art. VI of the
1975 Code]
§ 81-30. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Police Guard.
§ 81-31. Appointment.
The Police Guard shall be appointed by the Mayor and Council.
§ 81-32. Duties.
The Police Guard shall perform such duties as shall be designated by the
Mayor and Council and shall be under the direction and supervision of the
Chief of the Police Department.
§ 81-33. Salary.
The salary of the Police Guard shall be as set forth in the current Salary
Ordinance of the Borough of Edgewater.39
39.Editor's Note: Said ordinance is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 81-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-33
1:165

ARTICLE VII
Administrative Clerk
[Adopted 11-12-2002 by Ord. No. 1254-2002 (Ch. 66, Art. VII of the
1975 Code)]
§ 81-34. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Administrative Clerk.
§ 81-35. Appointment.
The Administrative Clerk shall be appointed by the Mayor and Council.
§ 81-36. Duties.
The Administrative Clerk shall perform such duties as shall be designated
by the Mayor and Council and shall be under the direction and supervision
of the Chief of the Police Department.
§ 81-37. Salary. [Amended 7-20-2010 by Ord. No. 1439-2010]
The salary of the Administrative Clerk shall be as set forth in the current
annual Salary Ordinance of the Borough of Edgewater.
§ 81-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-37
1:167

ARTICLE VIII
Fees40
[Adopted 4-15-2013 by Ord. No. 1491-2013]
§ 81-38. Fees payable to Police Department.
Processing fees for each of the following items shall be as set forth below:
Item Fee
Letter of good conduct $15
Firearm ID card (does not include state fee or
Morpho Trac fee)
$5
Permit to purchase firearm $2
Handicapped parking permit (does not include
MVC fee)
$3
§ 81-39. Collection and disposition of fees.
All payments made pursuant to this article shall be made by check or money
order only, payable to the Borough of Edgewater Police Department. All
sums collected under this chapter shall be considered the funds of the
Borough of Edgewater Police Department.
40.Editor's Note: See Ch. 318, Public Records, for fees for copies of police reports.
§ 81-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-39
1:169

ARTICLE IX
Key Lock Box Emergency Access System
[Adopted 8-19-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-007]
§ 81-40. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTOMATIC DIALER — A device that automatically dials and relays a
prerecorded message to a central station or police department.
CENTRAL STATION — An office of a private company to which remote
alarm and supervisory signaling devices are transmitted and where
personnel are in attendance at all times to supervise the circuits and
investigate signals.
KEY LOCK BOX — A secure rapid entry system that is designed to be used
by emergency personnel in the event of an emergency to gain entry into a
structure by using the enclosed owner-provided key(s). This box is usually
mounted on the exterior of the building in a location that is specified by the
Chief of Police. All boxes shall be UL (Underwriters Laboratories) certified,
Knox-Box® brand, and approved by the Chief of Police.
POLICE CHIEF — The chief law enforcement official responsible for
enforcing all laws of the State of New Jersey and Borough of Edgewater or
his/her designee.
§ 81-41. Structures to be equipped with a key lock box.
Unless otherwise determined in writing by the Chief of Police, the following
structures shall be equipped with a key lock box of a type and size and at a
location approved by the Chief of Police:
A. All new commercial buildings shall be equipped with a key lock box
prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
B. All existing commercial buildings constructing additions, major
renovations, or changes of use that require Borough Zoning or Planning
Board approval, shall be equipped with a key lock box prior to the
issuance of any necessary permits.
C. All existing commercial buildings with new occupancies by tenants
shall be equipped with a key lock box prior to the issuance of a
certificate of continued occupancy.
D. Multifamily residential structures that have restricted access through
locked doors but have a common corridor for access to the living units,
including but not limited to condominium buildings.
E. Schools, whether public or private.
§ 81-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-41
1:171
§ 81-42. Key lock box contents.
§ 81-43. Registration and installation of key lock boxes.
The property owner shall apply for a registration for a key lock box on forms
provided by and obtained from the Chief of Police. A registration is required
prior to the installation of a key lock box in order to verify the proper size,
mounting location and installation of said key lock box. The key lock box
shall be installed at a location approved by the Chief of Police. No key lock
box shall be installed, voluntarily or otherwise, without first obtaining the
approval of the Chief of Police. The property owner shall be responsible for
the cost to purchase, install, and maintain the key lock box.
§ 81-44. Compliance.
All existing buildings required to have a key lock box shall comply with this
article one year from its effective date. All newly constructed buildings not
yet occupied or buildings currently under construction and all buildings or
businesses applying for a certificate of occupancy shall comply immediately
F. Governmental structures and nursing care facilities, unless the building
is staffed or open 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
A. The property owner is required at all times to keep a key(s) in the key
lock box that will allow access to the structure. The key lock box shall
contain, but not be limited to, the following items as designated by the
Chief of Police:
(1) Labeled keys to locked points of ingress and egress, whether in
interior or exterior of such buildings;
(2) Labeled keys to the locked mechanical rooms;
(3) Labeled keys to locked elevator rooms and controls;
(4) Labeled keys to any fence or secured areas;
(5) Labeled keys to any other areas that may be required by the Chief
of Police;
(6) A card containing the emergency contact names and phone
numbers for such buildings;
(7) Floor plans of the rooms within the building showing locations of
shut-offs;
(8) Hazardous materials information; and
(9) An inventory of the keys.
B. The property owner shall notify the Chief of Police when any or all of the
locks or keys have been changed and shall keep the immediate area of
the key lock box free and clear of any and all obstructions.
§ 81-41 EDGEWATER CODE § 81-44
1:172
upon passage of this article. In any event, the owner of any structure in the
Borough shall comply with this article within 60 days from receipt of written
notice from the Chief of Police. The cost of purchasing and installing, along
with any cost associated with implementation of the program at a specific
property, will be borne by the property owner.
§ 81-45. Violations and penalties.
Any property owner failing to comply with this article shall be subject to a
fine of not more than $300 for each day of violation or noncompliance.
§ 81-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-45
1:173
Chapter 87
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency management — See Ch. 26.
Fire Department — See Ch. 45.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 71.
Police Department — See Ch. 87.
Recreation Department — See Ch. 92.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 293.
Public utility installations — See Ch. 326.
Sewers — See Ch. 347.
§ 81-45 EDGEWATER CODE § 81-45
1:174
ARTICLE I
Creation; Responsibilities
§ 87-1. Establishment of Department; employees; consulting
engineer.
There is created and established a Department of Public Works for the
Borough of Edgewater, to consist of street employees and other employees
as may be authorized from time to time by resolution adopted by the
Borough Council. The Department shall consist of one Superintendent,
three Assistant Supervisors, three Public Works Repairers, one Mechanic,
one Mechanic's Helper, nine Laborers, five Pumping Station Attendants and
one Recycling Coordinator.41 A consulting engineer may be employed by
the Borough Council for any special work at such compensation as may be
agreed upon.
§ 87-2. Responsibilities of Department.
The Department of Public Works shall take charge of and be responsible
for the construction, operation and maintenance of all streets, parks, public
docks, sewers and all other public work in the Borough, subject to the
orders and directions of the Borough Council.
§ 87-3. Salaries.
The salaries of the employees of the Department of Public Works shall be
as are set forth in the current annual Salary Ordinance of the Borough of
Edgewater.42
41.Editor's Note: See Ch. 71, Officers and Employees, Art. XXIV, Recycling Coordinator.
42.Editor's Note: The currently effective Salary Ordinance of the Borough of Edgewater is on
file in the office of the Borough Clerk and is available for examination during office hours.
§ 87-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-3
1:175

ARTICLE II
Superintendent
§ 87-4. Creation of Position.
The position of Public Works Superintendent is hereby created.
§ 87-5. Appointment; qualifications.
The Superintendent shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the
Council after the applicant has passed the civil service test for Public Works
Superintendent. The Superintendent must possess a valid Certified Public
Works Managers Certificate at the time of appointment.
§ 87-6. Duties of the Superintendent.
The duties of the Superintendent shall be set forth in the approved job
description by the Mayor and Council.
§ 87-7. Salary.
The salary of the Superintendent shall be as set forth in the current Salary
Ordinance of the Borough of Edgewater.43
43.Editor's Note: The currently effective Salary Ordinance of the Borough of Edgewater is on
file in the office of the Borough Clerk and is available for examination during office hours.
§ 87-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-7
1:177

ARTICLE III
Assistant Supervisor, Public Works
§ 87-8. Creation of position.
The position of Assistant Supervisor, Public Works, is hereby created.
§ 87-9. Appointment by Mayor and Council.
The Assistant Supervisor, Public Works shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the consent of the Council after the applicant has passed the civil
service test for Assistant Supervisor, Public Works.
§ 87-10. Duties.
The duties of the Assistant Supervisor, Public Works, shall be as outlined in
the approved job description by the Mayor and Council.
§ 87-11. Salary.
The salary of the Assistant Supervisor, Public Works, shall be as set forth in
the current Salary Ordinance of the Borough of Edgewater.44
44.Editor's Note: The currently effective Salary Ordinance of the Borough of Edgewater is on
file in the office of the Borough Clerk and is available for examination during office hours.
§ 87-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-11
1:179

ARTICLE IV
Assistant Supervising Laborer
§ 87-12. Creation of position.
The position of Assistant Supervising Laborer is hereby created.
§ 87-13. Appointment by Mayor and Council.
The Assistant Supervising Laborer shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
consent of the Council after the applicant has passed the civil service test
for Assistant Supervising Laborer.
§ 87-14. Duties.
The duties of the Assistant Supervising Laborer shall be as outlined in the
approved job description by the Mayor and Council.
§ 87-15. Salary.
The salary of the Assistant Supervising Laborer shall be as set forth in the
current Salary Ordinance of the Borough of Edgewater.45
45.Editor's Note: The currently effective Salary Ordinance of the Borough of Edgewater is on
file in the office of the Borough Clerk and is available for examination during office hours.
§ 87-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-15
1:181

ARTICLE V
Public Works Repairer
§ 87-16. Creation of position.
The position of Public Works Repairer is hereby created.
§ 87-17. Appointment by Mayor and Council.
The Public Works Repairer shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
consent of the Council after the applicant has passed the civil service test
for Public Works Repairer.
§ 87-18. Duties.
The duties of the Public Works Repairer shall be as outlined in the approved
job description by the Mayor and Council.
§ 87-19. Salary.
The salary of the Public Works Repairer shall be as set forth in the current
Salary Ordinance of the Borough of Edgewater.46
46.Editor's Note: The currently effective Salary Ordinance of the Borough of Edgewater is on
file in the office of the Borough Clerk and is available for examination during office hours.
§ 87-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-19
1:183

ARTICLE VI
Mechanic
§ 87-20. Creation of position.
The position of Mechanic is hereby created.
§ 87-21. Appointment by Mayor and Council.
The Mechanic shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the
Council after the applicant has passed the civil service test for Mechanic.
§ 87-22. Duties.
The duties of the Mechanic shall be as outlined in the approved job
description by the Mayor and Council.
§ 87-23. Salary.
The salary of the Mechanic shall be as set forth in the current Salary
Ordinance of the Borough of Edgewater.47
47.Editor's Note: The currently effective Salary Ordinance of the Borough of Edgewater is on
file in the office of the Borough Clerk and is available for examination during office hours.
§ 87-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-23
1:185

ARTICLE VII
Mechanic Helper
§ 87-24. Creation of position.
The position of Mechanic Helper is hereby created.
§ 87-25. Appointment by Mayor and Council.
The Mechanic Helper shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of
the Council after the applicant has passed the civil service test for Mechanic
Helper.
§ 87-26. Duties.
The duties of the Mechanic Helper shall be as outlined in the approved job
description by the Mayor and Council.
§ 87-27. Salary.
The salary of the Mechanic Helper shall be as set forth in the current Salary
Ordinance of the Borough of Edgewater.48
48.Editor's Note: The currently effective Salary Ordinance of the Borough of Edgewater is on
file in the office of the Borough Clerk and is available for examination during office hours.
§ 87-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-27
1:187

ARTICLE VIII
Laborer
§ 87-28. Creation of position.
The position of Laborer is hereby created.
§ 87-29. Appointment by Mayor and Council.
The Laborer shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the
Council.
§ 87-30. Duties.
The duties of the Laborer shall be as outlined in the approved job
description by the Mayor and Council.
§ 87-31. Salary.
The salary of the Laborer shall be as set forth in the current Salary
Ordinance of the Borough of Edgewater.49
49.Editor's Note: The currently effective Salary Ordinance of the Borough of Edgewater is on
file in the office of the Borough Clerk and is available for examination during office hours.
§ 87-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-31
1:189

ARTICLE IX
Sewage Plant Operator
§ 87-32. Creation of position.
The position of Sewage Plant Operator is hereby created.
§ 87-33. Appointment by Mayor and Council.
The Sewage Plant Operator shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
consent of the Council after the applicant has passed the necessary civil
service test.
§ 87-34. Duties.
The duties of the Sewage Plant Operator shall be as outlined in the
approved job description by the Mayor and Council.
§ 87-35. Salary.
The salary of the Sewage Plant Operator shall be as set forth in the current
Salary Ordinance of the Borough of Edgewater.50
50.Editor's Note: The currently effective Salary Ordinance of the Borough of Edgewater is on
file in the office of the Borough Clerk and is available for examination during office hours.
§ 87-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-35
1:191
Chapter 92
RECREATION DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 45.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 71.
Police Department — See Ch. 81.
Public Works Department — See Ch. 87.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 96.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 293.
§ 87-35 EDGEWATER CODE § 87-35
1:192
ARTICLE I
Organization
[Adopted 3-15-1955 by Ord. No. 374; readopted 8-1-1967 by Ord.
No. 476 (Ch. 75, Art. I, of the 1975 Code)]
§ 92-1. Membership; duties; compensation. [Amended 2-3-1970 by
Ord. No. 513-70; 9-3-1975 by Ord. No. 581-75; 9-20-1988 by Ord.
No. 900-88; 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 1002-92; 6-21-1999 by Ord. No.
1164-99; 9-20-2010 by Ord. No. 1439-2010]
§ 92-2. Recreational Aide. [Added 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 1002-92]
The position of Recreational Aide in the Department of Recreation is hereby
created. The Recreational Aide shall perform such duties as may be
prescribed by law and authorized by the Mayor and Council and shall
receive full compensation as shall be set forth in the current Salary
Ordinance of the Borough of Edgewater.
A. The Department of Recreation shall consist of a Coordinator of
Scheduling Recreation Activities, Youth, and a Coordinator of
Scheduling Recreation Activities, Adult.
B. The persons holding the two positions set forth in Subsection A of this
section shall perform such duties as prescribed by law and authorized
by the Mayor and Council and shall receive such compensation as shall
be set forth in the current Salary Ordinance of the Borough of
Edgewater.51
51.Editor's Note: The currently effective Salary Ordinance of the Borough of Edgewater is on
file in the office of the Borough Clerk and is available for examination during office hours.
§ 92-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-2
1:193

ARTICLE II
Criminal History Background Checks
[Adopted 5-20-2013 by Ord. No. 1492-2013]
§ 92-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH-SPONSORED PROGRAMS — Any programs sponsored by the
Borough of Edgewater, the Edgewater Recreation Department.
CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD BACKGROUND CHECK — A determination
of whether a person has a criminal record by cross-referencing that
person's name and/or fingerprints with those on file with the Federal
Bureau of Investigation, Identification Division, and/or the State Bureau of
Identification of the New Jersey State Police.
CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD INFORMATION or CHRI — Information
collected by criminal justice agencies concerning persons and stored in the
computerized databases of the New Jersey State Police SBI Criminal History
Information System, the National Law Enforcement Telecommunications
System or other states' computerized repositories containing criminal
history record information consisting of identifiable descriptions and
notations of arrests, indictments, or other formal criminal charges, and
any dispositions arising therefrom, including convictions, dismissals,
correctional supervision and release.
DEPARTMENT — The Borough of Edgewater Police Department.
NONCRIMINAL JUSTICE PURPOSE — Any purpose, other than
administration of criminal justice or criminal justice purpose, including
employment and licensing, for which applicant fingerprints or name search
requests are submitted by authorized requesters, as required or permitted
by a federal or state statute, rule or regulation, executive order,
administrative code provision, local ordinance or resolution, or by this
article, to the State Bureau of Identification for the dissemination of
criminal history record information.
NONPROFIT YOUTH-SERVING ORGANIZATION or ORGANIZATION —
Any corporation, association or other organization established pursuant to
Title 15 or Title 15A of the New Jersey Revised Statutes, or other law of
this state, but excluding public and nonpublic schools, and that provides
recreational, cultural, charitable, social or other activities or services for
persons younger than 18 years of age, and is exempt from federal income
taxes.
STATE BUREAU OF IDENTIFICATION or SBI — The New Jersey State
Bureau of Identification created by P.L. 1930, c.65 (N.J.S.A. 52:1-12 et seq.),
a bureau within the Division of State Police.
§ 92-4. Criminal background check required; written consent; costs.
§ 92-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-4
1:195
§ 92-5. Required submissions, exchange of background check
information.
§ 92-6. Conditions for disqualification from service.
A. The Borough requires that all employees and volunteers, 18 years of
age and older, of a nonprofit youth-serving organization request
through the Recreation Department that the State Bureau of
Identification conduct a criminal history record background check on
each prospective and current employee or volunteer of the
organization.
B. The Division of State Police shall inform the Department and the
individual whether the person's criminal history record background
check reveals a conviction of a disqualifying crime or offense set forth
in § 92-6 of this article.
C. The Recreation Commission shall conduct a criminal history record
background check only upon receipt of the written consent to the check
from the prospective or current employee or volunteer.
D. The Borough shall bear the costs associated with conducting the
criminal history record background checks.
A. Prospective or current employees and volunteers of nonprofit youthserving
organizations and/or employees and volunteers of Boroughsponsored
programs involving minors shall submit their name, address,
fingerprints, other required information and written consent to the
Police Department for the criminal history record background check to
be performed. The Police Department shall submit this documentation
to the State Bureau of Identification.
B. The Police Department shall act as a clearinghouse for the collection
and dissemination of information obtained as a result of conducting
criminal history record background checks pursuant to this article.
C. The Recreation Department may, in its discretion, engage the services
of a third-party independent agency or a volunteer group authorized by
the Chief of Police and/or Police Director to conduct the criminal history
record background checks authorized under this article. [Amended
3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 1541-2017]
A. A person may be disqualified from serving as an employee or volunteer
of a nonprofit youth-serving organization if that person's criminal
history record background check reveals a record of conviction of any
of the following crimes or offenses:
(1) In New Jersey, any crime or disorderly persons offense:
(a) Involving danger to the person, meaning those crimes and
disorderly persons offenses set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1 et seq.,
§ 92-4 EDGEWATER CODE § 92-6
1:196
§ 92-7. Limitations on access to and use of criminal history records.
N.J.S.A. 2C:12-1 et seq., N.J.S.A. 2C:13-1 et seq., N.J.S.A.
2C:14-1 et seq., or N.J.S.A. 2C:15-1 et seq.
(b) Against the family, children or incompetents, meaning those
crimes and disorderly persons offenses set forth in N.J.S.A.
2C:14-1 et seq.
(c) Involving theft as set forth in Chapter 20 of Title 2C of the New
Jersey Revised Statutes.
(d) Involving any controlled dangerous substance or controlled
substance analog as set forth in Chapter 35 of Title 2C of the
New Jersey Revised Statutes except Paragraph (4) of
Subsection (a) of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-10.
(2) In any other state or jurisdiction, conduct which, if committed in
New Jersey, would constitute any of the crimes or disorderly
persons offenses described in Subsection A(1) of this section.
B. For purposes of interpreting the information recorded in a criminal
history record to determine the qualifications of the employee or
volunteer of a nonprofit youth servicing organization and/or the
employee or volunteer involved with Borough-sponsored programs
involving minors, the Borough shall presume that the employee or
volunteer is innocent of any charges or arrests for which there are no
final dispositions on the record.
C. The determination of whether the information contained in the criminal
history record is sufficient to disqualify an employee or volunteer shall
be made by the State Police. Any employee or volunteer dissatisfied
with the determination shall be entitled to file an appeal with the
Criminal Background Check Appeal Panel created pursuant to this
article.
A. Access to criminal history record information for noncriminal justice
purposes, including licensing and employment, is restricted to the
Police Department and Criminal Background Check Appeal Panel, on a
need-to-know basis, as authorized by federal or state statute, rule or
regulation, executive order, administrative code, local ordinance or
resolution regarding obtaining and dissemination of criminal history
record information obtained under this article.
B. Such persons or organizations shall limit their use of criminal history
record information solely to the authorized purpose for which it was
obtained, and criminal history record information furnished shall not be
disseminated to persons or organizations not authorized to receive the
records for authorized purposes. Use of this record shall be limited
solely to the authorized purpose for which it was given, and it shall not
be disseminated to any unauthorized persons. This record shall be
destroyed immediately after it has served its intended and authorized
§ 92-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-7
1:197
§ 92-8. Challenge of report accuracy.
If this criminal history record may disqualify an applicant or existing
employee or volunteer for any purpose, the disqualified person shall have
an opportunity to complete and challenge the accuracy of the information
contained in the criminal history record or request an exception. The
disqualified person shall be afforded a reasonable period of time to correct
and complete this record. A person is not presumed guilty of any charges or
arrests for which there are no final dispositions indicated on the record.
§ 92-9. Appeal process; appeal panel.
purpose. Any person violating federal or state regulations governing
access to criminal history record information may be subject to criminal
and/or civil penalties.
A. Criminal background check appeal process. If the State Police
disqualify an employee or volunteer, the employee or volunteer may
appeal that disqualification by filing a written notice of appeal with the
Chief of Police and/or Police Director no later than 20 days after
receiving notice of the disqualification from the State Police. Any appeal
requested shall proceed before the Criminal Background Check Appeal
Panel. [Amended 3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 1541-2017]
B. Criminal Background Check Appeal Panel. In order to monitor and
supervise the enforcement of this article, the Borough of Edgewater
hereby creates a Criminal Background Check Appeal Panel which shall
consist of three members. The composition of the Criminal Background
Check Appeal Panel shall be as follows:
(1) One member of the Criminal Background Check Appeal Panel shall
be the Police Chief or his designee.
(2) One member of the Criminal Background Check Appeal Panel shall
be the Director of the Edgewater Recreation Department.
(3) One member of the Criminal Background Check Appeal Panel shall
be a member of the Edgewater Police Department selected by the
Chief of Police and/or Police Director. [Amended 3-20-2017 by
Ord. No. 1541-2017]
C. Powers. The Criminal Background Check Appeal Panel is granted and
shall have and exercise, in addition to other powers herein granted, all
the powers necessary and appropriate to carry out and execute the
purposes of this article, including but not limited to the following:
(1) To hold hearings and adjudicate appeals by employees and
volunteers dissatisfied with the disqualification.
(2) To hold hearings and adjudicate appeals by employees and
volunteers dissatisfied with the determination concerning the
accuracy of the criminal history record.
§ 92-7 EDGEWATER CODE § 92-9
1:198
(3) To grant exceptions where appropriate.
D. Findings. Not later than 45 days after the conclusion of the hearing, the
Criminal Background Check Appeal Panel shall issue its findings of fact
and the Panel's decision to the employee/volunteer involved in the
appeal and to the Recreation Department, which shall act in
accordance with the Panel's decision.
§ 92-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-9
1:199
Chapter 96
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 107
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
§ 92-9 EDGEWATER CODE § 92-9
1:200
ARTICLE I
Topless and Bottomless Dancing
[Adopted 9-21-1976 by Ord. No. 599-76 (Ch. 147 of the 1975 Code)]
§ 107-1. Certain types of dancing or exhibitions prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation or association of persons of
any kind to permit or employ a person in any place open to the public or to
which the public is invited, within the limits of the Borough of Edgewater,
to perform the following:
§ 107-2. Female exhibition.
It shall be unlawful for any female person to exhibit herself topless or
bottomless within the limits of the Borough of Edgewater in any public place
or any place open to the public or to which the public is invited.
§ 107-3. Male exhibition.
It shall be unlawful for any male person to exhibit himself bottomless within
the limits of the Borough of Edgewater in any public place or any place open
to the public or to which the public is invited.
§ 107-4. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOTTOMLESS — Having the genital area beneath the waist unclothed or
clothed by a transparent material.
EXHIBIT or EXHIBITION — To show oneself in any capacity, whether while
employed in the performance of work or entertainment or whether simply
at leisure or otherwise.
TOPLESS — Having the breasts unclothed or clothed by a transparent
material.
§ 107-5. Violations and penalties.52
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
A. Topless or bottomless exhibitions or dancing by a female person or
persons.
B. Bottomless exhibitions or dancing by male persons.
52.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 107-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 107-5
1:201
Chapter 117
ALARM DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 45.
Police Department — See Ch. 81.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 204.
Noise — See Ch. 271.
§ 117-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards and regulations for
various types of intrusion, burglar, fire, smoke and other emergency alarm
devices, whether it be a dial alarm, direct alarm, indirect alarm or local
alarm.
§ 117-2. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any person who operates,
maintains or owns any dial alarm, direct alarm, indirect alarm or local alarm
system designed to summon the Police Department, Fire Department or
other municipal agencies to any location in response to any type of alarm
signal.
§ 117-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DIAL ALARM — That type of device using telephone lines transmitting an
alarm directly through the Police Department or Fire Department.
DIRECT ALARM — Any alarm or device which, when activated, signals the
Police Department or Fire Department directly by the use of an electronic
or radio signal.
FALSE ALARM — Any alarm activated by inadvertence, negligence or the
unintentional act of someone other than an intruder and shall include as
well alarms caused by malfunction of the alarm device.
INDIRECT ALARM — Any alarm or device which, when activated, signals
any nongovernmental person, entity or agency, whether located within or
without the territorial limits of the Borough of Edgewater, by use of a dial,
electronic or radio signal, the report of which is then, by the use of a dial
or electronic radio signal or manual voice response, communicated to the
Police Department or Fire Department.
LOCAL ALARM — Any alarm or device which, when activated, produces a
visual and/or noise signal and which is not connected to telephone lines to
the Police Department or Fire Department switchboards.
§ 107-5 EDGEWATER CODE § 117-3
1:202
PERSON — Includes any natural person, partnership, corporation,
association, business, club or organization.
§ 117-4. Permit required.
§ 117-5. Malfunction and maintenance regulations.
§ 117-6. False alarms. [Amended 12-18-1984 by Ord. No. 803-84]
A. Any person who owns or operates a dial alarm, direct alarm, indirect
alarm or local alarm shall make application for the continuance thereof
in writing to the Police Chief/Fire Chief within 30 days from the final
passage of this chapter, which application shall contain at least the
location of the device, the name and address of the installer of the
device, the type of device, provisions relating to false alarms and
testing procedures, a list of persons to be contacted in the event of an
alarm and other information as may be required by the Police Chief/Fire
Chief.
B. No person may install or cause to be installed a dial alarm, direct alarm,
indirect alarm or local alarm device without first obtaining a written
permit for the installation from the Police Chief/Fire Chief of the
Borough of Edgewater.
C. The fee for processing an application for the issuance of a written
permit to install a dial alarm, direct alarm or indirect alarm or local
alarm device shall be $100. [Amended 4-4-1994 by Ord. No.
1025-94]
D. In addition to the initial application fee, an annual renewal fee of $50
shall be required. [Added 4-4-1994 by Ord. No. 1025-94]
A. Persons having either dial alarms, direct alarms, indirect alarms or
local alarm devices shall be required to leave with the Police/Fire
Department the name of a person or persons who can be reached in
case of malfunction of the equipment in order that the device can be
temporarily disconnected. In lieu thereof, this requirement can be
fulfilled by leaving a tagged key to the premises with the Police Chief/
Fire Chief of the Borough of Edgewater, provided that in so doing the
owner thereby releases the Borough of Edgewater and the Police/Fire
Department from any claims or damages or loss in connection with said
entry.
B. Persons moving alarm devices which are being tested or repaired shall
notify the Police/Fire Department before tests or repairs commence and
after completion of same so as to avoid the possibility of activating a
false alarm.
A. In the case of a false alarm, any person having knowledge thereof shall
immediately notify the Police/Fire Department and shall use such
means of communication so as to preclude the necessity for a response
§ 117-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-6
1:203
§ 117-7. Violations and penalties.53
Chapter 121
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use and development — See Ch. 240.
Noise — See Ch. 271.
Food and beverage handling — See Ch. 483.
by the Police/Fire Department. Notwithstanding the foregoing, such
communication shall not excuse a violation of this chapter in the event
that the Police/Fire Department has undertaken such action necessary
in order to respond to the scene.
B. The Police Chief and/or Fire Chief shall cause an investigation to be
made on all false alarms and shall keep a record of said alarms on file.
For such alarms, the Mayor and Council prescribe the following
penalties: for the first and second false alarms in any given calendar
year, a warning shall be issued; for the third false alarm in the same
calendar year, a fine of not less than $100 shall be paid to the Borough
of Edgewater; for the fourth false alarm and any subsequent false
alarms, a fine of $250 shall be paid to the Borough of Edgewater. After
four false alarms in any given year, the Mayor and Council reserves the
right to require the disconnection of the device for a limited or
permanent time, provided that no such permit shall be revoked or
suspended without giving the permittee an opportunity to show cause
before the Mayor and Council why such action should not be taken.
[Amended 12-20-1993 by Ord. No. 1016-93]
A. Any person found to have violated any of the provisions of this chapter,
the penalties for which are set forth in the New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23), shall be subject to the penalties set
forth therein.
B. Any person not covered by the provisions of Subsection A of this section
found to have violated any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1, Article II, General
Penalty.
53.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 117-6 EDGEWATER CODE § 117-7
1:204
ARTICLE I
Licensing
[Adopted 6-18-1940 by Ord. No. 293; readopted 8-1-1967 by Ord.
No. 476 (Ch. 112, Art. I, of the 1975 Code)]
§ 121-1. License required.
It shall be unlawful to sell or distribute alcoholic beverages in the Borough
of Edgewater without a license previously applied for and granted pursuant
to the provisions of this article and/or the New Jersey Revised Statutes.
§ 121-2. Authority for issuance of licenses; report of issuance.
The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Edgewater shall constitute the
authority for the administration of the issuance of licenses and shall
forthwith report the issuance of all such licenses to the Director of Alcoholic
Beverages.
§ 121-3. License fees. [Amended 9-3-1975 by Ord. No. 581-75;
5-15-1990 by Ord. No. 948-90; 6-4-1991 by Ord. No. 968-91;
5-18-1998 by Ord. No. 1125-98; 4-16-2001 by Ord. No. 1212-2001;
9-20-2010 by Ord. No. 1439-2010]
The fees for licenses, per annum, shall be as follows:
License 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015+
Plenary
retail
consumption
$960 $960 $1,100 $1,300 $1,500 $1,800 $2,100
Plenary
retail
distribution
$500 $500 $600 $700 $800 $960 $1,100
Club $150 $150 $188 $188 $188 $188 $188
Hotel $2,000 $2,000 $2,400 $2,500 $2,500 $2,500 $2,500
§ 121-4. Number of licenses limited.
Not more than 17 plenary retail consumption licenses shall be outstanding
in the Borough at the same time. Not more than one plenary retail
distribution license shall be outstanding in the Borough at the same time.54
54.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 33:1-12.14 provides that no new plenary or seasonal retail
consumption license shall be issued until the combined total number of such licenses is
fewer than one for each 3,000 of the municipality's population according to the most
recent estimates issued by the U.S. Bureau of the Census; provided, however, in the year
that the official federal decennial counts are received by the Governor, those federal
decennial counts shall be used. No new plenary retail distribution license shall be issued
until the combined total number of such licenses is fewer than one for each 7,500 of the
municipality's population according to the most recent estimates issued by the U.S.
Bureau of the Census; provided, however, in the year that the official federal decennial
counts are received by the Governor, those federal decennial counts shall be used. This
§ 121-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-5
1:205
§ 121-5. Limited and seasonal licenses not to be issued.
No limited retail distribution license and no seasonal retail consumption
license shall be granted within the Borough of Edgewater.
§ 121-6. Restrictions on retail licenses. [Amended 9-20-2010 by
Ord. No. 1439-2010]
No more than two retail licenses shall be granted to any person,
corporation, partnership, limited partnership or association in the Borough
of Edgewater, and each license shall cover only the licensed premises.
§ 121-7. Compliance with zoning regulations required.
No license of any class shall be issued contrary to any zoning regulations
now existing or hereafter enacted in this municipality.55
§ 121-8. Prohibited hours of sale. [Amended 10-20-1970 by Ord. No.
522-70; 6-17-1975 by Ord. No. 570-75]
A. No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served, delivered to or consumed
in any licensed premises on any day between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and
7:00 a.m., except Sundays and New Year's Day each year as hereinafter
provided. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply on Sunday.
On Sundays, no alcoholic beverages may be sold, served, delivered to or
consumed in the licensed premises between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and
1:00 p.m. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply on January 1.
On that day no alcoholic beverages may be sold, served, delivered to or
consumed in the licensed premises between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and
7:00 a.m., unless January 1 is a Sunday, in which case no alcoholic
beverages may be sold, served, delivered to or consumed in the
licensed premises between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m.
B. During the hours the sale of alcoholic beverages is prohibited, the
entire licensed premises shall be closed, and no person shall be allowed
to remain on the licensed premises except the licensee and employees
of the licensee.
C. The closing provisions as set forth in Subsection B shall not apply to
liquor-licensed bona fide restaurants, hotels and clubs.56
does not affect existing licenses but will become operative if any licenses are abandoned
or revoked.
55.Editor's Note: See Ch. 240, Land Use and Development.
56.Editor's Note: Four sections which formerly followed this section, the first of which
prohibited the sale of alcoholic beverages to minors, mental defectives, drunkards or
intoxicated persons; the second of which prohibited females from dispensing alcoholic
beverages; the third of which regulated the floor space of premises; and the last of which
prohibited service of alcoholic beverages in private rooms, except for hotels, were
repealed 9-3-1975 by Ord. No. 581-75.
§ 121-5 EDGEWATER CODE § 121-9
1:206
§ 121-9. Violations and penalties.57
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
57.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 121-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-9
1:207

ARTICLE II
Consumption Regulations
[Adopted 7-10-1973 by Ord. No. 547-73 (Ch. 112, Art. II, of the 1975
Code)]
§ 121-10. Consumption in certain locations prohibited. [Amended
6-20-1989 by Ord. No. 932-89; 12-3-1991 by Ord. No. 976-91]
No person shall consume alcoholic beverages or possess any opened
alcoholic beverage containers, as defined in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1:
§ 121-11. Exceptions.
Notwithstanding the provision in § 121-10 of this article, the Mayor and
Council of the Borough of Edgewater may by resolution permit the
possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages in a designated park at
a designated time or times in connection with a specific event, series of
events or observance which have been authorized by the governing body.
§ 121-12. Violations and penalties.58
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
A. While in or on a public street, roadway, avenue, sidewalk, public
parking lot, mall, park, whether devoted to activities or passive use,
playground or recreational area or any other quasi-public place other
than a place licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the
premises or in a public conveyance.
B. While on property owned by the federal, state, county or municipal
government or other public entity such as the Board of Education.
C. In a private motor vehicle or other vehicle while the same is in motion
or parked in any public street, public parking lot or quasi-public place.
D. While in or on a public conveyance.
E. While upon any private property, not his own, without the express
permission of the owner or other person having authority to grant such
permission.
58.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 121-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-12
1:209

ARTICLE III
Consumption by Minors on Private Property
[Adopted 12-3-1991 as part of Ord. No. 976-91 (Ch. 112, Art. III of
the 1975 Code); amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 121-13. Underage drinking on private property.
It is hereby unlawful for any person under the legal age to, without legal
authority, knowingly possess or knowingly consume an alcoholic beverage
on private property.
§ 121-14. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person found guilty of violating the terms of this article shall be
subject to a fine of $250 for the first offense and a fine of $350 for any
subsequent offense.
B. Suspension of driving privileges.
(1) Upon conviction, the court may, in addition to the fine, suspend or
postpone for six months the driving privilege of the defendant. In
the event a driver's license is suspended, the court shall forward a
report to the Division of Motor Vehicles stating the first and last day
of the suspension or postponement period imposed by the court
pursuant to this section. If a person at the time of the imposition of
a sentence is less than 17 years of age, the period of license
postponement, including suspension or postponement of the
privilege of operating a motorized bicycle, shall commence on the
day the sentence is imposed and shall run for a period of six months
after the person reached the age of 17 years.
(2) If a person at the time of the imposition of the sentence has a valid
driver's license issued by this state, the court shall immediately
collect the license and forward it to the Division of Motor Vehicles
along with the report. If for any reason the license cannot be
collected, the court shall include in the report the complete name,
address, date of birth, eye color, and sex of the person, as well as
the first and last date of the license suspension period imposed by
the court.
(3) The court shall inform the person orally and in writing that if the
person is convicted of operating a motor vehicle during the period
of license suspension or postponement, that person shall be subject
to the penalties set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:3-40. A person shall be
required to acknowledge receipt of the written notice in writing.
Failure to receive a written notice or failure to acknowledge in
writing the receipt of the written notice shall not be a defense to a
subsequent charge of a violation of N.J.S.A. 39:3-40.
§ 121-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-14
1:211
§ 121-15. Exceptions.
§ 121-16. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GUARDIAN — A person who has qualified as a guardian of the underage
person pursuant to a testamentary or court appointment.
RELATIVE — The underage person's grandparent, aunt or uncle, sibling or
any other person related by blood or affinity.
C. If the person convicted under this article is not a New Jersey resident,
the court shall suspend or postpone, as appropriate, the nonresident
driving privilege of the person based on the age of the person and shall
submit to the Division the required report. The court shall not collect
the license of a nonresident convicted under this article. Upon receipt
of a report by the court, the Division shall notify the appropriate
officials in the licensing jurisdiction of the suspension or postponement.
A. This article shall not prohibit an underage person from consuming or
possessing an alcoholic beverage in connection with a religious
observance, ceremony, or rite or consuming or possessing an alcoholic
beverage in the presence of and with the permission of a parent,
guardian or relative who has attained the legal age to purchase and
consume alcoholic beverages.
B. This article shall not prohibit the possession of alcoholic beverages by
an underage person while actually engaged in the performance of
employment by a person who is licensed under Title 33 of the Revised
Statutes or while actively engaged in the preparation of food while
enrolled in a culinary arts or hotel management program at a county
vocational school or postsecondary educational institution; however,
this article shall not be construed to preclude the imposition of a
penalty under this section, N.J.S.A. 33:1-81, or any other section
§ 121-14 EDGEWATER CODE § 121-16
1:212
ARTICLE IV
Public Urination
[Added 8-13-2012 by Ord. No. 1476-2012]
§ 121-17. Prohibited acts.
No person shall urinate or place any bodily waste of humans on any public
street, sidewalk or other place in public view, or to which the public is
invited or has access, except in a lavatory toilet or similar facility.
§ 121-18. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this
article shall be subject to a penalty in accordance with Chapter 1, Article II,
General Penalty, of the Code of the Borough of Edgewater.
§ 121-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-18
1:213
Chapter 125
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties — See Ch. 1, Art. II.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 121.
Curfew — See Ch. 174.
Noise — See Ch. 271.
§ 125-1. Definitions. [Amended 12-15-1981 by Ord. No. 710-81]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AMUSEMENT GAME — Any video game or similar machine operated by
coin, disc, token, key or similar device.59
AUTOMATIC AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any machine which, upon the
insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disc, may be operated by the public
generally for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, whether or not
registering a score, including but not limited to such devices as marble
machines, pinball machines, skill ball, mechanical grab machines and all
games, operations or transactions similar thereto under whatever name
they may be indicated. It shall include video-type games or machines or
similar devices that use a display screen for points, lines and dots of light
that can be manipulated to simulate games or other types of entertainment.
It shall not include, nor shall this chapter apply to, music-playing devices
and pool and billiard tables.
DISTRIBUTOR — Any person who supplies any automatic amusement
device to another for use in his place of business, whether under lease or
any similar arrangement.
OPERATOR — Any person in whose place of business any automatic
amusement device is placed or kept for operation by the public.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, member of firm, partnership, member
of partnership, corporation or any officer, director or stockholder of said
corporation.
§ 125-2. License required; exceptions; purpose. [Amended 9-3-1975
by Ord. No. 581-75; 12-15-1981 by Ord. No. 710-81]
A. License required. No person shall maintain, operate or possess in any
store, building or other place where the public may enter or in any
building or other place wherein any club or organization meetings are
held within the Borough of Edgewater any automatic amusement device
without first obtaining a license therefor.
59.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 121-18 EDGEWATER CODE § 125-2
1:214
§ 125-3. Issuance and display of license; fees. [Amended 9-3-1975
by Ord. No. 581-75; 12-15-1981 by Ord. No. 710-81]
§ 125-4. Jukeboxes and billiard tables; fees for licenses. [Added
2-17-1982 by Ord. No. 716-82]
B. Exceptions. Any persons who own or lease automatic amusement
games covered by this chapter and who are nonprofit, charitable or
religious organizations are exempted from the fee and payment
requirements of obtaining a license or licenses upon said amusement
games, but such organizations shall remain subject to all other
provisions of this chapter.
C. The purpose of this chapter is to license, regulate and control those
automatic amusement devices which are operated in a commercial
venture for the purpose of making a profit.
A. All licenses for the installation, operation and maintenance of such
amusement devices, games or machines shall be issued to, and in the
name of, the owner of said machine for a term of one year, commencing
on January 1 and expiring on December 31 of the year of issuance.
B. The license shall be affixed in a conspicuous place to the machine
covered thereby and shall disclose on its face the manufacturer's serial
number, the name and the post office address of the licensee and the
amount of money required to operate said machine or device and shall
briefly state that the machine or device to which the same is affixed is
licensed for operation by the Borough of Edgewater.
C. The fee for all applications for licenses pursuant to this chapter shall be
$25, in addition to all licensing and transfer fees.
D. The fee for a license to operate an automatic amusement device shall be
$200 for the first such device at such location and $20 for each
additional device at such location. [Amended 5-17-1999 by Ord. No.
1160-99]
A. The fee for all applications for licenses for the operation of a jukebox or
billiard table shall be limited to $25 for each such device on a particular
premises and $125 for each additional device on the same premises,
and no other municipal fees shall be charged to operate such devices.
B. The provisions of Chapter 125 dealing with automatic amusement
devices shall apply to jukeboxes and billiard tables only where the
premises contains more than one such device or one such device
together with one or more automatic amusement devices; provided,
however, that in all cases, the operator shall be required to file an
application for each machine with the Borough Clerk as set forth in
§ 125-5 of Chapter 125.
§ 125-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-5
1:215
§ 125-5. Application for license; deposit of fee. [Amended
12-15-1981 by Ord. No. 710-81]
§ 125-6. Transfer of license permitted; renewal of license.
[Amended 12-15-1981 by Ord. No. 710-81]
A. All applications for a license under this chapter shall be made and
delivered to the Borough Clerk in duplicate on forms to be supplied for
the purpose and shall be subscribed and sworn to by the applicant.
B. The application for the license shall contain the following:
(1) Name and address of the applicant.
(2) Name under which the place of business is being operated and the
location of the same.
(3) Number and type of alcoholic beverage licenses, where applicable.
(4) Number and type of machines sought to be licensed.
(5) Location where each automatic amusement game is to be located.
(6) Name and address of the person from whom each device is to be
purchased, rented or otherwise obtained.
(7) Description of each automatic amusement game sought to be
licensed, including for each device the name of the manufacturer,
model number and serial number.
(8) Terms of agreement governing the acquisition and installation of
said automatic amusement game.
(9) Information indicating whether the distributor, the applicant or any
person connected with the operation of the place of business
wherein the game or device is to be installed has ever been
convicted of any crime or found guilty of the violation of any
ordinance pertaining to gambling or gaming.
(10) Any other information which the Mayor and Council may deem
reasonably necessary and proper for the full protection of the
interest of the public in the application.
C. The Mayor and Council may request of an applicant additional
information supplementing the information given in the application.
D. The license application fee shall be deposited with the Borough Clerk
when the application is filed, and if the application is denied the fee
shall be returned. The fee for the license shall be due and payable at the
time the license to operate the automatic amusement device is issued.
A. A license may be transferred from one machine to another by giving
notice to the Borough Clerk to that effect and giving a description of the
new machine, including manufacturer, model number and serial
§ 125-5 EDGEWATER CODE § 125-6
1:216
§ 125-7. Location of devices; hours of operation; parking
requirements. [Added 12-15-1981 by Ord. No. 710-81]
§ 125-8. Gambling prohibited. [Added 12-15-1981 by Ord. No.
710-81]
No person shall, in his place of business, permit gambling in connection
with the playing of any mechanical amusement game.
§ 125-9. Suspension or revocation of license. [Amended 9-3-1975 by
Ord. No. 581-75]
Licenses issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the
Mayor after a written notice for any of the following causes:
number. A license may be transferred from one place to another by
giving notice to the Borough Clerk to that effect and submitting the
required information as to the new premises. A transfer of a license
from one place to another shall be subject to the approval of the Mayor
and Council. There shall be a fee for all transfers from one place to
another in the amount of $25 per place of transfer.
B. A license shall be renewed by submission to the Borough Clerk, no later
than November 1, of an application therefor, pursuant to §§ 125-5 and
125-6.
A. Each device shall be located at least 10 feet from the entranceway to
the premises in which located and placed so that it does not obstruct or
interfere with the free and unfettered passage of patrons or users of the
premises.
B. Each device shall have an unobstructed perimeter zone or distance of
five feet, not overlapping, between each machine, around three linear
borders of said device, wherein the users of said device may use, watch
or wait to use said device.
C. An automatic amusement device may only be used or operated during
the hours of operation of the premises in which located.
D. Any premises in which is located an automatic amusement device shall
provide two off-street parking spaces for each machine located in such
premises.
E. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any premises wherein is
licensed an automatic amusement device on November 24, 1981.
A. Misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application.
B. Misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on
activities regulated herein.
C. Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.
§ 125-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-9
1:217
§ 125-10. Appeals from suspension or revocation of license. [Added
9-3-1975 by Ord. No. 581-75]
Any person whose license has been suspended or revoked may have the
right of appeal to the Mayor and Council by requesting a hearing, in writing
to the Borough Clerk within 10 days of the revocation. The Mayor and
Council shall, within 10 days after receipt of the request, hold a hearing,
and at the conclusion of which it shall affirm or order the Mayor to set aside
the suspended or revoked license and reinstate the same. The decision of
the Mayor and Council on such appeal shall be final and conclusive.
§ 125-11. Operation near schools prohibited.
No game or machine coming within the purview of this chapter shall be
installed, operated or maintained within 200 feet of any school.60
§ 125-12. Number of devices per establishment restricted.
No more than five machines or devices of the type or types herein
mentioned shall be permitted to be used or operated in any one place,
location or premises.
§ 125-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-3-1975 by Ord. No.
581-75; 6-15-1976 by Ord. No. 594-76]
Chapter 129
D. Conducting the licensed business in an unlawful manner, in violation of
this chapter or in such a manner as to cause a breach of the peace or to
constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the
public.
A. Any person, corporation or other entity who shall own, have a direct or
indirect financial interest in, operate or permit the operation of any
machine or device without a license, as required by this chapter, on
premises either owned or leased by him or in which he has a
proprietary or leasehold interest, shall be deemed to be guilty of a
violation and punishable therefor, as provided by Chapter 1, Article II,
General Penalty.
B. Any person, corporation or other entity who shall own or have a direct
or indirect financial interest in any of the machines or devices licensed
hereunder for the purpose of gambling shall be deemed to be guilty of a
violation and punishable therefor as provided by Chapter 1, Article II,
General Penalty the Penalties chapter of this Code.61
60.Editor's Note: Former § 114-9, Age restrictions on use of machines, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed 10-5-1982 by Ord. No. 733-82.
61.Editor's Note: Former § 114-12, Purpose of regulations, as amended 9-3-1975 by Ord. No.
581-75, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 11-14-1994 by Ord. No.
1036-94.
§ 125-9 EDGEWATER CODE § 125-13
1:218
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 271
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 293.
Animals — See Ch. 454.
Fees for licenses and permits — See Ch. 479.
Nuisances — See Ch. 503.
Pet shops, kennels, shelters and
pounds — See Ch. 512.
§ 125-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-13
1:219

ARTICLE I
Dogs
[Adopted 9-3-1975 by Ord. No. 578-75 (Ch. 140 of the 1975 Code)]
§ 129-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DOG OF LICENSING AGE — Any dog that has attained the age of seven
months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.62
§ 129-2. License required; restrictions on dog ownership. [Amended
3-27-2000 by Board of Health Ord. No. 2000-4]
§ 129-3. Application for license; placement of tag. [Amended
3-27-2000 by Board of Health Ord. No. 2000-4]
A. No person shall keep or harbor any dog within the Borough without first
obtaining a license therefor, to be issued by the Board of Health
Secretary upon application of the owner and the payment of the
prescribed fee, and no person shall keep or harbor any dog in said
Borough except in compliance with the provisions of this article.
B. No more than three dogs of licensing age shall be kept, maintained or
harbored at one time in any residential housing unit or on its grounds or
in any business establishment or on its grounds. This restriction shall
not apply to properly licensed pet shops, kennels, shelters and pounds.
A. Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog of licensing age shall,
in the month of January, annually, apply for and procure from the Board
of Health Secretary, or other official designated by the governing body
thereof to license dogs in the municipality in which he/she resides, a
license and official registration tag with license number for each dog so
owned, kept or harbored, and shall place upon each dog a collar or
harness with the registration tag securely fastened to such strap, collar
or harness. Said license is not transferable.
B. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.3, persons owning Seeing Eye dogs, dogs
used to assist handicapped persons and commonly known as "service
dogs" and dogs used to assist deaf persons and commonly known as
"hearing ear" dogs, shall be exempt from paying the license fees
provided for in § 129-4 but must apply for a license and tag.63
62.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
63.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 129-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 129-4
1:221
§ 129-4. Licenses: where to apply; expiration; fees. [Amended
3-27-2000 by Board of Health Ord. No. 2000-4; 9-23-2002 by Ord.
No. 2002-164]
The person applying for the license and registration tag for each dog shall
do so at the office of the Board of Health. All licenses and registrations shall
expire on the last day of January of each year. Any person applying for a
license shall pay an annual fee as determined by the Board of Health and
set forth in Code § 479-3. If a license for a dog is not renewed by March 1,
a late charge of $10 will be added on to the fee.
§ 129-5. Time limit for application.65
The owner of any newly acquired dog of licensing age or of any dog which
attains licensing age shall make application for a license and registration
tag for each dog within 10 days after such acquisition or age attainment.
§ 129-6. Notification regarding dogs brought into Borough.
[Amended 4-28-2003 by Board of Health Ord. No. 2003-266]
§ 129-7. Dogs at large prohibited; leashing required; exceptions.
[Amended 7-11-1978 by Ord. No. 635-78]
A. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Borough of
Edgewater any dog licensed in another state for the current year, and
bearing a registration tag, and shall keep the same or permit the same
to be kept within the Borough for a period of more than 90 days shall
immediately apply for a license and registration tag for each such dog
in accordance with this article unless such dog is exempt from licensure
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.8.
B. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Borough of
Edgewater any unlicensed dog and shall keep the same or permit the
same to be kept within the Borough for a period of more than 10 days
shall immediately apply for a license and registration tag for each such
dog in accordance with this article unless such dog is exempt from
licensure pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.8.67
A. No person owning, keeping or harboring a dog shall suffer or permit it
to run at large upon the public streets or in any public building or other
public place within the Borough unless the dog is accompanied by its
owner or his representative and is upon a leash of not more than six feet
which shall be held or controlled by the owner or his representative.
64.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
65.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
66.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
67.Editor's Note: Former § 140-7, Habitual disturbance of neighborhood prohibited, which
immediately followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 129-4 EDGEWATER CODE § 129-7
1:222
§ 129-8. Dogs prohibited at food establishments.68
No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog shall suffer or permit it to
enter any food establishment, which for the purpose of this article includes
any place used in the production, preparation, manufacture, packing,
storage, transportation or handling of food of foodstuffs intended for sale or
distribution. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the provisions of this section
shall not apply to so-called "seeing eye dogs," "service dogs" or "hearing ear
dogs."69
§ 129-9. Owner’s permission assumed for violation of § 129-8.70
Any dog found in any place specified in § 129-8 of this article shall be
deemed to be in such place by permission of the owner or keeper of such
dog, and such owner or keeper shall be guilty of a violation of this article.
§ 129-10. Violations and penalties. [Added 9-6-1989 by Ord. No.
933-8971]
Except as provided in N.J.S.A. 4:19-15:19, any person who shall violate any
of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be liable to a penalty
as set forth in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Code.
The leash must be of sufficient strength to restrain the dog attached to
it.
B. No person owning, keeping or harboring a dog shall suffer or permit it
to go into or be taken into any public park or recreation area within the
Borough.
C. This section of the article does not apply to private property upon which
the dog is present with the consent of the property owner or some other
person entitled to be on the private property.
68.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
69.Editor's Note: Former §§ 140-10, Nuisances in private and public places prohibited, and
140-10.1, Exceptions, which immediately followed this section, were deleted at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
70.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
71.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 129-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 129-10
1:223

ARTICLE II
Disposal of Pet Waste
[Adopted 5-1-2006 by Ord. No. 1337-2006 (Ch. 116, Art. I, of the
1975 Code)]
§ 129-11. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish requirements for the proper
disposal of pet solid waste in the Borough of Edgewater so as to protect
public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for failure to
comply.
§ 129-12. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
IMMEDIATE — The pet solid waste is removed at once, without delay.
OWNER/KEEPER — Any person who shall possess, maintain, house or
harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet, whether or not the
owner of such pet.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PET — A domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance animal)
kept for amusement or companionship.
PET SOLID WASTE — Waste matter expelled from the bowels of the pet;
excrement.
PROPER DISPOSAL — Placement in a designated waste receptacle, or other
suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container which is regularly
emptied by the municipality or some other refuse collector; or disposal into
a system designed to convey domestic sewage for proper treatment and
disposal.
§ 129-13. Requirement for disposal.
All pet owners and keepers are required to immediately and properly
dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited on any property, public or
private, not owned or possessed by that person.
§ 129-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 129-14
1:225
§ 129-14. Exemptions.
Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability assistance animal
shall be exempt from the provisions of this section while such animal is
being used for that purpose.
§ 129-15. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Police Department and
the Health Department of the Borough of Edgewater.
§ 129-16. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine in accordance with Chapter 1, Article II, General
Penalty, of the Code of the Borough of Edgewater.
§ 129-14 EDGEWATER CODE § 129-16
1:226
ARTICLE III
Feeding of Wildlife
[Adopted 5-15-2006 by Ord. No. 1340-2006 (Ch. 116, Art. II, of the
1975 Code)]
§ 129-17. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the feeding of unconfined wildlife in
any public park or on any other property owned or operated by the Borough
of Edgewater so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to
prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 129-18. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible
material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — All animals that are neither human nor domesticated.
§ 129-19. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned
or operated by the Borough of Edgewater, any wildlife, excluding confined
wildlife (for example, wildlife confined in zoos, parks or rehabilitation
centers, or unconfined wildlife at environmental education centers).
§ 129-20. Enforcement.
§ 129-21. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this
article shall be subject to a penalty in accordance with Chapter 1, Article II,
General Penalty, of the Code of the Borough of Edgewater.
A. This article shall be enforced by the Police Department and/or other
municipal official(s) of the Borough of Edgewater.
B. Any person found to be in violation of this article shall be ordered to
cease the feeding immediately.
§ 129-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 129-21
1:227

ARTICLE IV
Pet Shop Sales
[Added 10-17-2016 by Ord. No. 1539-2016]
§ 129-22. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL CARE FACILITY — An animal control center or an animal shelter,
maintained by or under contract with any state, county, or municipality,
whose mission and practice is, in whole or significant part, the rescue and
placement of animals in permanent homes or rescue organizations.
ANIMAL RESCUE ORGANIZATION — Any not-for-profit organization which
has tax-exempt status under § 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal
Revenue Code, whose mission and practice is, in whole or in significant
part, the rescue and placement of animals in permanent homes.
CAT — Member of the species of domestic cat, Felis catus.
DOG — Member of the species of domestic dog, Canis familiaris.
OFFER FOR SALE — To sell, offer for sale or adoption, advertise for the sale
of, barter, auction, give away or otherwise dispose of a dog or cat.
PET SHOP — Retail establishment where dogs and cats are sold,
exchanged, bartered or offered for sale as pet animals to the general public
at retail. Such definition shall not include an animal care facility or animal
rescue organization, as defined.
§ 129-23. Restrictions on the sale of animals.
A. A pet shop may offer for sale only those dogs and cats that the pet shop
has obtained from or displays in cooperation with:
(1) An animal care facility; or
(2) An animal rescue organization.
B. A pet shop shall not offer for sale a dog or cat that is younger than eight
weeks old.
§ 129-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 129-23
1:229
Chapter 134
BABY-KEEP-WELL STATION
§ 134-1. Station created.72
There is hereby created and established a Baby-Keep-Well Station.
Chapter 147
BUILDINGS, DANGEROUS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Demolition regulations — See Ch. 179.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 204.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 314.
§ 147-1. Removal or repair required; assessment of costs.
Any building, wall or structure which is or may become dangerous to life
or health or might tend to extend a conflagration shall be taken down,
destroyed and removed or made safe and secure, and the cost thereof may
be assessed as a municipal lien against the lot, tract or parcel of land or
premises upon which the unsafe and dangerous structure stands or stood.
§ 147-2. Investigation of report; service of notice. [Amended
9-20-2010 by Ord. No. 1439-2010; 3-20-2017 by Ord. No.
1541-2017]
Immediately upon the receipt of a report from either the Chief of Police
and/or Police Director, Fire Chief, Health Officer, Sanitary Inspector,
Construction Official, or Borough Engineer of the Borough of Edgewater
that a building, wall or structure, or any part thereof, is or may become
dangerous to life or health or might tend to extend a conflagration, the
Borough Engineer shall report the same at the next meeting of the Mayor
and Council, and a copy of his report shall be included in the minutes of
that meeting. He shall also forthwith cause to be served upon the owner,
executor, administrator, agent, lessee or any other person who may have a
vested or contingent interest in such structure or premises a written notice
containing a description of such structure or premises and a statement
of the particulars in which such structure or premises are deemed to
be dangerous to life or health, or might tend to extend a conflagration,
together with an order requiring such structure or premises to be made safe
and secure or removed and destroyed. Such notice shall require the person
72.Editor's Note: Three additional sections, the first of which provided for the appointment,
salary and term of office of a Public Health Nurse, and the second and third of which set
forth the specific and general duties of such nurse, were repealed 9-3-1975 by Ord. No.
581-75.
§ 129-23 EDGEWATER CODE § 147-2
1:230
or persons thus served immediately to certify to the Borough Engineer his
or their acceptance or rejection of such order.
§ 147-3. Time limit for abatement of condition.
If the person or persons served with a notice and order as herein specified
shall immediately certify his or their assent to the securing or removal
and destruction of such unsafe or dangerous structure and premises, he
or they shall be allowed 48 hours from the time of serving of such notice
and order within which to commence an abatement of the unsafe and
dangerous conditions. Such person or persons shall employ sufficient labor
and assistance to secure or remove and destroy such unsafe or dangerous
conditions as expeditiously as the Borough Engineer considers it reasonable
to require.
§ 147-4. Effect of refusal or neglect to comply; survey of premises.
Upon the refusal or neglect of the person or persons served with the notice
and order as provided in §§ 147-2 and 147-3 to comply with any of the
requirements thereof, a further written notice shall be served upon him
or them that a survey of the premises named in such notice will be made
at a time and place therein named. Such survey shall be made by three
competent persons, of whom one shall be the Borough Engineer, another
shall be a licensed architect appointed by the Borough Engineer and the
third shall be a practical builder with at least five years' experience, who
shall also be appointed by the Borough Engineer. The owner or any other
person interested in such premises shall have the right to designate some
one person to represent him in making such a survey.
§ 147-5. Hearing. [Amended 9-3-1975 by Ord. No. 581-75]
The notice provided for in this chapter shall also set forth that if the
premises referred to therein are reported by such surveyors to be
dangerous to life or health, or likely to become so, or might tend to extend
a conflagration, their report will be placed before the Mayor and Council
of the Borough of Edgewater, and that a hearing upon the allegations and
statements contained therein will be held before said Mayor and Council, at
the time and place stated in said notice, to determine whether the unsafe
or dangerous structure or premises shall be repaired and secured, or taken
down, removed and destroyed, and that the report of such survey shall
constitute the issue to be placed before the Mayor and Council of the
Borough of Edgewater.
§ 147-6. Condemnation and destruction; account of costs.
After the hearing by the Mayor and Council on the report of the surveyors
and the answer of the owner, the Mayor and Council may condemn any
building, wall or structure as dangerous to life or health, or likely to
become so, or might tend to extend a conflagration, and order the Borough
Engineer to remove or destroy such structure and complete the work by the
§ 147-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-6
1:231
municipality. The Borough Engineer shall keep a true and accurate account
of the cost thereof and make a report as required by law.
§ 147-7. Standards for contents and service of notices. [Amended
9-3-1975 by Ord. No. 581-75]
The notices herein provided for shall, in addition to the provisions of this
chapter, also conform to the statutes of New Jersey in such case made
and provided, and shall also be served in the manner provided by N.J.S.A.
40:48-1, paragraph 15.
§ 147-8. Order to vacate premises; refusal deemed violation.
[Amended 9-3-1975 by Ord. No. 581-7573]
Whenever any building or part thereof in the opinion of the Borough
Engineer of Construction Official is dangerous to life or health, or is so unfit
for human habitation that it cannot be remedied by repairs or otherwise
except by the destruction of such building or portion thereof, the Borough
Engineer or Construction Official may issue an order to vacate such
building. Any person or persons refusing to obey any order issued by the
Borough Engineer or Construction Official pursuant to the provisions of this
section shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalty provided in Chapter
1, Article II, General Penalty.
§ 147-9. Immediate or emergency demolition; failure to comply
deemed violation. [Added 12-15-1970 by Ord. No. 525-70]
A. Where any violation or condition existing on the premises is of such a
nature as to constitute an immediate or serious threat to health or
safety unless abated without delay, the Construction Official and/or the
Borough Engineer may either abate the violation or condition
immediately or order the owner, operator or occupant to correct the
violation or condition within a period of time not to exceed 48 hours,
and upon failure to do so, the Construction Official may abate the
condition immediately thereafter. It shall not be necessary under such
circumstances to first give any notice to the owner, occupant or
operator of the premises, nor shall it be necessary for the Construction
Official and/or the Borough Engineer to advertise for or receive bids for
such emergency repair or demolition. The cost of such repair or
demolition shall become a municipal lien against the real property upon
which such cost was incurred.74
B. If the owner or operator or occupant fails to comply with the aforesaid
order within the time specified, the failure to comply shall be deemed a
violation subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1, Article II,
General Penalty. [Amended 9-3-1975 by Ord. No. 581-75]
73.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
74.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 147-6 EDGEWATER CODE § 147-9
1:232
Chapter 151
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 204. Land use and development — See Ch. 240.
§ 151-1. Numbering required; specifications.
Every dwelling house, store or other building shall be numbered in a
conspicuous place facing the street upon which it fronts, with numerals of
a uniform size and type as shall be designated by the Borough Engineer.
Said numbers shall be kept in good condition so as to be always clearly
discernible.
§ 151-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-3-1975 by Ord. No.
581-75]
Any person who, after having been notified in writing so to do by the
Borough Engineer, shall refuse or neglect, for 30 days, to put upon his, her
or their house, store or other building the number determined upon by the
Borough Engineer as the number of such house, store or other building,
or to make the same clear and distinguishable, he, she or they shall, upon
conviction before the Municipal Judge of such refusal or neglect, be subject
to the penalty provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
Chapter 157
CERTIFICATES, LICENSES AND PERMITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dangerous buildings — See Ch. 147.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 166.
Land use and development — See Ch. 240.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 314.
§ 147-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-2
1:233

ARTICLE I
Condominiums and Cooperatives
[Adopted 8-10-1982 by Ord. No. 730-82 (Ch. 125, Art. I, of the 1975
Code)]
§ 157-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING PERMIT — Any type of construction permit required to be issued
pursuant to the state Uniform Construction Code Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119
et seq., and the administrative regulations promulgated thereunder.
CONDOMINIUM — The form of ownership of real property under a master
deed providing for ownership by one or more owners of units of
improvement, together with an undivided interest in common elements
appurtenant to each such unit.
COOPERATIVE — A housing corporation or association which entitles the
holder of a share of membership interest thereof to possess and occupy for
dwelling purposes a house, apartment or other structure, or land owned or
leased by said corporation or association, or to lease or purchase a dwelling
constructed or to be constructed by said corporation or association.
DEVELOPMENT PERMIT — Any approval by the appropriate land use
agency for the Borough of Edgewater involving a subdivision site plan or
variance.
§ 157-2. Approval of condominium or cooperative board required.
Any application for a building or development permit in an existing
condominium or cooperative association shall be accompanied by written
approval from the board of directors of the condominium or cooperative
association indicating approval by said board of the planned construction,
which approval shall be addressed to the Borough. No building or
development permit shall be issued by the Borough until evidence of such
approval by the board of directors of the condominium or cooperative
association is presented at the time application is made.
§ 157-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-2
1:235

ARTICLE II
Payment of Taxes and Assessments
[Adopted 6-7-1988 by Ord. No. 887-88 (Ch. 53, Art. I, of the 1975
Code)]
§ 157-3. Payment prior to issuance.
The following procedures are established when an application is made for
the issuance or renewal of a license or permit:
A. Any applicant who requests the issuance or renewal of any license or
permit issued by or requiring the approval of the Mayor and Council or
of any agency, subdivision or department of the Borough which issues
permits shall be required to pay any delinquent property taxes or
assessments if such applicant is the owner of said property wherein the
business or activity is to be conducted.
B. Any license or permit issued by the Mayor and Council or by any
agency, subdivision or department of the Borough may be revoked or
suspended by the governing body when any licensee or permittee
owning the property upon which the licensed business or activity is
conducted has failed to pay taxes due on the property for at least three
consecutive quarters.
C. Upon payment of the delinquent taxes or assessments, the license or
permit shall be restored.
D. The provisions of this article shall not apply to or include any alcoholic
beverage license or permit issued pursuant to the Alcoholic Beverage
Control Act (N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq).
§ 157-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-3
1:237

ARTICLE III
Certificates of Continued Occupancy
[Adopted 10-1-1991 by Ord. No. 972-91 (Ch. 134 of the 1975 Code)]
§ 157-4. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Construction Official of the Borough of
Edgewater or such other officer designated by the Mayor and Council to
enforce the provisions of this article.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — Any building or structure containing three or
more rented or leased dwelling units occupied or intended to be occupied
by three or more persons, together with all appurtenant land, buildings and
structures.
OCCUPANCY — The lawful possession of a dwelling unit, commercial or
industrial space.
OWNER — The person or persons holding a legal or equitable fee simple
interest in a commercial, industrial or residential building or, in case of
premises held in the cooperative form of ownership, the person or persons
holding legal or equitable title to the cooperative shares allocated to a
dwelling unit.
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING — Includes one-, two- and three-family homes,
multiple-family dwellings and units therein and individual condominium and
cooperative units.
§ 157-5. Certificate required; issuance of certificate.
A. No person shall occupy or use any portion of a commercial, industrial or
residential building after such building or portion thereof has been
vacated or sold, or when there has been a change in use or occupancy
of such building or any portion thereof, until the owner or landlord
thereof shall have applied for and secured a certificate of continuing
occupancy. Such certificate shall be issued upon a determination by the
Enforcement Officer that, based upon a general inspection of the visible
parts of the building and the portion thereof that has been vacated or
sold or in which there has been a change in use and occupancy, there
are no imminent hazards and that the premises in question is in
compliance with applicable building, health, safety and fire codes,
regulations, ordinances and statutes of the Borough of Edgewater and
State of New Jersey.
B. Prior to the rental, lease or sale of any commercial, industrial or
residential building or the rental, lease or sale of any individual unit in a
multiple-family dwelling involving a new occupancy, continued
occupancy or change of use, the Enforcement Officer shall issue a
certificate of continuing occupancy in accordance with the standards
set forth in Subsection A of this section.
§ 157-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-6
1:239
§ 157-6. Requirements for issuance. [Amended 11-19-2012 by Ord.
No. 1480-2012]
The following requirements shall be complied with prior to the issuance of
a certificate of continued occupancy to a residential building or any portion
thereof pursuant to this article:
§ 157-7. Application for certificate.
Prior to any rental, lease or sale of any building or any portion thereof,
the owner thereof shall apply to the Enforcement Officer, on an appropriate
form, for a certificate of continuing occupancy.
§ 157-8. Time limit for issuance or denial of certificate.
The Enforcement Officer shall conduct an inspection of said commercial,
industrial or residential building or portion thereof which is to be sold,
rented or leased within a reasonable time, not exceeding 30 days after
completion of said application, and shall issue a certificate of continuing
occupancy, provided that the standards set forth in § 157-5A of this article
have been satisfied and, in the case of residential buildings, that the
premises is in compliance with the requirement of installation of a smoke
detector alarm system.
A. An approved smoke detector device must be installed as required by
applicable state statute and local ordinance and Chapter 149 of the
Borough Code.75
B. If the front door is connected to a common hallway, the front door must
be self-closing, have a chain lock and door viewer.
C. Smoke detectors must be in working order, less than 10 years old, and
installed as per design when the building was constructed.
D. Carbon monoxide detectors must be in working order, less than five
years old, and located within 10 feet of all bedrooms. However, carbon
monoxide detectors shall only be required in buildings that contain any
of the following: fireplace, attached garage or any gas appliance(s).
E. Must meet all hotel and multiple dwelling laws, i.e., holes in walls, GFIs
where required, peeling paint.
F. Additional requirements for one- and two-family dwellings:
(1) Shall contain a portable fire extinguisher (ABC type) no larger than
10 pounds, located in or in close proximity to the kitchen.
75.Editor's Note: Editor's Note: Former Chapter 149, Fire Detection Systems, was repealed
9-20-2010 by Ord. No. 1439-2010.
§ 157-6 EDGEWATER CODE § 157-9
1:240
§ 157-9. Failure to comply.
If, after inspection by the Enforcement Officer, a certificate of continuing
occupancy may not be issued to the commercial, industrial or residential
building or portion thereof because of the existence of a violation of any
code or failure to comply with the standards set forth in § 157-5A of this
article, notice shall be given by the Enforcement Officer to the owner
detailing the violations of applicable laws, regulations or ordinances. The
Enforcement Officer shall have authority to issue any summons or complaint
for any violation of any ordinance, statute or regulation against the owner
and/or occupant of the commercial, industrial or residential building or
portion thereof wherein the violation exists. In the event that any violations
are found to exist, there shall be no new occupancy or use of the premises
until the criteria has been satisfied for the issuance of the certificate of
continuing occupancy.
§ 157-10. Fees. [Amended 4-4-1994 by Ord. No. 1027-94]
The following fees shall be applicable for the inspection and issuance of a
certificate of continuing occupancy:
A. For one-family homes and individual condominiums, cooperative units
and apartment units: $50.
B. For two-family dwellings: $75.
C. For multiple-family dwellings: $75 for the first two units and $50 for
each additional unit.
D. For commercial or industrial property: $250 for up to 10,000 square
feet of gross floor area, plus $25 for each additional 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area.
E. The fee for all reinspections required for the issuance of the certificate,
whether due to inspection failure or denial of access, shall be $25.
[Added 9-18-2000 by Ord. No. 1196-2000; amended 11-19-2012
by Ord. No. 1480-2012]
§ 157-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-10
1:241

ARTICLE IV
Certificates of Necessity
[Adopted 2-6-1995 by Ord. No. 1042-95 (Ch. 135 of the 1975 Code)]
§ 157-11. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to permit property owners or inhabitants of
property to make certain necessary repairs to their property which may be
accomplished only by obtaining access to an adjoining property. It is the
intent of this article to permit the obtaining of a certificate of necessity
only after all other reasonable and practical means have been exhausted
for the purpose of making repairs, and the Construction Official or such
other legally authorized or designated Borough official shall issue such a
certificate only when no other alternative means is available for the purpose
of making the necessary repairs. The certificate of necessity may be issued
by the Construction Official or such other delegated official of the Borough.
§ 157-12. Application; extensions; notice of hearing.
A. Any owner of property who, pursuant to an order of the Construction
Official or such other delegated official, is unable to comply with an
order unless access is obtained to adjoining property may, where such
access has been denied by the adjoining property owner, apply to the
Construction Official for a certificate of necessity. An appropriate
application form shall be completed, together with an affidavit, made
under oath, evidencing the need for access and that the adjoining
property owner has denied such access.
B. In the event that a property owner makes an application within 10 days
of denial of access by the adjoining owner, the Construction Official may
grant an extension of time to comply with the previous order so as to
permit the property owner to obtain a certificate of necessity in
accordance with the provisions of this article.
C. After the application has been filed, the Construction Official shall order
the adjoining owner to appear before him on a fixed date for the
purpose of showing cause why an order should not be issued so as to
permit the applicant to obtain a certificate of necessity for the purpose
of securing access in order to comply with the order.
D. The notice shall be served personally on the adjoining property owner
or by certified mail, return receipt requested, which service shall be
made not less than 10 days from the date of the hearing. If mailed, it
shall be forwarded to the name of the person or entity owning such land
as indicated by the tax assessment records of the Borough and
forwarded to the address listed on the tax duplicate. In the event that
service cannot be obtained, the Construction Official may publish notice
of such hearing in an official newspaper of the Borough, with the cost
thereof charged to the applicant seeking the certificate of necessity.
§ 157-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-12
1:243
§ 157-13. Hearing on application; imposition of conditions;
indemnification; bond.
§ 157-14. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of any of the provisions of this article shall subject the person,
upon conviction, to such penalties as are established in Chapter I, Article II,
General Penalty, of the Borough Code.
Should service be required by publication, the Construction Official
may extend the time for compliance with the previously entered order.
A. The Construction Official shall afford the adjoining property owner the
opportunity to state his or her reasons for opposing the requested
access. The adjoining property owner may submit such evidence as
such owner may deem appropriate, and the weight to be given thereto
shall rest with the sole discretion of the Construction Official.
B. Should the certificate of necessity be issued, the Construction Official
may impose certain conditions in connection therewith, including time
of access, duration and other requirements that the applicant must
comply with.
C. The applicant shall assume full responsibility for any damage caused in
connection with access to the adjoining owner's property. No
responsibility shall attach to the Construction Official or his or her
designee in connection with the issuance of the certificate.
D. The Construction Official shall require the applicant to post a surety
bond to be issued by a surety company authorized to do business in the
State of New Jersey or a cash bond, provided that such cash bond shall
not be in the sum of less than $1,000. In fixing the amount of the bond
or cash deposit, the Construction Official shall consider the extent and
duration of the repairs, the proximity of the improvements to the
adjoining property, applicable building and code requirements and such
other issues that may be appropriate based on the facts presented. The
bond shall be subject to approval as to form by the Borough Attorney.
E. The applicant shall agree to indemnify the Borough and the adjoining
property owner from any claim for property damage or personal injury
in connection with the certificate of necessity.
§ 157-12 EDGEWATER CODE § 157-14
1:244
ARTICLE V
Permits for Certain Business Uses
[Adopted 6-3-1996 by Ord. No. 1076-96 (Ch. 194, Art. I of the 1975
Code)]
§ 157-15. Application for certain uses required.
Any person owning, operating, maintaining or providing the following uses
shall make application to the Borough Clerk, on forms to be provided for
such purpose, for a permit to be issued on an annual basis. Such uses shall
include the following:
§ 157-16. Fees.76
An applicant for a permit for any of the uses referred to in § 157-15 of this
article shall pay an annual fee as set forth below:
A. The operation of a laundromat and the operation of each washer and
dryer in laundromat.
B. Movie theaters.
C. Service stations.
D. Hotels and motels.
E. Coin-operated vending machines.
F. Cigarette vending machines.
G. Parking facilities.
A. Laundromats.
(1) Per washer: $50.
(2) Per dryer: $10.
B. Movie theaters: $100 per screen.
C. Service stations: $25.
D. Hotels and motels.
(1) Up to 10 units: $1,000.
(2) Each unit in excess of 10: $25.
E. Coin-operated vending machines (candy, soda): $5.
F. Cigarette vending machines: $25.
G. Parking lots, per square foot: $0.10.
76.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 157-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-17
1:245
§ 157-17. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be subject to such
fines and penalties as established by Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty,
of the Borough Code.
§ 157-17 EDGEWATER CODE § 157-17
1:246
Chapter 161
CHARITABLE DONATION BINS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use and development — See Ch. 240.
Littering — See Ch. 248.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 368.
§ 161-1. Purpose.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60 through 40:48-2.64, the purpose of this
chapter is to provide a uniform set of procedures for administering the
placement and maintenance of clothing bins within the Borough of
Edgewater ("Borough"), as well as providing for a uniform set of procedures
for administering the issuance and revocation of all permits issued by the
Borough for the placement of clothing bins, consistent with state law.
§ 161-2. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DONATION BIN — Any enclosed receptacle, container or other depository
made of metal, steel or a similar product and designed or intended for the
donation and the temporary storage of clothing or other materials.
SOLICITATION or SOLICIT — The request, directly or indirectly, for money,
credit, property, financial assistance, or other thing of any kind or value.
Solicitation shall include, but not be limited to, the use or employment of
canisters, cards, receptacles or similar devices for the collection of money
or other thing of value. A solicitation shall take place whether or not the
person making the solicitation receives any contribution.
§ 161-3. Permit required.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no person shall
place, use or employ a clothing bin, for solicitation purposes, within the
Borough without first obtaining a permit, valid for a period of one year, from
the Borough Construction Official as hereinafter provided.
§ 161-4. Application for permit; fee.
A. Application for a permit to place and/or maintain a clothing bin shall be
made in writing to the Borough Construction Official prior to placing
and/or maintaining the clothing bin.
B. The application shall contain the following information:
§ 157-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 161-4
1:247
(1) Name, address and telephone number of the person, firm,
corporation, club or charitable organization, institution or
association placing and/or maintaining such clothing bin;
(2) Name and address of the owner of the premises on which the
clothing bin is to be located and the written consent of the owner if
the applicant is other than the owner;
(3) The location where the clothing bin would be situated, as precisely
as possible;
(4) A description, including dimensions, of the proposed clothing bin;
(5) The manner in which the person, firm, corporation, club or
charitable organization, institution or association anticipates any
clothing or other donations collected via the clothing bin would be
used, sold or dispersed, and the method by which the proceeds of
collected donations would be allocated or spent; and
(6) The schedule of pickups removing the articles from the clothing
bins, which can be no less often than once per week, and the name
and telephone number of the person to be notified if the clothing
bin is overflowing prior to the scheduled date of pickup.
C. The fee for such application for the permit to place and/or maintain a
clothing bin shall be $25.
D. An expiring clothing bin permit may be renewed upon payment of the
renewal fee of $25 and by application to the Borough Construction
Official for renewal that shall include the following information:
(1) Name, address and telephone number of the person, firm,
corporation, club or charitable organization, institution or
association placing and/or maintaining such clothing bin;
(2) Name and address of the owner of the premises on which the
clothing bin is to be located and the written consent of the owner if
the applicant is other than the owner, and, if applicant intends to
move it, the new name and address of the owner of the premises on
which the clothing bin is to be located and the written consent of
the owner if the applicant is other than the owner;
(3) The location where the clothing bin would be situated, as precisely
as possible, and, if the applicant intends to move it, the new
location where the clothing bin would be situated, as precisely as
possible;
(4) A description, including dimensions, of the proposed clothing bin;
(5) The manner in which the person, firm, corporation, club or
charitable organization, institution or association has used, sold or
dispersed any clothing or other donations collected via the clothing
bin, the method by which the proceeds of collected donations have
§ 161-4 EDGEWATER CODE § 161-4
1:248
§ 161-5. Regulations.
been allocated or spent, and any changes the person, firm,
corporation, club or charitable organization, institution or
association anticipates it may make in these processes during the
period covered by the renewal; and
(6) The schedule of pickups removing the articles from the clothing
bins, which can be no less often than once per week, and the name
and telephone number of the person to be notified if the clothing
bin is overflowing prior to the scheduled date of pickup.
A. The following information shall be clearly and conspicuously displayed
on the exterior of the clothing bin:
(1) The permit number and its date of expiration;
(2) The name and address of the registered person, firm, corporation,
club or charitable organization, institution or association that owns
the clothing bin, and of any other entity which may share or profit
from any clothing or other donations collected via the bin;
(3) The telephone number of the person, firm, corporation, club or
charitable organization, institution or association's bona fide office
and, if applicable, the telephone number of any other entity which
may share or profit from any clothing or other donations collected
via the bin;
(4) In cases when an entity other than the person who owns the
clothing bin may share or profit from any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin, a notice, written in a clear and
easily understandable manner, indicating that clothing or other
donations collected via the bin, their proceeds, or both, may be
shared by, or given entirely to, an entity other than the person,
firm, corporation, club or charitable organization, institution or
association who owns the bin, and identifying all such entities
which may share or profit from such donations; and
(5) A statement indicating the manner in which the person, firm,
corporation, club or charitable organization, institution or
association anticipates any clothing or other donations collected
via the bin would be used, sold or dispersed, and the method by
which the proceeds of collected donations would be allocated or
spent.
B. An application for a permit to place and/or maintain a clothing bin shall
not be granted and a permit may be revoked if the Borough
Construction Official determines that the placement of the bin could
constitute a health or safety hazard. Such hazards shall include, but are
not limited to, the placement of a clothing bin in parking spaces, in any
area that interferes with pedestrian or vehicular traffic, landscaping,
required setbacks, or within 100 yards of any place which stores large
§ 161-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 161-5
1:249
§ 161-6. Enforcement; inspections.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Building Department and/or Borough
Construction Official. All clothing bins shall be subject to inspection by the
Building Department or any duly authorized representative of the Borough.
§ 161-7. Receipt and investigation of complaints; removal of bins in
violation.
§ 161-8. Additional penalties; remedies.
amounts of, or sells, fuel or other flammable liquids or gases, or is likely
to or does attract vermin or litter.
C. Each clothing bin shall be accessory to an existing nonresidential use.
D. Each clothing bin and surrounding area shall be maintained in a neat,
clean and orderly condition. Failure to maintain the clothing bin and
surrounding area in neat, clean and orderly condition shall be cause for
revocation of the permit granted hereunder.
A. The Building Department and/or Borough Construction Official shall
receive and investigate, within 30 days, any complaints from the public
about a clothing bin.
(1) Whenever it appears that a person, firm, corporation, club or
charitable organization, institution or association has engaged in,
or is engaging in, any act, omission or practice which violates this
chapter, the person, firm, corporation, club or charitable
organization, institution or association who placed and/or
maintains the clothing bin shall be issued a warning, stating that if
the violation is not rectified or a hearing is not requested within 45
days, the bin will be seized or removed at the expense of the
person, firm, corporation, club or charitable organization,
institution or association who placed the bin, and any clothing or
other donations collected via the bin will be sold at public auction
or otherwise disposed of.
(2) In addition to any other means used to notify the person, firm,
corporation, club or charitable organization, institution or
association who placed the bin, such warning shall be affixed to the
exterior of the bin itself.
B. In the event that the person who placed the bin does not rectify the
violation or request a hearing within 45 days of the posting of the
warning, the Borough may seize the bin, remove it, or have it removed,
at the expense of the person who placed the bin, and sell at public
auction or otherwise dispose of any clothing or other donations
collected via the bin. Any proceeds from the sale of the donations
collected via the bin shall be paid to the Borough.
§ 161-5 EDGEWATER CODE § 161-8
1:250
Chapter 166
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Certificates of substantial compliance — See
Ch. 157, Art. III.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 204.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 210.
Land use and development — See Ch. 240.
Sewers — See Ch. 347.
Solid waste; construction debris
removal — See Ch. 368.
§ 166-1. Enforcing Agency established; subcode officials
designated.
A. Any person, firm, corporation, club or charitable organization,
institution or association violating any of the provisions of this chapter
and/or Section 2 of P.L.2007, c. 209 (N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.61) which results
in the seizure of the donation clothing bin shall be:
(1) Subject to a penalty of up to $20,000 for each violation. The
Borough Construction Official may bring this action in the
municipal court or Superior Court as a summary proceeding under
the Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999, N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et seq.,
and any penalty monies collected shall be paid to the Borough; and
(2) Deemed ineligible to place and maintain a clothing bin pursuant to
this chapter. A person, firm, corporation, club or charitable
organization, institution or association disqualified from placing
and/or maintaining a clothing bin by violating the provisions of this
chapter may apply to the Borough Construction Official to have that
person, firm, corporation, club or charitable organization,
institution or association's eligibility restored. A person, firm,
corporation, club or charitable organization, institution or
association may have its eligibility restored if that person, firm,
corporation, club or charitable organization, institution or
association has:
(a) Acted within the public interest; and
(b) Demonstrated a good faith effort to comply with the provisions
of this chapter and all other applicable laws and regulations, or
had no fraudulent intentions.
B. In addition to any other penalties or remedies under this chapter, any
person, firm, corporation, club or charitable organization, institution or
association that violates any provision which results in a threat to
public health or safety shall be subject to all penalties and remedies
available under the Borough's police powers.
§ 161-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-1
1:251
§ 166-2. Fees. [Amended 4-20-1982 by Ord. No. 719-82; 9-8-1987 by
Ord. No. 872-87]
A. There is hereby established in Edgewater a State Uniform Construction
Code Enforcing Agency, to be known as the "Uniform Construction
Enforcing Agency of the Borough of Edgewater," consisting of a
Construction Official, a Building Subcode Official, Plumbing Subcode
Official, Electrical Subcode Official, Fire Protection Subcode Official
and such other subcode officials for such additional subcodes as the
Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs, State of New
Jersey, shall hereafter adopt as part of the State Uniform Construction
Code. The Construction Official shall be the chief administrator of the
Enforcing Agency. The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Edgewater
is hereby delegated the function of the reorganization of positions or
the opening of lines of authority between dispersed personnel in
different agencies, if any.
B. Each official position created in Subsection A hereof shall be filled by a
person qualified for such position pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, as
amended, and N.J.A.C. 5:28, provided that, in lieu of any particular
subcode official, an on-site inspection agency may be retained by
contract pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23. More than one such official position
may be held by the same person, provided that such person is qualified
pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, and N.J.A.C. 5:28 to hold each such
position. For purposes of this regulation and its enforcement, any such
dispersed personnel are subject to the procedures and policies of the
Enforcing Agency and are primarily responsible to the Construction
Official.
C. The public shall have the right to do business with the Enforcing
Agency at the Borough Hall, Edgewater, New Jersey, except for
emergencies and unforeseen or unavoidable circumstances.77
A. The fee for a construction permit shall be the sum of the subcode fees
listed in Subsection A hereof and shall be paid before the permit is
issued. [Amended 1-19-1988 by Ord. No. 879-88; 4-16-1991 by
Ord. No. 965-91; 4-18-2016 by Ord. No. 1531-2016]
(1) The building subcode fees are as follows:
(a) For new construction: $0.036 per cubic foot of building or
structure volume.
(b) For renovations, additions, alterations, and repairs: $50 per
$1,000 of estimated cost; $25 thereafter.
(2) The plumbing subcode fees shall be as follows:
77.Editor's Note: Original § 29-2, Construction Board of Appeals, which immediately followed
this section, was repealed 9-20-2010 by Ord. No. 1439-2010.
§ 166-1 EDGEWATER CODE § 166-2
1:252
(a) $25 per plumbing fixture, device and plumbing stack to be
installed.
(b) For special devices, including but not limited to grease traps,
oil separators, backflow preventers and water-cooled air
conditioning or refrigeration units: $100 per special device.
(c) For water heaters, steam boilers, hot-water boilers and sewer
pumps and oil interceptor/separator: $50 each.
(d) For installation or replacement of sewers, as follows:
[1] There shall be a minimum fee of $100 for any size up to
and in excess of six inches.
(e) For installation or replacement of water service, as follows:
[1] There shall be a minimum fee of $75 for one-inch up to
including four-inch.
(3) The electrical subcode fees shall be as follows:
Type Fee
Minimum fee $50
Switching outlets
Rough wiring (1 to 50) $65
Lighting outlets
Rough wiring (1 to 50) $65
Receptacle outlets
Rough wiring (1 to 50) $65
Each additional $65
Switches, final (1 to 50) $65
Lighting, final (1 to 50) $65
Receptacles, final (1 to 50) $65
Each additional (25) $20
Electrical range $50
Electric dryer $50
Electric hot-water heater $50
Furnace $50
Dishwasher $50
Garbage disposal (replacement only) $50
Intercom system $50
Heating unit (wiring) $50
Whirlpool/spa $50
§ 166-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-2
1:253
Type Fee
Pool bonding, including G.F.I.
receptacle
$100
Air conditioner, without heat pump $50
Air conditioner, with heat pump $50
Motor, any over 1 horsepower $50
Automatic fire alarm system $50
Manual fire alarm $50
(4) The fees for service meter equipment and feeders shall be as
follows:
Type Fee
Not over 200 amperes $80
200 to 300 amperes $120
Each additional 100 amperes $50
Transformers, vaults, substations
Not over 45 kilovolts $150
45 to 112.5 kilovolts $150
Over 112.5 kilovolts $150
Motors
Fractional, up to 1
horsepower/kilowatt
$40
Over 1 horsepower/kilowatt to
10 horsepower kilowatt
$65
Over 10 horsepower/kilowatt
to 50 horsepower kilowatt
$65
Over 50 horsepower/kilowatt
to 100 horsepower/kilowatt
$150
Over 100 horsepower/kilowatt $500
Protective signaling device
system, smoke detectors
1 to 5 devices $50
Each additional 3 devices $10
Service, pole, temporary $75
Single appliance outlet $50
Outdoor light poles, each $50
Minimum fee $50
(5) The fee for demolition of a building or structure shall be as follows:
§ 166-2 EDGEWATER CODE § 166-2
1:254
Type Fee
1- or 2-family residential use $200
Commercial or industrial use
To 10,000 square feet $500
Each additional 1,000 square feet $50
Multifamily $250
Each unit over 3 $50
Garage or accessory buildings
Residential $50
Commercial or industrial $50
(6) The fee for swimming pools shall be as follows:
Type Fee
In-ground pools $250
Aboveground pools $150
(7) The fire subcode fees shall be as follows:
Type Fee
Sprinkler system (based on sprinkler
heads)
1 to 25 heads $150
26 to 75 heads $150
76 to 100 heads $200
Each 100 heads thereafter, add
Standpipes, per riser
2 1/2-inch $250
2 l/2-inch to 4-inch $275
4-inch to 6-inch $300
Over 6 inches $350
Suppression system in hood over stove $125
Automatic fire alarm system
(supervised annunciator panel)
$50
Manual fire alarm system $50
Heating equipment, fuel storage tanks
Residential gas or oil $75
Heating unit, each $75
Home oil tank each $75
Commercial storage tanks
§ 166-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-2
1:255
Type Fee
Up to 999 gallons, each $100
1,000 gallons to 2,999 gallons,
each
$100
3,000 gallons to 4,999 gallons,
each
$250
Over 5,000 gallons, each $300
Underground storage tanks, closure or
removal
$200
Gas- or oil-fired appliances (not
connected to the plumbing system)
$200
Minimum fee, includes fire detection
system up to 5 heads
$200
Fire pump $200
Special suppression (Halon, CO, foam)
Per $1,000 of construction cost $200
Minimum fee $200
(8) Certificate of occupancy fees shall be as follows:
Type Fee
Certificate of occupancy
1- and 2-family residential $75
Multiple-family $250
Multiple-family, for each unit over
2, per unit
$25
Business, mercantile $250
Factory/industrial/storage $250
Certificate of approval $35
Certificate of continued occupancy $75
(9) Miscellaneous fees shall be as follows:
Type Fee
Fences over 4 feet $65
Elevators, escalators, chair lifts
Per $1,000 cost of installation
Minimum fee up to 9 floors $300
Minimum fee 10 floors and over $350
Roped elevators, hydraulic $300
Escalators $250
§ 166-2 EDGEWATER CODE § 166-2
1:256
§ 166-3. Fire limits.
The following fire limits are established pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23: Districts
C, D, E and F, as provided by the Zoning Ordinance of the Borough of
Edgewater, County of Bergen, New Jersey, of 1955, as amended.79
§ 166-4. Removal of refuse materials from construction or
renovation. [Added 11-1-1978 by Ord. No. 638-78]
Type Fee
Dumbwaiter $68
Building permit duplicate $5
Sign permits, per square foot
Minimum fee $5 sq. ft.
Dumpster $25
B. The Construction Official shall, with the advice of the subcode officials,
prepare and submit to the Mayor and Council, biannually, a report
recommending a fee schedule based on the operating expenses of the
municipality fairly attributable to the enforcement of the State Uniform
Construction Code Act.78
C. Surcharge fee.
(1) In order to provide for the training, certification and technical
support programs required by the Uniform Construction Code Act
and the regulations, the Enforcing Agency shall collect, in addition
to the fees specified above, a surcharge fee of $0.0006 per cubic
foot of volume of new construction. Said surcharge fee shall be
remitted to the Bureau of Housing Inspection, Department of
Community Affairs, on a quarterly basis for the fiscal quarters
ending September 30, December 31, March 31 and June 30, and
not later than one month next succeeding the end of the quarter for
which it is due. In the fiscal year in which the regulations first
become effective, said fee shall be collected and remitted for the
third and fourth quarters only.
(2) The Enforcing Agency shall report annually at the end of each fiscal
year to the Bureau of Housing Inspection, and not later than July
31, the total amount of the surcharge fee collected in the fiscal
year. In the fiscal year in which the regulations first become
effective, said report shall be for the third and fourth quarters only.
A. Builders, building contractors or persons engaged in the construction,
demolition or renovation of any building or structure or any addition to
any building or structure within the municipality will be responsible for
78.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
79.Editor's Note: See Ch. 240, Land Use and Development.
§ 166-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-4
1:257
§ 166-5. Design, construction and maintenance of elevators. [Added
8-9-1988 by Ord. No. 896-88]
§ 166-6. Violations and penalties.80
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
Chapter 179
DEMOLITION REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dangerous buildings — See Ch. 147.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 166.
Solid waste — See Ch. 368.
Solid waste disposal — See Ch. 529.
removal of any refuse materials resulting from such construction or
renovation. Said materials must not be placed on sidewalks or streets
at any time.
B. Materials to be removed in accordance with Subsection A above shall
be removed from the site as promptly as possible, and in no case shall
said refuse materials be stored at the site for more than five days.
A. Except where more-restrictive provisions govern, the design,
construction, installation, maintenance and operation of elevators shall
conform to ASME A17.1 and shall meet the technical criteria of N.J.A.C.
5:23-7.70 through 23-7.79 and BOCA Article 26 (1987 Edition).
B. Elevator service shall be provided for access by fire-fighting and rescue
operations to all floors.
C. At least one elevator shall have a cab with a minimum distance between
walls or between wall and door, excluding return panels, not less than
80 inches by 54 inches and a minimum distance from wall to return
panel not less than 51 inches, with a forty-two-inch side-slide door to
allow for turning a wheelchair and accommodating an ambulance cot or
stretcher measuring 24 inches by 76 inches in its horizontal open
position.
D. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all use groups with the
exception of Use Group R-3 (one- or two-family dwelling units).
80.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 166-4 EDGEWATER CODE § 179-1
1:258
§ 179-1. Performance bond required.
Prior to the issuance of a permit for the demolition of any structure
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.17 or other applicable regulation, the person,
firm or entity making such application shall post with the Construction
Official security in the form of cash, certified check, irrevocable letter
of credit or surety bond issued by a surety company authorized to do
business in New Jersey. Such security shall be in the amount of $10,000
for one- and two-family homes and accessory buildings and $25,000 for
all other buildings. The purpose of the security or condition of the bond
shall be to ensure that demolition shall have been performed in a good and
workmanlike manner as well as to guarantee compliance with § 179-3 of
this chapter, in addition to all other regulations governing demolition. In the
event that a bond is posted, the beneficiary of the security or obligee shall
be the owner or owners of the land, and any persons having an interest in
the realty involved on which the demolition is taking place, and the term of
any security, be it cash, certified check, irrevocable letter of credit or surety
bond, shall terminate no earlier than the expiration date of the demolition
permit, plus an additional 30 days.
§ 179-2. Applicability. [Added 6-20-1989 by Ord. No. 931-89;
amended 11-13-1990 by Ord. No. 959-90]
This chapter shall be applicable to the demolition of any structure and
shall include, but not be limited to, construction debris, demolition debris,
roofing debris, trees, including stumps, branches and shrubbery,
excavations such as water main and gas line pipes, ferrous or wood railroad
and trolley tracks, pilings of all kinds, houseboats, docks and piers.
§ 179-3. Recycling tonnage application to be filed. [Amended
6-20-1989 by Ord. No. 931-89]
Within five days after completion of demolition of any building or structure,
the applicant shall cause to be filed with the Recycling Official of the
Borough a municipal recycling tonnage application commercial business
form and accompanying documentation. Such form shall be available from
the Construction Official and shall be filed with the Recycling Official of
the Borough. In the event that any person, including an owner, contractor
or builder, during the course of a demolition activity shall discover the
existence of recyclable items, the same shall be reported and duly
documented in accordance with this section, and the Recycling Coordinator
shall be notified.
§ 179-4. Disposition of security.
In the event that, within 30 days after demolition of the building or
structure, the Recycling Official has not received the required
documentation pursuant to § 179-3 of this chapter, and the Construction
Official has been notified in writing of the commencement of litigation and
the court in which such litigation has commenced, and that said litigation
§ 179-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 179-4
1:259
alleges a violation of the purpose or condition of the security or bond posted
herewith, the Construction Official shall forthwith transmit such security or
bond to the Clerk of the court involved for disposition of the matter.
§ 179-5. Miscellaneous demolition requirements. [Added
10-15-2007 by Ord. No. 1374-2007]
The following shall be required prior to the issuance of a permit for the
demolition of any structure pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.17 or other
applicable regulation.
§ 179-6. Violations and penalties.81
Any person, corporation, partnership, or other entity found to have violated
the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties set forth
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty. All such penalties so imposed
shall be enforceable as a lien against the property on which the demolition
occurred or was intended to occur. In addition, no permits, certificates of
occupancy or other municipal approvals shall issue while any such lien
remains outstanding.
Chapter 188
FILMING
§ 188-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FILMING — The taking of still or motion pictures, either on film or
videotape or current technology medium, for commercial or educational
purposes intended for viewing on television, in theaters or for institutional
uses. The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to include the
filming of news stories within the Borough of Edgewater.
A. Certificate of extermination: A certificate of extermination shall be
furnished to the Construction Official from a recognized or acceptable
extermination contractor that the structure to be demolished has been
rodent and vermin exterminated within one week prior to the
demolition of the structure.
B. Continued trapping of vermin: Following the demolition of any
structure pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.17 or other applicable regulation,
the owner of the property shall be required to continue trapping for
rats, rodents and other vermin within a perimeter of 50 feet from the
demolition site or the perimeter of the property boundary lines,
whichever is closer to the demolition site, until such time as all
demolition debris have been cleared from the site.
81.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 179-4 EDGEWATER CODE § 188-1
1:260
MAJOR MOTION PICTURE — Any film which is financed and/or distributed
by a major motion-picture studio, including but not limited to the following:
PUBLIC LANDS — Any and every public street, highway, sidewalk, square,
public park or playground or any other public place within the Borough
which is within the jurisdiction and control of the Borough of Edgewater.
§ 188-2. Permit required.
A. Universal Pictures;
Warner Brothers, including New Line Cinema, Castle Rock Cinema,
Turner Production Company, Village Road Show and Bel-Aire;
B.
C. Paramount, including MTV Films and Nickelodeon Movie;
D. Twentieth Century Fox, including Fox Searchlight;
E. Columbia/Tri-Star;
F. Sony/Columbia;
G. Disney/Miramax;
H. MGM — United Artists;
I. Dreamworks; and
J. Any film for which the budget is at least $5,000,000.
A. No person or organization shall film or permit filming within the
Borough of Edgewater without first having obtained a permit from the
Borough Clerk, which permit shall set forth the approved location and
duration of such filming by specific reference to day or dates. Except as
otherwise provided in this chapter, no permit shall authorize filming for
more than three consecutive days in any one location, and in no event
shall filming at one location within the Borough exceed a total of six
days in any one calendar year, regardless of the number of permits
utilized in reaching this six-day maximum. This six-day limitation may
be extended only if the filming requested constitutes a major motion
picture and the Borough Clerk has considered the factors in § 188-3H
before approaching such a request. A denial of this request is
appealable to the Mayor and Council in accordance with the provisions
of § 188-3G. The permit or a true copy must be readily available for
inspection by Borough officials at all times at the site of the filming.
B. All permits shall be applied for from the Borough Clerk during normal
business hours. Applications for such permits shall be in a form
approved by the Borough Clerk accompanied by a permit fee in the
amount set forth herein below.
C. If a permit is issued and, due to inclement weather or other good cause,
filming does not in fact take place on the dates specified, the Borough
Clerk may, at the request of the applicant, issue a new permit for
§ 188-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 188-2
1:261
§ 188-3. Issuance of permits.
filming on other dates, subject to full compliance with all other
provisions of this chapter. No additional fee shall be paid for this
permit.
A. No permit will be issued by the Borough Clerk unless applied for at
least five days prior to the requested shooting date; provided, however,
that the Borough Clerk may waive the five-day period if, in the Borough
Clerk's judgment, the applicant has obtained all related approvals and
adjacent property owners or tenants do not need to be notified.
B. No permit shall be issued for filming upon public lands unless the
applicant shall provide the Borough with satisfactory proof of the
following:
(1) Certificate of insurance specifically naming the Borough of
Edgewater as an additional insured, providing general liability,
bodily injury and property damage coverage with minimum limits
of liability not less than $1,000,000 combined single limit. The
certificate shall state that "the issuing company shall mail 30 days'
written notice to the certificate holder named, certified mail return
receipt."
(2) An agreement, in writing, whereby the applicant agrees to
indemnify and save harmless the Borough of Edgewater from any
and all liability, expense, claim or damages resulting from the use
of public lands.
(3) The posting of a cash or surety bond of $550 in favor of the
Borough to ensure that the location utilized will be left, after
filming, in a satisfactory condition, free of debris, rubbish and
equipment, and that due observance of all ordinances, laws and
regulations will be followed. Within seven days of the completion of
the filming, the Borough will return the bond if there has been no
damage to public property or public expense caused by the filming.
(4) The hiring of an off-duty Edgewater police officer for the times
indicated on the permit.
C. The holder of a permit shall take all reasonable steps to minimize
interference with the passage of pedestrians and traffic over public
lands and shall comply with all lawful directives issued by the
Edgewater Police Department with respect thereto.
D. The holder of a permit shall conduct filming in such a manner as to
minimize the inconvenience or discomfort to adjoining property owners
attributable to such filming and shall, to the extent practicable, abate
noise and park vehicles associated with such filming off the public
streets. The holder shall avoid any interference with previously
scheduled activities upon public lands and limit, to the extent possible,
any interference with normal public activities on such public lands.
§ 188-2 EDGEWATER CODE § 188-3
1:262
Where the applicant's production activity, by reason of location or
otherwise, will directly involve and/or affect any businesses, merchants
or residents, these parties shall be given written notice of the filming at
least three days prior to the requested shooting date and be informed
that objections may be filed with the Borough Clerk, said objections
to form a part of the applicant's application and be considered in
the review of the same. Proof of service of notification to adjacent
owners shall be submitted to the Borough Clerk within two days of the
requested shooting date.
E. Filming in residential zones shall be permitted Monday through Friday
between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., provided that all requests
for night scenes shall be approved in the permit to be granted in
accordance with the provisions of Subsection H herein below. The
setup, production and breakdown required by all filming shall be
included in the hours as set forth herein.
F. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this chapter, the Borough
Clerk may refuse to issue a permit whenever the Borough Clerk
determines, on the basis of objective facts and after a review of the
application and a report thereon by the Police Department and by other
Borough agencies involved with the proposed filming site, that filming
at the location and/or the time set forth in the application would violate
any law or ordinance or would unreasonably interfere with the use and
enjoyment of adjoining properties, unreasonably impede the free flow
of vehicular or pedestrian traffic or otherwise endanger the public's
health, safety or welfare. Further, the Borough reserves the right to
require one or more on-site patrolmen in situations where the proposed
production may impede the proper flow of traffic, the cost of said
patrolman to be borne by the applicant as a cost of production. Where
existing electrical power lines are to be utilized by the production, an
on-site licensed electrician may be similarly required if the production
company does not have a licensed electrician on staff.
G. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Borough Clerk denying or
revoking a permit or a person requesting relief pursuant to Subsection
D may appeal to the Mayor and Council. A written notice of appeal
setting forth the reasons for the appeal shall be filed with the Borough
Clerk. An appeal from the decision of the Borough Clerk shall be filed
within 10 days of the Borough Clerk's decision. The Mayor and Council
shall set the matter down for a hearing within 30 days of the day on
which the notice of appeal was filed. The decision of the Mayor and
Council shall be in the form of a resolution supporting or reversing the
decision of the Borough Clerk at the first regularly scheduled public
meeting of the Mayor and Council after the hearing on the appeal,
unless the appellant agrees in writing to a later date for the decision.
H. The Borough Clerk may authorize filming other than during the hours
herein described only consistent with this subsection. In determining
whether to allow an extension of time under this subsection, the
Borough Clerk shall consider the following factors:
§ 188-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 188-3
1:263
§ 188-4. Fees.
The schedule of fees for the issuance of permits authorized by this chapter
is as follows:
(1) Traffic congestion at the location caused by vehicles to be parked
on the public streets;
(2) Applicant's ability to remove film-related vehicles off the public
streets;
(3) When the applicant is requesting restrictions on the use of public
parking during the course of the filming;
(4) Nature of the film shoot itself; e.g., indoors or outdoors, day or
night; and
(5) Prior experience of the film company/applicant with the Borough, if
any.
I. Copies of the approved permit shall be sent to the Police Department
and Fire Department before filming takes place and to the New Jersey
Film Commission. The applicant shall permit the Fire Prevention
Bureau or other Borough inspectors to inspect the site and the
equipment to be used. The applicant shall comply with all safety
instructions issued by the Fire Prevention Bureau or other Borough
inspectors.
J. In addition to any other fees or costs mentioned in this chapter, the
applicant shall reimburse the Borough for any lost revenue that the
Borough was prevented from earning because of filming.
K. Special regulations for major pictures.
(1) When filming is requested with respect to a major motion picture,
the Borough Clerk may authorizing such filming for a period in
excess of six days only after consideration of the factors set forth in
§ 188-3H. A denial of such a request is appealable pursuant to the
provisions of § 188-3G.
(2) Any days necessary to be used for setup and preparation for a
major picture filming may, in the discretion of the Borough Clerk,
be counted as a filming day where setup is anticipated to involve
one or more of the factors set forth in Subsection H hereinabove.
A. Basic filming permit: $75. (Where an applicant requests a waiver of the
provision of § 188-3A requiring expedited processing of the permit
application, the basic filming permit shall be $125.)
B. Daily filming fee payable in addition to the basic filming permit: $500
per day.
C. Daily filming fee payable for major motion picture: $1,500 per day.
§ 188-3 EDGEWATER CODE § 188-4
1:264
§ 188-5. Violations and penalties.82
Where the owner of the premises is not the applicant for a permit by this
chapter, both the owner and the applicant shall each be liable for violations
hereof. Any persons violating this chapter or these rules and regulations,
upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article
II, General Penalty. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each
day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 192
FIREARMS
§ 192-1. Discharge of firearms restricted.
The discharge of any firearms, bow and arrow, crossbow, slingshot, air gun,
spring gun, gas gun or any other device which impels a projectile through
the use of force is prohibited in the Borough of Edgewater.
§ 192-2. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
§ 192-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalties provided in
Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
Chapter 196
FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Demolition — See Ch. 179. Fire prevention — See Ch. 204.
D. Filming permit for nonprofit applicants filming for educational
purposes (no daily rate required): $25.
A. Any duly appointed law officer in the course of his or her official duty.
B. The use of firearms when necessary for the preservation of human life.
C. The use of firearms when hunting in conformity with the applicable
laws and regulations of the State of New Jersey.
D. Use of a firearm on a licensed pistol, rifle or firearm range and under
the supervision of the Police Department.
82.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 188-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-3
1:265
§ 196-1. Payment prohibited when charges are in arrears.
No insurance company shall pay any claim in excess of $2,500 for fire
damages on any real property located within the Borough, when such claim
is payable in connection with a fire insurance policy issued or renewed after
the adoption of this chapter, until such time as anticipated demolition costs
and all taxes and assessments and all other municipal liens or charges due
and payable appearing on the official certificate of search shall have been
paid either by the owner of such real property or by the insurance company
pursuant to § 196-3 of this chapter. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
Borough may enter into an agreement with an owner for the payment
of delinquent taxes, assessments or municipal liens in installments in
accordance with § 196-2 of this chapter.
§ 196-2. Installment payments.
The Borough may enter into an agreement with the owner of any firedamaged
property to pay in full all delinquent taxes, assessments or other
municipal liens by installments pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-19, or for the
redemption of any tax sale lien by installment payments as provided by
law, or for the payment in full of any anticipated costs of demolition by
installment, if the governing body is satisfied that the claim for fire damages
is to be used to restore or improve the fire-damaged property. A certified
copy of a resolution by the governing body shall authorize an insurance
company to make full payment on the claim to the insured party.
§ 196-3. Payment by insurer of liens and demolition costs; appeals.
A. Unless a resolution is received in accordance with § 196-2 of this
chapter, an insurance company is hereby authorized and required, prior
to the payment of any claims for fire damages in excess of $2,500, to
pay the amount of anticipated demolition costs to the Borough as
prescribed by N.J.S.A. 17:38-8 and to pay to the Borough the amount of
liens as appears on the official certificate and such other recorded liens
or related charges as may be certified to the insurance company.
B. Should an appeal be taken on the amount of any lien or charge other
than an appeal on the assessed valuation of real property, the insurance
company shall issue a draft payable to the court of record which shall
be held by the court as required by law, the draft shall be in an amount
totaling 75% of the full amount of the lien or charge being contested but
not to exceed the proceeds payable under the insurance policy. The
insurance company shall be required to issue a draft payable to the
Borough for the remaining 25% of the lien or charge being contested,
provided that the full amount paid by the insurance company to the
court and Borough shall not exceed the proceeds payable under the
policy. Upon conclusion of all proceedings, the money shall be
§ 192-3 EDGEWATER CODE § 196-3
1:266
Chapter 200
FIRE LANES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 45.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 204.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 432.
§ 200-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish certain areas that are private
property that are open to the public or in which the public is invited that
shall prohibit parking in areas designated as "No Stopping or Standing" (fire
zones).
§ 200-2. Statutory authority; location and size. [Amended
11-19-2012 by Ord. No. 1483-2012]
§ 200-3. Designation of fire lanes. [Amended 9-16-1986 by Ord. No.
849-86; 10-21-1986 by Ord. No. 851-86; 2-22-1989 by Ord. No.
913-89; 9-29-1997 by Ord. No. 1103-97; 10-16-2000 by Ord. No.
disbursed in accordance with the final order of the judgment of the
court.
A. This chapter is enacted in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46, which
does confer upon the Borough of Edgewater the right to establish “No
Stopping or Standing” (fire lanes), in order to preserve and safeguard
the public health, safety, morals and welfare.
B. In and on all premises within the Borough of Edgewater whereon there
is located a retail store, shopping center, office building, industrial
plant, research laboratory, school, church, multifamily residential
building or other public or quasi-public structure wherein the public is
invited, there shall be established a fire zone for the purpose of
accommodating fire and other emergency equipment, which zone when
designated shall be paved and designated "fire zone."
C. The location and size of the fire lanes to be created shall be determined
by the Fire Official of the Borough of Edgewater or, in the case of any
application pending before it, by the Planning Board upon
recommendation of the Fire Official of the Borough of Edgewater. In
formulating the size and location of the fire zone, due consideration
shall be given to the size of the building and location of the structure to
be served to water supplies and existing facilities for the utilization by
emergency equipment, as well as the flammability of the materials used
in the construction of each particular building.
§ 196-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-3
1:267
1198-2000; 7-16-2012 by Ord. No. 1475-2012; 11-19-2012 by Ord.
No. 1483-2012]
§ 200-3.1. Maintenance. [Added 11-19-2012 by Ord. No. 1483-2012]
The property owner shall be required to maintain fire zone designations in
a good state of repair. The designated area shall be redesignated in each
instance where the area in which the zone has been designated is repaved,
sealed or coated in a manner so as to obscure the fire zone designation, and
otherwise at such time as, in the reasonably exercised judgment of the Fire
Official, the designation shall become obscure; provided, however, that in
such latter instance, no such redesignation shall be required for at least a
period of three years from the date of the former execution of a fire zone
designation plan.
§ 200-3.2. Obstructions. [Added 11-19-2012 by Ord. No. 1483-2012]
A. Whenever a determination has been made for the designation of a fire
zone as hereinbefore provided, the Fire Official shall notify the owner of
the property, in writing, by registered or certified mail or by hand
delivering such notice, specifically describing the area designated as a
"No Stopping or Standing" (fire zone), together with a statement of
reasons therefor.
B. The marking and remarking of fire lanes shall be the responsibility of
and shall be made at the cost and expense of the property owner. The
execution of the work required shall be fully performed within a period
of 90 days from the date of mailing by the Fire Official or receipt by the
property owner in the event that such notice is delivered by hand.
C. The areas designated as "No Stopping or Standing" (fire lanes) shall be
so marked by signs indicating prohibition of parking in conformance
with the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets
and Highways.
A. Except as set forth in Subsection B, it shall be unlawful for any person
to park, stop or stand any motor vehicle or to otherwise place or store
material or obstruct the fire zone.
B. The following vehicles shall be permitted to park, stop or stand in the
fire zone:
(1) Any fire or emergency vehicle that is actively engaged in the
performance of official business.
(2) School buses that are loading and unloading passengers. These
vehicles must park in their designated area when waiting more
than 15 minutes for passengers.
§ 200-3 EDGEWATER CODE § 200-4
1:268
§ 200-4. Temporary fire lanes. [Added 2-22-1989 by Ord. No.
913-89]
The Fire Official shall have the authority to designate certain roads and
areas as temporary fire lanes during the construction of a development
project, and the owner or person in control of such development shall be
required to post such designated areas as temporary fire lanes when so
directed by the Fire Official.
§ 200-5. Violations and penalties. [Added 9-20-2010 by Ord. No.
1439-2010]
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
Chapter 204
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 45.
Dangerous buildings — See Ch. 147.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 151.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 166.
Land use and development — See Ch. 240.
Garbage receptacles — See Ch. 368, Art. I.
Heating of buildings — See Ch. 466.
§ 200-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-5
1:269

ARTICLE I
Truss-Type Construction
[Adopted 2-22-1989 by Ord. No. 911-89 (Ch. 152, Art. III of the
1975 Code)]
§ 204-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to identify and mark buildings of truss-type
construction in order to safeguard the occupants and emergency personnel
in the event of fire or other hazardous condition.
§ 204-2. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall apply to the owner/occupant of any
building or structure of truss-type construction, as determined by the Fire
Official.
§ 204-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING/STRUCTURE — Used or intended for supporting or sheltering
any use or occupancy, including but not limited to commercial, residential,
governmental, educational and any other place of public assembly.
FIRE OFFICIAL — The Borough of Edgewater Fire Official, or his
designated representative, as defined in N.J.A.C. 5:70, Uniform Fire Code.
OWNER/OCCUPANT — Any natural person or individual or any firm,
partnership, association, limited partnership, sole proprietorship,
corporation or other business entity or any government agency or entity.
TRUSS-TYPE CONSTRUCTION — A truss is a single-plane framework of
individual structural members connected at their ends to form a series of
triangles to span a distance greater than would be possible with any of the
individual members on their own.
§ 204-4. Enforcement; identification of affected structures.
A. The article shall be enforced by the Fire Official as required by the
Mayor and Council.
B. Upon inspection and identification of a building of such truss-type
construction, the owner/occupant shall be notified by the Fire Official of
the requirements of this article in accordance with the Uniform Fire
Code of the State of New Jersey.
C. Upon notification, the owner/occupant will be required to permanently
affix an Edgewater Fire Department-approved twelve-by-eighteen-inch
reflective truss-construction identification logo on the building. The
exact location shall be determined by the Fire Official. The
identification logo shall be properly installed within 10 days of receipt
§ 204-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-4
1:271
§ 204-5. Violations and penalties.84
Penalties shall be assessed in accordance with the Uniform Fire Code, State
of New Jersey, N.J.A.C. 5:70.
of written notice. The initial identification logo will be supplied by the
Edgewater Fire Department.
D. The owner/occupant shall be required to maintain the approved
identification logo at the designated locations on the building; missing
or damaged identification logos will be reported to the Fire Official.
Approved identification logos are available from the Fire Official.83
83.Editor's Note: Former § 152-27, Fees, which immediately followed this section, was
repealed 11-10-1982 by Ord. No. 997-82.
84.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 204-4 EDGEWATER CODE § 204-5
1:272
ARTICLE II
Enforcement of Uniform Fire Safety Act
[Adopted 8-12-2002 by Ord. No. 1235-2002 (Ch. 152, Art. II of the
1975 Code)]
§ 204-6. Local enforcement.
Pursuant to Section 11 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (L. 1983, c. 383;
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-202), the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code (N.J.A.C. 5:70-1 et
seq.), shall be locally enforced in the Borough of Edgewater.
§ 204-7. Enforcing agency designation. [Amended 9-20-2010 by
Ord. No. 1439-2010]
The Edgewater Fire Prevention Bureau shall hereinafter be known as the
"local enforcing agency."
§ 204-8. Duties of enforcing agency.
§ 204-9. Organization. [Amended 9-20-2010 by Ord. No. 1439-2010]
§ 204-10. Appointments; qualifications; term of office; removal.
A. The local enforcing agency shall enforce the Uniform Fire Code in all
buildings, structures and premises within the established boundaries of
the Borough of Edgewater other than one- and two-family owneroccupied
dwellings used exclusively for dwelling purposes and
buildings, structures and premises owned by the federal government or
interstate agencies of the state.
B. The local enforcing agency shall faithfully comply with all the pertinent
requirements of the Uniform Safety Act and the Uniform Fire Code.
A. The Edgewater Fire Prevention Bureau established by § 204-7 of this
article shall be under direct supervision and control of the Fire Official,
who shall report to the Mayor and Council.
B. The Edgewater Fire Prevention Bureau shall have at least one paid
inspector.
A. Appointment and qualifications of the Fire Official. The Fire Official
shall be certified by the state and appointed by the Mayor and Council
pursuant to N.J.S.A. Title 11A, Department of Personnel, of the Revised
Statutes.
B. Appointment and qualifications of fire inspectors and other employees.
Inspectors and other employees of the enforcing agency shall be
appointed by the Mayor and Council upon recommendation of the Fire
Official. Fire inspectors shall be certified by the state.
C. The Mayor and Council shall, specifically, appoint legal counsel to assist
the agency in enforcing the Uniform Fire Code.
§ 204-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-10
1:273
§ 204-11. Life-hazard uses.
The Edgewater Fire Prevention Bureau established by § 204-7 of this article
shall carry out the periodic inspections of life-hazard uses required by
the Uniform Fire Code on behalf of the Commissioner of the New Jersey
Department of Community Affairs.
§ 204-12. Non-life-hazard uses. [Amended 5-16-2011 by Ord. No.
1456-2011]
In addition to the registrations required by the Uniform Fire Code, the
following non-life-hazard uses shall register with the Edgewater Fire
Prevention Bureau. These uses shall pay an annual fee as follows:
Use Fee
A. Assembly: All assembly uses $100
B. Business/professional
B-1 One- and two-story, less than 5,000 square feet
per floor
$100
B-2 One- and two-story, more than 5,000 square feet
but less than 10,000 square feet per floor
$120
B-3 One- and two-story, more than 10,000 square
feet
$200
B-4 Three- to five-story, less than 5,000 square feet
per floor
$250
B-5 Three- to five-story, more than 5,000 square feet
but less than 10,000 square feet per floor
$300
B-7 Three- to five-story, over 10,000 square feet per
floor
$400
D. Terms of office.
(1) The Fire Official shall serve a term of office pursuant to N.J.S.A.
Title 11A, Department of Personnel, of the Revised Statutes.
(2) Fire inspectors shall serve a term of office pursuant to N.J.S.A. Title
11A, Department of Personnel, of the Revised Statutes. [Amended
9-20-2010 by Ord. No. 1439-2010]
E. Removal from office.
(1) The Fire Official shall be subject to removal by the Mayor and
Council pursuant to N.J.S.A. Title 11A, Department of Personnel, of
the Revised Statutes.
(2) Fire inspectors and other employees shall be subject to removal by
the Mayor and Council pursuant to N.J.S.A. Title 11A, Department
of Personnel, of the Revised Statutes. [Amended 9-20-2010 by
Ord. No. 1439-2010]
§ 204-10 EDGEWATER CODE § 204-12
1:274
Use Fee
C. Retail/mercantile
M-1 One- and two-story, less than 5,000 square feet
per floor
$250
M-2 One- and two-story, more than 5,000 square feet
but less than 10,000 square feet per floor
$300
M-3 One- and two-story, more than 10,000 square
feet per floor
$400
M-4 Three- to five-story, less than 5,000 square feet
per floor
$400
M-5 Three- to five-story, more than 5,000 square feet
but less than 10,000 square feet per floor
$450
M-6 Three- to five-story, over 10,000 square feet $500
M With the exception of hardware stores, 3,000
square feet; retail stores over 12,000 square feet
are life-hazard uses.
D. Manufacturing/factory
F-1 One-and two-story, less than 5,000 square feet
per floor
$150
F-2 One- and two-story, more than 5,000 square feet
but less than 10,000 square feet per floor
$200
F-3 One- and two-story, more than 10,000 square
feet
$300
F-4 Three- to five-story, less than 5,000 square feet
per floor
$350
F-5 Three- to five-story, more than 5,000 square feet
but less than 10,000 square feet per floor
$400
F-6 Three- to five-story, over 10,000 square feet $500
F Exception life-hazard uses
S. Storage
S-1 One- and two-story, less than 5,000 square feet
per floor
$100
S-2 One- and two-story, more than 5,000 square feet
but less than 10,000 square feet per floor
$200
S-3 One- and two-story, more than 10,000 square
feet
$300
S-4 Three- to five-story, less than 5,000 square feet
per floor
$350
S-5 Three-to five-story, more than 5,000 square feet
but less than 10,000 square feet per floor
$400
S-6 Three- to five-story, over 10,000 square feet $500
§ 204-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-12
1:275
Use Fee
S Exception life-hazard uses
E. Residential (fee is for each building or unit)
[Amended 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 1555-2017]
R-1 1 to 10 units $100
R-2 Over 10 units $100 plus $10 for
each additional
unit
R-3 Single-unit condominium or townhouse located
in a multiple dwelling where the condominium
association is not responsible for violations
inside unit
$100
R-4 Non-owner-occupied one- and two-family
dwelling
$100
R-5 Non-owner-occupied condominium or townhouse
not located in a multiple dwelling
$100
R-6 Any non-owner-occupied and/or vacant
condominium or townhouse
$100
§ 204-13. Exemptions.
§ 204-14. Late fee.
If the required non-life-hazard registration fee is not paid to the Edgewater
Fire Prevention Bureau by March 31 of the current year, a twenty-five-dollar
late fee will be charged. An additional fifty-dollar late fee will be charged for
each following month or part thereof that the registration fee is delinquent.
A. Buildings owned by the Borough of Edgewater are exempt from fees
imposed by this article. Buildings of life-hazard use owned by the
Borough of Edgewater shall be regulated in accordance with the
applicable state regulations.
B. Buildings owned by the Borough of Edgewater are subject to all the
required inspections and regulations pursuant to the Uniform Fire
Safety Act.
C. All nonprofit corporations, including churches, fraternal organizations
and other corporations which are classified as nonprofit corporations
under Title 15A, the New Jersey Nonprofit Corporation Act, shall not be
required to pay the Borough of Edgewater any registration or permit
fee set forth in this article. This does not exempt the nonprofit
organization from registration, inspections and compliance to the
Uniform Fire Code. Life-hazard nonprofit organizations are regulated
by the State Division of Fire Safety.
§ 204-12 EDGEWATER CODE § 204-15
1:276
§ 204-15. Payment responsibility.
The owner/owners of businesses which require non-life-hazard registration
fees to be paid under the article shall be responsible for the payment of said
fees.
§ 204-16. Penalties.
The Fire Official and/or fire inspectors may affix penalties as are permitted
by the Uniform Fire Code.
§ 204-17. Appeals.
Pursuant to the Uniform Fire Code, any person aggrieved by any order of
the Edgewater Fire Prevention Bureau shall have the right to appeal to the
Construction Board of Appeals of the County of Bergen.
§ 204-18. Permit fees.
The permit fees established by the Uniform Fire Code shall be used.
§ 204-19. Reports.
Fees for a copy of a report shall be established by the Open Public Records
Act, Chapter 404 of the Laws of 2001 (N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq.).
§ 204-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-19
1:277

ARTICLE III
Fire Watch
[Adopted 11-9-2009 by Ord. No. 1425-2009]
§ 204-20. Intent and purpose.
Firesafety compliance has always been and continues to be a high priority
for the Borough of Edgewater. Borough officials frequently assess what can
be done to assure the safety of all Borough residents, and to that end,
the Borough deems it necessary to implement fire watch procedures when
there exist substantial risks to life, safety and property, including when
all or part of the required fire protection systems in Borough structures
are intentionally interrupted for repairs and maintenance, not functioning
properly, not functioning at all, or when they are damaged or destroyed
by fire or other disaster. In certain circumstances detailed herein, the Fire
Official, or his designee, is hereby authorized to order a fire watch for the
affected structure in order to ensure continued safety of residents during
this period.
§ 204-21. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIRE WATCH — A temporary measure intended to ensure continuous and
systematic surveillance of a building or portion(s) thereof by one or more
qualified individuals for the purpose of identifying and controlling fire
hazards, detecting early signs of an unwanted fire, raising an alarm of fire
to the occupants and notifying the Fire Department.
§ 204-22. Fire watch; when required.
A. A fire watch may be ordered by the Fire Official or his assigned
designee in public and privately owned buildings and or properties
within the Borough of Edgewater under the following circumstances:
(1) Required fire-protection systems are out of service due to system
failure, repair, scheduled maintenance, vandalism, etc.;
(2) A fire watch is requested by the building owner, tenant, or lessee;
(3) Public and private events where 100 people or more are in
attendance;
(4) Events where with the approval of the Fire Official or his assigned
designee the posted occupancy load is exceeded;
(5) All other situations deemed necessary by the Fire Official or his
assigned designee.
B. A fire watch may include the maintaining of posted fire lanes, means of
egress, posted occupancy loads, enforcement of no smoking in posted
§ 204-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-22
1:279
§ 204-23. Fees and payment.
§ 204-24. Violations and penalties.
Any person, partnership, corporation, or other entity that violates the
provisions of this article shall be subject to the penalties as set forth in the
Uniform Fire Code.
areas, building surveillance for signs of smoke or fire, checking for
proper permits, inspecting for proper safety precautions of cooking
equipment, and other functions as required by the Fire Official or his
assigned designee.
C. Fire watches shall be performed by active members of the Borough of
Edgewater Fire Prevention Bureau, and or the Edgewater Fire
Department. In the event none of the above is available, other qualified
individuals may be utilized at the discretion of the Fire Official or his
assigned designee. Any qualified individuals used for the purposes of a
fire watch shall report directly to the Fire Official or his assigned
designee, who will report to the Administrator of the Borough of
Edgewater.
A. A fire watch shall be paid for by the building owner, tenant, lessee, or
organization for which the fire watch is requested or required, as
appropriate.
B. All fire watch services not incurred by the Borough of Edgewater shall
be paid at the rate of $32 per hour per person. [Amended 6-15-2015
by Ord. No. 1520-2015]
C. There shall be a minimum payment of four hours per person and $10
per hour for the use of each Borough vehicle utilized, plus a 15%
administration fee.
D. All payments shall be made within 10 days after service is provided.
E. Payments shall be made payable to the Borough of Edgewater.
§ 204-22 EDGEWATER CODE § 204-24
1:280
Chapter 210
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
§ 210-1. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1, et
seq., delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote public health, safety, and general welfare
of its citizenry. Therefore, the Mayor and Council of the Borough of
Edgewater of Bergen County, New Jersey does ordain as follows.
§ 210-2. Findings of fact.
§ 210-3. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
A. The flood hazard areas of the Borough of Edgewater are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and
velocities, and when inadequately anchored, causes damage in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
A. Protect human life and health;
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, bridges located in
areas of special flood hazard;
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
§ 204-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-3
1:281
§ 210-4. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
§ 210-5. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
AH ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by 1% annual chance shallow
flooding (usually areas of ponding) where average depths are between one
and three feet. Base flood elevations (BFEs) derived from detailed hydraulic
analyses are shown in this zone.
AO ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by 1% annual chance shallow
flooding (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain) where average depths are
between one and three feet.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Construction Official interpretation
of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO or AH Zone on a
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map with a 1% annual or greater chance
of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined
channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and
where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by
ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — Land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters;
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 210-3 EDGEWATER CODE § 210-5
1:282
It is shown on the FIRM as Zone V, VE, V1-30, A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or
AH.
BASE FLOOD — A flood having 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The flood elevation shown on a
published Flood Insurance Study (FIS) including the Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM). For Zones AE, AH, AO, and A1-30 the elevation represents
the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a 1% or greater
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. For Zones VE and
V1-30 the elevation represents the stillwater elevation (SWEL) plus wave
effect (BFE = SWEL + wave effect) resulting from a flood that has a 1% or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BEST AVAILABLE FLOOD HAZARD DATA — The most recent available flood
risk guidance FEMA has provided. The best available flood hazard data may
be depicted on but not limited to Advisory Flood Hazard Area Maps, Work
Maps or Preliminary FIS and FIRM.
BEST AVAILABLE FLOOD HAZARD DATA ELEVATION — The most recent
available flood elevation FEMA has provided. The best available flood
hazard data elevation may be depicted on an Advisory Flood Hazard Area
Map, Work Map or Preliminary FIS and FIRM.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
COASTAL A ZONE — The portion of the special flood hazard area (SFHA)
starting from a Velocity (V) Zone and extending up to the landward limit
of the moderate wave action delineation. Where no V Zone is mapped, the
Coastal A Zone is the portion between the open coast and the landward limit
of the moderate wave action delineation. Coastal A Zones may be subject to
wave effects, velocity flows, erosion, scour, or a combination of these forces.
Construction and development in Coastal A Zones is to be regulated the
same as V Zones/coastal high hazard areas.
COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA — An area of special flood hazard
extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along
an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from
storms or seismic sources.
CUMULATIVE SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure that equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure at the time of the
improvement or repair when counted cumulatively for 10 years.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
§ 210-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-5
1:283
storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood
hazard.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building built, in the case of a
building in an area of special flood hazard, to have the top of the elevated
floor or, in the case of a building in a coastal high-hazard area or Coastal
A Zone, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of
the elevated floor, elevated above the base flood elevation plus freeboard
by means of piling, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the
flow of the water, and adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural
integrity of the building during a flood up to the magnitude of the base
flood. In an area of special flood hazard "elevated building" also includes a
building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with
openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In
areas of coastal high hazard and Coastal A Zones "elevated building" also
includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated building"
even though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls.
EROSION — The process of gradual wearing away of land masses.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report in which the
Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the
Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion
control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term
describes such federal, state or local regulations, in any combination
thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage
prevention and reduction.
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
B.
§ 210-5 EDGEWATER CODE § 210-5
1:284
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood
level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood
conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological
effect of urbanization of the watershed.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed or existing walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LIMIT OF MODERATE WAVE ACTION (LiMWA) — Inland limit of the area
affected by waves greater than 1.5 feet during the base flood. Base flood
conditions between the V Zone and the LiMWA will be similar to, but less
severe than those in the V Zone.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for the
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement is not considered a building's lowest floor provided that such
enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable nonelevation design requirements of 44 CFR Section 60.3.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 210-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-5
1:285
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION
— A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation adopted
by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
PRELIMINARY FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (pre FIRM) — The draft
version of the FIRM released for public comment before finalization and
adoption.
PRIMARY FRONTAL DUNE — A continuous or nearly continuous mound
or ridge of sand with relatively steep seaward and landward slopes
immediately landward and adjacent to the beach and subject to erosion and
overtopping from high tides and waves from coastal storms. The inland limit
of the primary frontal dune occurs at the point where there is a distinct
change from the relatively steep slope to a relatively mild slope.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is built on a single chassis;
400 square feet or less when measured at the longest horizontal
projections; designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but
as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
SAND DUNES — Naturally occurring or man-made accumulations of sand
in ridges or mounds landward of the beach.
START OF CONSTRUCTION —
For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the
Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L. No. 97-348), includes substantial
improvements and means the date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within
180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site such
as the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of pilings, the
A.
§ 210-5 EDGEWATER CODE § 210-5
1:286
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a
gas or liquid storage tank that is principally aboveground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred. Substantial damage also means flood-related damages
sustained by a structure on two or more separate occasions during a tenyear
period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood
event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25% of the market valve of the
structure before the damages occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure during a ten-year period, the
cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure
before the "start of construction" of the improvement. Substantial
improvement also means "cumulative substantial improvement." This term
includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of
the actual repair work performed or repetitive loss. The term does not,
however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter that
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter. A new or substantially improved structure or
other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or
other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR § 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10),
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation,
or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of
streets and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings or piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor
does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part
of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start
of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
B.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure.
B.
§ 210-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-5
1:287
(e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
§ 210-6. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the Borough of Edgewater, Bergen County, New Jersey.
§ 210-7. Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
§ 210-8. Violations and penalties.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, relocated to, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails
to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, for each
violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the
case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Borough of Edgewater
from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy
any violation.
§ 210-9. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the Borough of Edgewater,
Community No. 340029, are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study, Bergen
County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)" dated August 28, 2019.
(2) "Flood Insurance Rate Map for Bergen County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions)" as shown on Index and panels 34003C0276H,
34003C0277H, 34003C0278H, 34003C0279H, and 34003C0286H,
whose effective date is August 28, 2019.
(3) Best available flood hazard data. These documents shall take
precedence over effective panels and FIS in construction and
development regulations only. Where the effective mapping or base
flood elevation conflict or overlap with the best available flood
hazard data, whichever imposes the more stringent requirement
shall prevail.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study, maps and advisory documents
are on file at 55 River Road, Edgewater, New Jersey.
§ 210-5 EDGEWATER CODE § 210-9
1:288
and other ordinances, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 210-10. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
§ 210-11. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
§ 210-12. Establishment of development permit.
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins, including placement of manufactured homes, within any area of
special flood hazard established in § 210-7. Application for a development
permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Construction Official and
may include but not be limited to plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing
the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question;
existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities;
and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is
required:
A. Considered as minimum requirements;
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
A. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural
causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special
flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Borough of
Edgewater, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance
Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
A. Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures;
B. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been
floodproofed;
C. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in § 210-18B; and
D. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
§ 210-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-13
1:289
§ 210-13. Designation of the local administrator.
The Construction Official is hereby appointed to administer and implement
this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in
accordance with its provisions.
§ 210-14. Duties and responsibilities of the administrator.
Duties of the Construction Official shall include, but not be limited to:
A. Permit review.
(1) Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(2) Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
(3) Review all development permits in the coastal high hazard and
Coastal A Zone area to determine if the proposed development
alters sand dunes or other natural coastal protections so as to
increase potential flood damage.
(4) Review plans for walls to be used to enclose space below the base
flood level in accordance with § 210-20B(4).
B. Use of other base flood data. When base flood elevation data has not
been provided in accordance with § 210-7, Basis for establishing the
areas of special flood hazard, the Construction Official shall obtain,
review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data available
from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer § 210-18A,
Specific standards, residential construction, and § 210-18B, Specific
standards, nonresidential construction.
C. Information to be obtained and maintained.
(1) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.
(2) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
§ 210-12C.
(3) In coastal high hazard and Coastal A Zone areas, certification shall
be obtained from a registered professional engineer or architect
that the provisions of § 210-20B(1) and B(2)(a) and (b) are met.
§ 210-13 EDGEWATER CODE § 210-14
1:290
§ 210-15. Appeals.
(4) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
D. Alteration of watercourses.
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Bureau of Flood Control and the Land
Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the
Federal Insurance Administration.
(2) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so the flood carrying capacity
is not diminished.
E. Substantial damage review.
(1) After an event resulting in building damages, assess the damage to
structures due to flood and nonflood causes.
(2) Record and maintain the flood and nonflood damage of substantial
damage structures and provide a letter of substantial damage
determination to the owner and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Bureau of Flood Control.
(3) Ensure substantial improvements meet the requirements of
§ 210-18A, Specific standards, residential construction, § 210-18B,
Specific standards, nonresidential construction and § 210-19,
Specific standards, manufactured homes.
F. Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. Make interpretations where
needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict
between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in § 210-15.
A. The Board of Adjustment, as established by the Borough of Edgewater,
shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
B. They shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error
in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the
Construction Official in the enforcement or administration of this
chapter.
C. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Adjustment, or any
taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the Mayor and Council of the
Borough of Edgewater, as provided in § 240-28 of the Land Use
Procedures Ordinance of the Borough of Edgewater provided said
§ 210-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-15
1:291
§ 210-16. Conditions for variances.
appeal is taken in accordance with the provisions set forth in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-17.
D. In passing upon such applications, the Board of Adjustment shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
(5) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(6) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program of that area;
(9) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
(10) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
(11) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
E. Upon consideration of the factors of § 210-15D and the purposes of this
chapter, the Board of Adjustment may attach such conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of
this chapter.
F. The Construction Official shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions, including technical information, and report any variances to
the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
§ 210-15 EDGEWATER CODE § 210-16
1:292
§ 210-17. General standards; provisions for flood hazard reduction.
In all areas of special flood hazards, compliance with the applicable
requirements of the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23) and the
following standards, whichever is more restrictive, is required:
A. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, providing § 210-15D(1) through
(11) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the 1/2
acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance
increases.
B. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as
a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
C. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
D. Variances shall only be issued upon:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public as identified in § 210-15D, or conflict
with existing local laws or ordinances.
E. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from
the reduced lowest floor elevation.
A. Anchoring.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure.
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use
of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is
§ 210-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-17
1:293
in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
C. Utilities.
(1) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(2) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters;
(3) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
and
(4) For all new construction and substantial improvements the
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
D. Subdivision proposals.
(1) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(2) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize
flood damage;
(3) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage; and
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed new development which contain at
least 50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
E. Enclosure openings. All new construction and substantial
improvements having fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that
are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in
an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall
§ 210-17 EDGEWATER CODE § 210-17
1:294
§ 210-18. Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in § 210-7, Basis for establishing the areas of
special flood hazard or in § 210-14B, Use of other base flood data, the
following standards are required:
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings in at least two exterior
walls of each enclosed area, having a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than
one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
or other covering or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. Residential construction.
(1) For Coastal A Zone construction see § 210-20, Coastal high hazard
area and Coastal A Zone.
(2) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure located in an A or AE Zone shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, together with the attendant utilities (including
all electrical, heating, ventilating, air-conditioning and other
service equipment) and sanitary facilities, elevated at or above the
more restrictive, base flood elevation (published FIS/FIRM) plus
one foot, the best available flood hazard data elevation plus one
foot, or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1;
(3) Require within any AO or AH Zone on the municipality's DFIRM
that all new construction and substantial improvement of any
residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, together with the attendant utilities and sanitary
facilities, elevated above the depth number specified in feet plus
one foot, above the highest adjacent grade (at least three feet if no
depth number is specified) or at or above the best available flood
hazard data elevation plus one foot, whichever is more restrictive.
And, require adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes
to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
B. Nonresidential construction. In an area of special flood hazard, all new
construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure located in an A or AE Zone
(for Coastal A Zone construction see § 210-20, Coastal high hazard area
and Coastal A Zone) shall have the lowest floor, including basement
together with the attendant utilities and sanitary facilities as well as all
§ 210-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-18
1:295
§ 210-19. Manufactured homes.
electrical, heating, ventilating, air-conditioning and other service
equipment:
(1) Either:
(a) Elevated at or above the more restrictive, base flood elevation
(published FIS/FIRM) plus one foot, the best available flood
hazard data elevation plus one foot, or as required by ASCE/
SEI 24-14, Table 2-1; and
(b) Require within any AO or AH Zone on the municipality's FIRM
to elevate above the depth number specified in feet plus one
foot, above the highest adjacent grade (at least three feet if no
depth number is specified) or at or above the best available
flood hazard data elevation plus one foot, whichever is more
restrictive. And, require adequate drainage paths around
structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away
from proposed structures.
(2) Or:
(a) Be floodproofed so that below the more restrictive, base flood
elevation (published FIS/FIRM) plus one foot, the best
available flood hazard data elevation plus one foot, or as
required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 6-1, the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage
of water;
(b) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
(c) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be
provided to the official as set forth in § 210-14C(2)(b).
A. Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
§ 210-17A(2).
B. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within
an area of special flood hazard shall:
(1) Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(2) Be constructed to minimize flood damage;
(3) Have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage;
§ 210-18 EDGEWATER CODE § 210-19
1:296
§ 210-20. Coastal high hazard area and Coastal A Zone.
Coastal high hazard areas (V or VE Zones) and Coastal A Zones are located
within the areas of special flood hazard established in § 210-7. These areas
have special flood hazards associated with high velocity waters from tidal
surges and hurricane wave wash; therefore, the following provisions shall
apply:
(4) Be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the top of the
lowest floor is at or above the more restrictive, base flood elevation
(published FIS/FIRM) plus one foot, the best available flood hazard
data elevation plus one foot, or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14,
Table 2-1;
(5) The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or
other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are
no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
A. Location of structures.
(1) All buildings or structures shall be located landward of the reach of
the mean high tide.
(2) The placement of manufactured homes shall be prohibited, except
in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision.
B. Construction methods.
(1) Elevation. All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be elevated on piling or columns so that:
(a) The bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the
lowest floor (excluding the piling or columns) is elevated at or
above the more restrictive, base flood elevation (published FIS/
FIRM) plus one foot, the best available flood hazard data
elevation plus one foot, or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14,
Table 4-1;
(b) All electrical, heating, ventilating, air-conditioning, mechanical
equipment and other equipment servicing the building is
elevated at or above the more restrictive, base flood elevation
(published FIS/FIRM) plus one foot, the best available flood
hazard data elevation plus one foot, or as required by ASCE/
SEI 24-14, Table 4-1;
(c) With all space below the lowest floor's supporting member
open so as not to impede the flow of water, except for
breakaway walls as provided or in § 210-20B(4).
(2) Structural support.
§ 210-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-20
1:297
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
securely anchored on piling or columns.
(b) The pile or column foundation and structure attached thereto
shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral
movement due to the effects of wind and water loading values
each of which shall have a 1% chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year (100-year mean recurrence
interval).
(c) Prohibit the use of fill for structural support of buildings within
Zones VI-30, VE, V, and Coastal A on the community's FIRM.
(3) Certification. A registered professional engineer or architect shall
develop or review the structural design specifications and plans for
the construction and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction to be used are in accordance with accepted standards
of practice for compliance with the provisions of § 210-20B(1) and
B(2)(a) and (b).
(4) Space below the lowest floor.
(a) Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a
structure started after the enactment of this chapter shall not
enclose the space below the lowest floor unless breakaway
walls, open wood lattice-work or insect screening are used as
provided for in this section.
(b) Breakaway walls, open wood lattice-work or insect screening
shall be allowed below the base flood elevation provided that
they are intended to collapse under wind and water loads
without causing collapse, displacement or other structural
damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting
foundation system. Breakaway walls shall be designed for a
safe loading resistance of not less than 10 and no more than 20
pounds per square foot. Use of breakaway walls which exceed
a design safe loading of 20 pounds per square foot (either by
design or when so required by local or state codes) may be
permitted only if a registered professional engineer or
architect certifies that the designs proposed meet the following
conditions.
[1] Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less
than that which would occur during the base flood; and
[2] The elevated portion of the building and supporting
foundation system shall not be subject to collapse,
displacement or other structural damage due to the effects
of wind and water load acting simultaneously on all
building components (structural and nonstructural). Water
loading values used shall be those associated with the base
§ 210-20 EDGEWATER CODE § 210-20
1:298
Chapter 221
GRAFFITI
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 314. Nuisances — See Ch. 503.
§ 221-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GRAFFITI — Any letters, numbers, word or words, writing, inscription,
symbol, drawing, carving, etching or any other marking of any nature
whatsoever which defaces, obliterates, covers, alters, damages or destroys
the real or personal property of another. This chapter shall not be construed
to prohibit easily removable chalk markings on the public sidewalks and
streets used in connection with traditional children's games.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
SPRAY PAINT CONTAINER — Any container or other device which contains
paint or other pigmented substance, which is intended to expel the paint or
pigment without the aid of additional devices or substances, and includes
an aerosol spray paint, as it is commonly known.
WIDE FELT-TIP MARKERS — A marking pen or instrument of which the
surface used for writing or marking purposes is equal to or greater than 1/
8 of an inch.
§ 221-2. Intent.
It is the express intent of this chapter to impress upon the general public
the necessity of removing graffiti from any and all buildings as not only does
it devalue the property, but devalues the Borough of Edgewater as a whole.
flood. Wind loading values used shall be those required by
applicable state or local building standards.
(c) If breakaway walls are utilized, such enclosed space shall be
used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage
and not for human habitation.
(d) Prior to construction, plans for any breakaway wall must be
submitted to the Construction Code Official or Building
Subcode Official for approval.
C. Sand dunes. Prohibit man-made alteration of sand dunes within Coastal
A Zones, VE and V Zones on the community's DFIRM which would
increase potential flood damage.
§ 210-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 221-2
1:299
The Mayor and Council further find and declare that the prompt removal of
graffiti is the responsibility of all property owners and that, in the event a
property owner should fail or refuse to remove such graffiti, it is appropriate
for the Borough of Edgewater to abate such a nuisance and to charge the
cost thereof as a lien against the property.
§ 221-3. Prohibited conduct.
A. Graffiti prohibited. No person shall write, draw, paint, print or place
with ink, paint, chalk, or other substance, graffiti or other markings,
whether obscene or not and whether intended to offend or not, on the
real or personal property of another, whether such property is publicly
or privately owned, unless the owner of said property shall have, prior
to the drawing, writing, printing or placing of such markings,
specifically consented to the same; nor shall any person willfully or
maliciously damage, deface or vandalize the property of another by
inscribing or placing graffiti or any other markings on a public or
private street, or on public or private property, whether real or
personal; provided, however, that nothing contained herein shall
prohibit the occasional and temporary marking of public streets or
sidewalks with chalk for traditional children's games.
B. Notice required with sale of certain items. No person shall knowingly
sell or offer for sale to the general public any spray paint or other
pigmented substance in an aerosol or similar spray container, or any
wide felt-tip marker, as defined above, unless a sign is exhibited, either
where the product is displayed or where it is paid for, warning that in
the Borough of Edgewater a conviction for an act of graffiti carries a
minimum mandatory fine of $100 for a first offense and carries
additional fines, restitution, and community service for subsequent
violations. See Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of this Code.85
C. Possession prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess a
spray paint container, liquid paint in cans, a wide felt-tip marker or any
other pigmented substance in an aerosol or similar spray container in
any public building or upon any public facility or private property with
the intent to use the same to deface said building, facility or property. A
person who possesses a spray paint container, liquid paint in cans, a
wide felt-tip marker or any other pigmented substance in an aerosol or
similar spray container in any public building, or upon any public
facility or private property, with no legitimate or lawful purpose
therefor, shall be presumed to have possessed the same with the
intention of using such container, marker, can or paint to deface said
building, facility or property, the said presumption being rebuttable by
the possessor demonstrating a lawful, legitimate use for the container,
marker, can or paint.
D. Parents of minors. It shall be unlawful for any parent, legal guardian or
other person having custody or in the presence of any minor child under
85.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 221-2 EDGEWATER CODE § 221-3
1:300
§ 221-4. Removal of graffiti.86
the age of 18 years to assist, aid, abet, allow, permit or encourage said
minor to violate the provisions of this chapter, as defined herein, either
by words, overt act or by failing to act or by lack of proper supervision
and control over said minor child.
A. Time limit for removal. The Borough shall provide written notice of an
order to remove graffiti to the owner of the property on which the
graffiti is located by certified and regular mail. The notice sent to the
property owner shall provide a form to be utilized by a property owner
to inform the municipality that the graffiti has been removed. The form
shall contain a provision stating that by affixing a signature to the form,
indicating that graffiti has been removed, the owner is certifying that
the facts set forth therein are true and that the certification shall be
considered as if made under oath and subject to the same penalties as
provided by law for perjury. The property owner shall remove the
graffiti within 90 calendar days of the date on which the notice is sent.
B. Response by owner. An owner who has been ordered to remove graffiti
shall respond to the Borough by personal delivery or by certified mail:
(1) Of any objection to the order, within 30 days of the date of the
order; or
(2) Of notice that the graffiti has been removed, within 90 days of the
date of the order, or in the case of the Department of
Transportation, within 120 days of the date of the order.
C. Objection to order. An owner who objects to an order to remove graffiti,
pursuant to Subsection B(1) of this section, may institute an action
challenging the order before a court of competent jurisdiction within 60
days of the date of the order.
D. Failure to remove graffiti. If a property owner does not undertake the
removal of graffiti within 90 days of the date of the order, or in the case
of the Department of Transportation, within 120 days of the date of the
order, unless an action challenging the order to remove graffiti is still
pending pursuant to Subsection C of this section, the Borough may
remove the graffiti from that property and present the property owner
with a detailed itemization of the costs incurred by the Borough, by
certified and regular mail, for reimbursement from the property owner.
E. Cost chargeable to owner. Whenever the Borough undertakes the
removal of graffiti from any building, structure or other exposed
surface, the Mayor and Council, in addition to assessing the cost of
removal as a municipal lien against the premises, may enforce the
payment of such assessment, together with interest, as a debt of the
owner of the property and may authorize the institution of an action at
86.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 221-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 221-4
1:301
§ 221-5. Violations and penalties.87
§ 221-6. Juvenile offenders.
If, at the time of the offense charged, any person apprehended for a
violation of this chapter shall be under the age of 18 years, the Bergen
County Juvenile and Domestic Relations Court shall have exclusive
jurisdiction of the trial of such infant or infants, and such infant or infants
shall be surrendered to that Court, and the case, including all papers,
reports, and process thereto, shall be transferred to said Court as provided
for by N.J.S.A. 2C:4-11.
Chapter 226
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CLEANUP
§ 226-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EXPENDABLE ITEMS — Any items used to extinguish any fire or stop or
contain any leak or spill involving any hazardous material which cannot
be reused or cannot be replenished without cost after that particular fire,
leak or spill. These include, but are not restricted to, fire-fighting foam,
chemical extinguishing agents, absorbent material, sand, recovery drums
and specialized protective equipment to include, but not restricted to, acid
suits, acid gloves, goggles and protective clothing.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Any material, solid, liquid or gaseous, listed as
such under the NFPA Guide of Hazardous Materials or the Department of
Transportation Guide Book.
VEHICLE — Any motorized equipment, registered or unregistered,
including but not limited to passenger cars, motorcycles, trucks, tractortrailers,
construction equipment and farm machinery.
law for the collection thereof. The Superior Court shall have jurisdiction
of any such action.
A. Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as
provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
B. Additional penalties. In addition to any other penalty imposed by the
court, any person convicted of a violation of this chapter may, at the
discretion of the Judge of the Municipal Court, be required to pay to the
owner of the damaged property monetary restitution in the amount of
the pecuniary damage caused by the act of graffiti or, as part of such
person's community service, to remove the graffiti from the property.
87.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 221-4 EDGEWATER CODE § 226-1
1:302
VESSEL — Any container, drum, box, cylinder or tank used to hold or
contain or carry or store any hazardous material.
§ 226-2. Purpose.
§ 226-3. Parties responsible for reimbursement.
Reimbursement to the Borough for any expendable items used shall be
made by the following parties:
§ 226-4. Reimbursement for services.
Any person or company responsible for any fire, leak or spill involving
a hazardous material must provide reimbursement in accordance with
Schedule A,88 attached hereto, for services rendered by any recovery
company, towing company or other technical assistance called for by the
Fire Department to handle such incident.
§ 226-5. Time limit for reimbursement.
Any person, owner or company responsible for any fire, leak or spill of
hazardous materials shall reimburse the Borough of Edgewater Fire
Department for the full price of any expendable items used to extinguish
such a fire, stop or contain such a leak or control such a spill within a
A. This chapter provides for the reimbursement for or the replacement of
the specialized and sometimes nonreusable equipment required by
state and federal regulations to be made available in the Borough in
case of fire, leakage or spillage involving any hazardous material.
B. This chapter entitles the Borough of Edgewater to reimbursement for
any expendable items used by the Borough or any of its agencies in
extinguishing any fire, stopping or containing any leak or controlling
any spill of hazardous materials.
A. The owner or operator of any vehicle responsible for any fire, leak or
spill of hazardous material.
B. The owner or person responsible for any vessel containing hazardous
material involved in any fire, leak or spill on public or private property,
whether stationary or in transit, whether accidental or through
negligence.
C. The owner or person responsible for any property from which any leak
or spill of hazardous material emanates, whether accidental or through
negligence.
D. Any person responsible for any fire, leak or spill of hazardous material
on public or private property, whether accidental or through
negligence.
88.Editor's Note: Schedule A is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 226-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-5
1:303
period of 45 days after receipt of a bill for such items from the Borough of
Edgewater Fire Department.
§ 226-6. Violations and penalties.89
Any person, owner or company responsible for any fire, leak or spill of
hazardous material who fails to reimburse the Borough of Edgewater Fire
Department within the time set forth in this chapter shall be subject to the
penalties in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
Chapter 235
LANDFILL OPERATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use and development — See Ch. 240. Soil removal — See Ch. 362.
§ 235-1. Definition.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LANDFILL OPERATION — The depositing, filling or placement of soil on
property for the purpose of filling, leveling or grading on such property.
OWNER — Any person seized in fee simple of any lot or portion thereof or
having such other interest or estate therein as will permit the exercise of
effective possession thereof or dominion thereover.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation or
any other type of entity.
RIPARIAN LAND — Land now or formerly under water.
SOIL — Any earth, sand, clay, loam, gravel, humus or rock, or mixtures of
any of these.
SURCHARGING OF LAND — The temporary placement of fill on a property
surface above the final grade for the purpose of consolidating subsurface
materials.
§ 235-2. Permit required.
No landfill operation or surcharging of land shall occur in the Borough
of Edgewater unless and until a permit is acquired from the municipality
therefor.
§ 235-3. Application for permit.
89.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 226-5 EDGEWATER CODE § 235-3
1:304
§ 235-4. Site plan submission.
The application for a permit hereunder shall be accompanied by the
following information and a site plan prepared by a licensed engineer,
indicating the following:
A. An application for a permit shall be made to the Mayor and Council by
the filing of an appropriate application, forms of which are available
through the Borough Clerk. Said application shall be filed in triplicate.
B. No application shall be made for a permit under the provisions of this
chapter and no permit shall be granted for any operation or site which
would be in conflict or noncompliance with any zoning ordinance of the
Borough.
C. Simultaneously with the filing of the application for a permit, the
applicant shall submit satisfactory proof that all taxes have been paid
on the lands comprising the site of the proposed landfill or surcharging
operation for which a permit under this chapter is sought.
A. The applicant's estimate of the time necessary to complete the
proposed landfill or surcharging operation.
B. The boundary lines of the whole tract of land within which the proposed
landfill or surcharging operation will take place.
C. The lot and block numbers of all adjoining lands as shown on the Official
Tax Map and identification of the owners thereof within 200 feet.
D. Contour lines showing elevations of the site at the time of the
commencement of the operation.
E. Contour lines showing proposed elevations planned for the site
subsequent to the landfill or surcharging operation.
F. The location of all access roads and other roads adjoining the property.
G. The location and inclination of all slopes to be created, including
proposed finished grade.
H. Description and details of proposed safety measures to be taken during
operations to eliminate unsafe and hazardous conditions, extensive
erosion and ponding of water.
I. If the operation is to be performed by an individual other than the
person owning the premises, evidence of the landowner's consent shall
also be submitted.
J. Approximate location of structures, where existing. If no such
structures exist within 200 feet of the premises, a note on the map
should so state.
K. Whether the property constitutes riparian land as defined in this
chapter.
§ 235-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-5
1:305
§ 235-5. Escrow.90
Prior to the issuance of any permit under this chapter, the applicant shall
deposit with the Borough an escrow in the amount of $2,500.
§ 235-6. Insurance.
An application for a permit under this chapter shall be accompanied by
a certificate of public liability insurance reflecting the issuance of such a
policy to the applicant, wherein the Borough is named as coinsured for
damages arising out of any activity of the applicant under a permit issued
under this chapter, in an amount not less than $500,000/$1,000,000 for
death or bodily injury and $50,000/$100,000 for property damage.
§ 235-7. Expiration of permits; notice of default in performance.
§ 235-8. Criteria for approving permits.
A. All permits issued under this chapter shall be valid for a period to be
determined by the Mayor and Council but in no case longer than one
year from the date of its issuance.
B. If the landfill operation or surcharging of land for which a permit was
issued has not been completed by the expiration date of the permit, the
Mayor and Council shall give notice by certified mail to the person to
whom the permit was issued that there has been a default in
performance, and 60 days subsequent to the giving of such notice, the
Mayor and Council may commence utilization of the escrow funds
submitted by the applicant pursuant to § 235-5 in order to correct any
unsafe condition.91
A. The Mayor and Council, in considering and reviewing the application
and in arriving at its decision, shall be guided and take into
consideration the public health, safety and general welfare, and
particular consideration shall be given to the following factors:
(1) Soil erosion by water and wind.
(2) Surface water drainage.
(3) Slopes and lateral support of abutting streets and lands.
(4) Land values and uses.
(5) Existing contours and topographic character of the land prior to
the commencement of the landfill or surcharging operation and the
proposed contours which will result to the aforesaid operation.
(6) Whether the proposed landfill or surcharge is necessary and
incidental to the development of the property for its intended use
90.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
91.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 235-5 EDGEWATER CODE § 235-8
1:306
§ 235-9. Fees.
§ 235-10. Return of escrow.92
When the landfill operation or the surcharging of land has been completed,
the person conducting same shall notify the Mayor and Council in writing
of the completion thereof and shall send a copy thereof to the Construction
Official and to the Borough Engineer. In the event that the Mayor and
Council determine that the work has been completed in accordance with the
terms of the granting of the permit, and such completion has been approved
by the Construction Official and/or the Borough Engineer, the Mayor and
Council shall authorize the applicant's escrow funds to be released. In the
event that such work has only been partially completed at the time the
application is made to release of the escrow funds, the Mayor and Council
shall not release such funds.
§ 235-11. Enforcement officials designated.
The Construction Official and the Borough Engineer shall be responsible for
the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 235-12. Riparian lands.
In the event that a landfill operation or surcharging of land takes place on
riparian land, in addition to the information the applicant is required to
submit pursuant to §§ 165-3 and 165-4 of this chapter, the applicant shall
or whether the proposed operation constitutes primarily a
commercial activity.
(7) Such other factors as may bear upon or relate to the coordinated
adjustment and harmonious physical development of the Borough.
B. In the event that permission is not granted by the Mayor and Council
for the issuance of a permit, the applicant, upon written request for a
hearing made to the Mayor and Council, shall be given an opportunity
to be heard within 30 days thereafter.
C. Any permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be
authorized by formal resolution of the Mayor and Council. Said
resolution may include conditions of approval reasonably related to the
protection of the public health, safety and welfare.
A. An application for a permit under the provisions of this chapter shall be
accompanied by an application fee of $100.
B. The cost of legal, engineering or other expert advice incurred by the
Borough in reviewing the application shall be reimbursed to the
Borough by the applicant prior to the issuance of the permit; provided,
however, that the cost of such fees shall not exceed the sum of $1,000.
92.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 235-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-12
1:307
further submit a copy of the permit granted by the State of New Jersey,
Department of Environmental Protection, Division of Navigation, together
with proof of authority to conduct such landfill or surcharging operation. If,
in the opinion of the Borough Engineer, the fill operation would be subject to
the rules and regulations of the Army Corps of Engineers, then the applicant
shall submit proof of compliance with said rules and regulations.
§ 235-13. Revocation of permits.
A permit issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by
the Mayor and Council for violation of any of the terms and conditions
under which such permit was granted; provided, however, that the person
to whom such permit was issued shall have reasonable notice and an
opportunity to be heard prior to such revocation.
§ 235-14. Dumping or accumulation of materials.
§ 235-15. Conduct of operations.
§ 235-16. Violations and penalties; lien.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, dump or
accumulate upon any public street, sidewalk or public place or any
private lot or land within the Borough of Edgewater any fill not
satisfying the definition of soil as defined in § 235-1 of this chapter.
B. It shall further be unlawful for any person to dump or accumulate in any
area within the Borough of Edgewater, for fill purposes, any barrels,
boxes, cans, glass, bottles, papers or containers, abandoned automobile
or automobile parts, garbage, rubbish, dead vegetation, leaves,
uprooted or cut-down trees, branches, stumps, castoff organic building
materials, trash, debris or any other matter whatsoever. The terms
herein included shall not be interpreted to be all-inclusive.
A. During the course of any landfill or surcharging operations being
conducted under a permit issued under this chapter, the height of such
stockpile fill may at no time exceed the height produced by the
discharge of an approved licensed dump truck. No such fill shall be
placed nearer than 50 feet to any existing street, building or residential
zone.
B. The applicant shall be required to control any filled-in land or
stockpiled fill as to dust or dirt problems by use of water, chemicals or
whatever means may be necessary to control same.
C. No person or owner shall compact soil or surcharge land by means of
the process known as "dynamic compaction." As used herein, the term
"dynamic compaction" shall mean the process of dropping a weight
raised on a boom which by free fall causes soil to be compacted within
the area of operation. [Added 12-16-1996 by Ord. No. 1083-96]
§ 235-12 EDGEWATER CODE § 235-16
1:308
Chapter 240
LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Shade Tree Board — See Ch. 6, Art. III.
Housing Authority — See Ch. 55.
Land Use Administrator — See Ch. 71, Art.
XV.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 151.
Certificates and permits — See Ch. 157.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 166.
Demolition regulations — See Ch. 179.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 204.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 210.
Noise — See Ch. 271.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 314.
Sewers — See Ch. 347.
Soil removal — See Ch. 362.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 374.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 380.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 386.
Trailers — See Ch. 416.
Trees — See Ch. 421.
A. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to
the penalties provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty. Each
day of each violation shall be considered a separate offense.93
B. In the event that any person shall place on property any material in
violation of the terms of this chapter, the Mayor and Council may
provide for the removal of such material under the direction of the
Borough Engineer, and the expense of such removal shall be certified
by the Borough Engineer to the Collector of Taxes and shall be and
remain a lien on such property until paid.
93.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 235-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-16
1:309

ARTICLE I
General
§ 240-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Land Use Ordinance of the Borough of
Edgewater."
§ 240-2. Purpose.
A. It is the purpose of the Borough in adopting this chapter to exercise to
the fullest the powers granted to the Borough by the State of New
Jersey to manage land use through zoning, subdivision and site plan
control and through the police power generally. It is the further purpose
of the Borough in adopting this chapter to organize and codify all such
powers of land use management into one comprehensive cohesive
system in order to facilitate the administration of land use procedure,
while providing maximum protection of the public health, safety and
general welfare in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-2
et seq.
B. It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to:
(1) Encourage action to guide the appropriate use or development of
all lands in the Borough of Edgewater in a manner which will
promote the public health, safety, morals and general welfare.
(2) Secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other natural and manmade
disasters.
(3) Provide adequate light, air and open space.
(4) Ensure that the development of the Borough of Edgewater does not
conflict with the development and general welfare of neighboring
municipalities.
(5) Promote the establishment of appropriate population densities and
concentrations that will contribute to the well-being of persons,
neighborhoods and the entire municipality as well as the
preservation of the environment.
(6) Encourage the appropriate and efficient expenditure of public
funds by the coordination of public development with land use
policies.
(7) Provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for a variety of
residential, recreational, commercial and industrial uses and open
space, both public and private, according to their respective
environmental requirements.
(8) Encourage the location and design of transportation routes which
will promote the free flow of traffic while discouraging location of
such facilities and routes which will result in congestion or blight.
§ 240-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-2
1:311
§ 240-3. Scope.
It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way
impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances,
except those specifically or impliedly repealed by this chapter, or any
private restrictions placed upon property by covenant, deed or other private
agreement unless repugnant hereto. Whenever this chapter imposes a
greater restriction, including but not limited to the use of buildings or
premises or upon the height of buildings or lot coverage or requires greater
lot area or longer yards or other open spaces than are imposed or required
by such rules, regulations or permits or by such private restrictions, the
provisions of this chapter shall control.
§ 240-4. Word usage.
In the construction of this chapter, the present tense shall include the
future, the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the
singular. The word "shall" is always mandatory. The word "may" is
permissive. The words "zone" and "district" are synonymous. The word
"used" shall include the words "arranged," "designed" or "intended to be
used." Any word or term not interpreted or defined by this section is to be
given its standard or common meaning. Whenever a term is used in this
chapter which is defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., such term shall have
the meaning in the state statute.
§ 240-5. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following phrases and words shall have the
meanings indicated.
ACCESSORY USE OR BUILDING — A use or structure subordinate to
the principal use or structure on the same lot and serving a purpose
customarily incidental to the principal use or the principal structure. Where
an accessory building is attached to a principal building by a roof, wall or
the like, such accessory building shall be considered part of the principal
building.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The Zoning Officer.94
(9) Promote a desirable visual environment through creative
development techniques and good civic design and arrangements.
(10) Promote the conservation of open space and valuable natural
resources and prevent urban sprawl and degradation of the
environment through improper use of land.
(11) Establish orderly and uniform procedures relating to land use and
development regulation.
(12) Generally achieve and advance the various purposes of the
Municipal Land Use Law (c. 291, P.L. 1975) as set forth in the
statement of purposes of said law in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-2.
§ 240-2 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-5
1:312
ADVERSE EFFECT — Development designs or existing features on a
developer's property, or nearby property, creating, imposing, aggravating or
leading to impractical, unsafe, unsatisfactory or noncomplying conditions,
such as a layout inconsistent with the zoning regulations; insufficient street
location; inconvenient street system; inadequate utilities, such as water,
drainage, shade trees and sewerage; unsuitable size, shape and location
of any area reserved for public use or land for open space in a planned
development; infringement upon land designated as subject to flooding; and
the creation of conditions leading to soil erosion by wind or water from
excavation or grading; all as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38 and measured
against the design and performance standards of this chapter.
ALTERATION, STRUCTURAL — Any changes in the supporting members
of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders, or in the
dimensions or configuration of the roof or exterior walls.
AMUSEMENT GAME — Any video game or similar machine operated by
coin, disc, token, key or similar device.
APARTMENT — A dwelling unit in a building having three or more dwelling
units.
APPROVAL — Acceptance of a plan or plat by the approving authority and
meeting the preliminary or final plat requirements, as applicable.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — The Planning Board or Board of Adjustment,
unless a different agency is designated in this chapter pursuant to the
Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.).
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY — Residences for the elderly that provide units
which may include semi-independent living quarters and the supervision
of self-administered medication, as well as shared facilities for meals,
recreational activities, personal care and transportation.
ATTIC — The open, uninhabitable space between the ceiling beams of the
top habitable story and the roof rafters in any building.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION or GASOLINE STATION — A building
or place of business where gasoline, fuel, oil and grease and/or batteries,
tires and automobile accessories are supplied and dispensed directly to the
motor vehicle trade and where mechanical repair but not body repair may
be rendered as an accessory activity, provided that all mechanical repair
takes place within the confines of a building.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building which is partly or completely
below grade.
BUFFER AREA — An area either in its natural state or planted with
evergreen or other suitable vegetation, fences, walls, berms, or any
combination thereof, used to physically separate or screen one use or
property from another so as to visually shield or block noise, lights or other
nuisances. Such areas may not contain buildings, parking areas or aisles
or storage areas, except that driveways providing access from the street
94.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 240-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-5
1:313
to the site may extend through a front yard buffer. Signs approved by the
approving authority may also be included.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The percentage of a lot covered by buildings,
including accessory structures such as porches, decks and building
appurtenances.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from grade plane to
the average height of the highest roof surface.
CHILD-CARE CENTER — An institution offering the provision of
supplemental parental care and supervision for nonrelated children on
a regular basis during part or all of the day under license by the New
Jersey Department of Human Services. The term "child-care center," as used
herein, includes the terms "infant-care center," "day nursery," "day-care
center," "nursery school" or similar.
CLASSIFICATION — The determination by the approving authority that a
plat is either a minor or major development.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT — A planned development technique based on
a density of dwelling units per acre. The permitted number of dwelling
units is then clustered onto one or more portions of the overall tract on
reduced lot sizes so that individual segments of the tract have higher
densities, provided that other portions of the tract are left in open space or
common property so that the gross density limitation of the entire tract is
not exceeded.
COMMON PROPERTY — A parcel(s) of land, together with the
improvements thereon, the ownership, use and enjoyment of which are
shared by owners and occupants of one or more of the individual building
sites in the development.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR THE DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED —
Any community residential facility licensed pursuant to P.L. 1977, c. 448
(N.J.S.A. 30:11B-1 et seq.) providing food, shelter and person guidance,
under such supervision as required, to not more than 15 developmentally
disabled or mentally ill persons who require assistance, temporarily or
permanently, in order to live in the community and shall include, but not
be limited to, group homes, halfway houses, intermediate-care facilities,
supervised apartment living arrangements and hostels.
COMPLETE APPLICATION — The submission of an application form and
checklist completed by the applicant, together with all accompanying
documents required by this chapter, for review by the approving authority.
The approving authority may require such additional information not
specified by ordinance as is reasonably necessary to make an informed
decision as to whether the requirements necessary for approval of the
application for development have been met. The application shall not be
deemed incomplete for lack of any such additional information.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district only
upon a showing that such use in a specified location will comply with
the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such use as
§ 240-5 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-5
1:314
contained in the zoning provisions of this chapter and upon the issuance of
an authorization thereof by the Planning Board.
CONTINUING CARE RETIREMENT COMMUNITY — An organization that
provides housing, services and health care (including long-term care) to
persons of retirement age. The community must provide increasing levels
of care that meet the needs of individual residents, beginning with
independent living and providing a variety of health and nursing care
services. It offers a contract based on an entry fee that guarantees shelter
and access to various health care services, whether these are prefunded or
on a fee-for-service basis.
DENSITY — The permitted number of dwelling units per gross acre of land
developed.
DENSITY, NET — The number of dwellings per unit of land, excluding
streets, easements, water areas and lands with environmental constraints.
DETENTION BASIN — Those areas which exist or are created for the
temporary storage of stormwater and controlled discharge of this water to
a receiving drainage system.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure or of any
mining, excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any
building or other structure or use or extension of use of land for which
permission may be required.
DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE — Subdivision and/or site plan committee(s)
of at least three members of the approving authority (three members on
each committee if separate subdivision and site plan committees are
appointed), appointed by the Chairman for the purpose of reviewing and
making recommendations to the approving authority on a development
application. In the event that no development committee(s) has been
created, the function delegated to it shall be performed by the approving
authority.
DISTRICT — Any portion of the territory of the Borough of Edgewater
within which certain uniform regulations and requirements, or various
combinations thereof, apply under the provisions of this chapter.
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by
drains, grading or other means, including the control of runoff, to minimize
erosion and sedimentation during and after construction or development
and means necessary for water supply preservation or prevention or
alleviation of flooding.
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The lands required for the installation of
stormwater sewers or drainage swales or required along a natural
watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the flow of water
therein to safeguard the public against the hazard of flooding.
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT — A business or establishment engaged in the
sale of food, soft drinks, ice cream and similar confections which are so
§ 240-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-5
1:315
prepared, packaged in paper or other types of disposable wrappers or
containers and served to persons in motor vehicles so as to be intended for
consumption either outside of the building or in motor vehicles while parked
on the premises.
DWELLING — Any permanent building or portion thereof designed or used
exclusively as the residence of one or more persons.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms occupied or intended for
occupancy as separate living quarters by one family or household, provided
that access is directly from the outside or through a common hall and that
separate cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities are provided within the
dwelling for the exclusive use of the occupants.
EATING ESTABLISHMENT — A commercial establishment where food and
drink are prepared, served and consumed on premises, excluding, however,
a fast-food restaurant and a snack bar or refreshment stand at a public
or community swimming pool, playground or park operated in conjunction
with and incidental to such recreational facility for the sole convenience of
its patrons.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance by public utilities or municipal or other government agency
of electrical, gas, water transmission or distribution systems or collection,
communication, water supply or sewage treatment and collection systems,
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — A building which is completely
surrounded by permanent open space occupied or intended for
occupancy exclusively by one family, with cooking, sleeping and
sanitary facilities for the use of the occupants of the dwelling unit; also
referred to as a "single-family dwelling."
A.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building occupied or intended for
occupancy as separate living quarters for no more than two families,
with separate access, cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities for the
exclusive use of the occupants of each unit, which units are separated
from each other by vertical walls to the underside of the roof or by
horizontal floors; also referred to as a "duplex dwelling."
B.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A structure or building occupied or
intended for occupancy as separate living quarters for more than two
families, with separate cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities for the
exclusive use of the occupants of each unit.
C.
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE — A one-family dwelling in a row of units in
which each unit has its own front and rear access to the outside, no unit
is located over another units, and each unit is separated from any other
unit by one or more common fire-resistant walls.
D.
DWELLING, GARDEN APARTMENT — One or more multiple-family
buildings with dwelling units located one above the other and/or sideby-
side units, containing off-street parking, outdoor recreation
facilities, landscaped areas and other appurtenant facilities.
E.
§ 240-5 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-5
1:316
including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire
alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, light stanchions, telephone
lines, hydrants and other similar equipment and accessories in connection
therewith, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate services by
such public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies for the
public health, safety or general welfare, but not including buildings.
FAMILY — Any number of persons related by blood, marriage or adoption
or living together as a single housekeeping unit.
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — A private residence in which child-care
services for a fee are regularly provided to no less than three and no more
than five children for no less than 15 hours per week.
FAST-FOOD RESTAURANT — An establishment whose principal business
is the sale of prepared or rapidly prepared food directly to the customer
in a ready-to-consume state for consumption either within the restaurant
building, in cars on the premises or off the premises. (See also "drive-in
restaurant.")
FINAL PLAT — The final map of all or a portion of the subdivision which is
presented to the approving authority for final approval in accordance with
the subdivision regulations, and which, if approved, shall be filed with the
proper county recording officer.
FLAG LOT — A lot whose area, exclusive of its access drive, meets the
area requirement of the zoning provisions of this chapter but whose
configuration is one of reduced frontage on an approved street (generally
a width sufficient for use as a driveway or future street), with the enlarged
buildable portion of the lot located at the rear of the lot at the end of the
access drive.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA — The rivers or other watercourses and adjacent
land areas subject to inundation, as defined by the New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection and Energy, in the event of the design flood.
These areas include, but are not necessarily limited to, the floodway and
flood-fringe areas as delineated on the Flood Insurance Study for the
Borough of Edgewater with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps and
Flood Boundary Maps prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.
FLOODPLAIN — The channel and the relatively flat area adjoining the
channel of a natural stream or river which has been or may be covered by
floodwater.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a natural stream and portions of the flood
hazard area adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to carry
and discharge the floodwater or flood flow of any natural stream or river.
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several
floors of a building. "Floor area," for the purposes of imposing parking
calculations, shall not include areas devoted to mechanical equipment
serving the building, stairways and elevators, interior areas devoted
exclusively to parking and loading for motor vehicles or to any space where
§ 240-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-5
1:317
the floor-to-ceiling height is less than seven feet, provided that no more than
15% of the gross area may be reduced for these common area calculations.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The sum of the area of all floors of buildings or
structures compared to the total area of the site.
GARAGE — A building used for the inside storage of one or more vehicles.
GARAGE, REPAIR — Any building, structure, premises and land in which
a business or service involving the maintenance, servicing or repair of
vehicles, but not body repair of vehicles, is conducted or rendered.
GOVERNING BODY — The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Edgewater.
GRADE PLANE — A reference plane representing the average of finished
ground level adjoining the building at all exterior walls. Where the finished
ground level slopes away from the exterior walls, the reference plane shall
be established by the lowest points within the area between the building
and the lot line or, where the lot line is more than six feet from the building,
between the building and a point six feet from the building.
GROSS ACREAGE — The total upland area contained within a parcel or
parcels of land, excluding any portion of the property that is inundated with
water at any time.
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several
floors of a building measured from the exterior walls of the building, but not
including interior parking spaces.
HOME OCCUPATION — An activity which is incidental to the use of a
dwelling for residential purposes and which is conducted as an accessory
use in the resident's dwelling unit. Licensed professional occupations shall
not be permitted as home occupations.
IMPERVIOUS LOT COVERAGE — The portion of a lot which is improved
with principal and accessory buildings, structures and uses and including
but not limited to driveways, swimming pools, tennis courts, parking areas,
garages, walkways, patios, loading areas, hard surfaces and other
impervious materials. Detention or retention basins shall be excluded from
such calculations, provided that the same are constructed of pervious
materials.
JUNKYARD — Any area of land, with or without buildings, devoted to the
storage, keeping or abandonment of junk debris, whether or not it is in
connection with the dismantling, processing, salvage, sale or other use or
disposition thereof of any material whatsoever.
LOADING SPACE — An off-street berth on the same lot as the building being
served for the temporary parking of a vehicle while loading and unloading.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.
§ 240-5 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-5
1:318
LOT DEPTH — A horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines,
measured perpendicular or radial to the front lot line at the midpoint of the
lot frontage to the furthest distance thereof or taken as the average of three
measurements, one taken at each corner and one taken at the midpoint, for
irregularly shaped parcels.
LOT FRONTAGE — The horizontal distance between the side lot lines,
measured along the front lot line.
LOT LINE — Any line, including the street line, forming a portion of the
exterior boundary of a lot.
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between side lot lines, measured
parallel to the front lot line at the required front yard setback line.
MANUFACTURING — The mechanical, electrical or chemical
transformation of materials or substances into new products, excluding
the assembly of components which are prepared from previously prepared
materials.
MEZZANINE — An intermediate level or levels between the floor and
ceiling of any story with an aggregate floor area of not more than 1/3 of the
area of the room in which the level or levels are located.
NOISE — Any undesirable audible sound.
NURSING HOME — An institution or a distinct part of an institution that
is licensed or approved to provide health care under medical supervision
for 24 or more consecutive hours for more than two residents who are not
related to the governing authority or its members by marriage, blood or
adoption.
OFF-SITE AND OFF-TRACT IMPROVEMENTS — Improvements to
accommodate conditions generated by a proposed development, including
but not limited to new improvements and extensions and modifications of
existing improvements. "Off-site" means located outside the lot lines of the
LOT, CORNER — A parcel of land located at the junction of and abutting
two intersecting streets or at the bend of the same street, where the
angle of intersection does not exceed 135°.
A.
LOT, THROUGH — A parcel of land which extends through from one
street to another.
B.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The line which separates the publicly owned or
controlled street right-of-way from the private property which abuts
upon the street, as distinct from a sidewalk line, curbline or edge-ofpavement
line. On a street or highway shown on the adopted Master
Plan of the Borough, the "front lot line" shall be considered to be the
proposed right-of-way line for the street.
A.
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line opposite and most distant from the
front lot line.
B.
C. LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
§ 240-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-5
1:319
lot in question but within the property (of which the lot is a part) which is
the subject of a development application or contiguous portion of a street
or right-of-way. "Off-tract" means not located on the property which is the
subject of a development application nor on a contiguous portion of a street
or right-of-way.
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land essentially unimproved and
set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use or
enjoyment, or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land
adjoining such open space.
PARKING SPACE — A space used for the parking of motor vehicles within a
public or parking area.
PATIO HOME (ZERO LOT LINE) — A detached dwelling or semidetached
dwelling that shares no common interior wall, located on the side lot line.
The resulting design offers one larger side yard as opposed to two smaller
side yards that result in conventional designs where the building is sited
toward the center of the lot.
PERMITTED USE — Any use of land or buildings permitted by this chapter.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — The preliminary map indicating the proposed layout
of the subdivision which is submitted to the approving authority for
consideration and meeting the requirements of the Borough subdivision
design standards.
PRINCIPAL USE — The primary or predominant use of a lot.
PRIVATE SCHOOL — An institution of education whose general course
work is comparable to the public school system and whose curriculum is
approved by the New Jersey Department of Education or the New Jersey
Department of Higher Education.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — The office of a dentist, physician, attorney,
clergyman, accountant, engineer, architect, professional planner, insurance
agent, real estate agent or other generally recognized professional licensed
by the State of New Jersey.
PROFESSIONAL RESIDENT — Includes all of the professions listed in
"professional office," provided that the professional person owns and
occupies as a dwelling the unit used in the practice in the profession and
the use does not exceed 30% of the floor area.
PUBLIC PURPOSE — The use of land and/or buildings by a municipal,
county, state or federal agency or authority.
RECYCLING AREA — Space allocated for the collection and storage of
source-separated recyclable materials.
RESTAURANT — A commercial establishment where food and drink are
prepared, served and consumed on premises, excluding, however, a fastfood
restaurant.
§ 240-5 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-5
1:320
RETAIL TRADE — An establishment engaged in selling goods or
merchandise to the general public and rendering services incidental to the
sale of such goods.
RETENTION BASIN — Those areas which exist or are created for the
storage of stormwater and absorption of this water into the ground.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The total width of a street, watercourse, utility alignment
or other way and within, under or over which all improvements and rights
of access are confined.
SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — Establishments primarily engaged in
rendering services to individuals, business and governmental uses.
Examples include employment services, copying and supply services,
advertising and mailing, photographic studios, hair and nail salons,
barbershops, shoe repair, clothing repair and rental, dance, karate and
similar uses, music and art classes and dry-cleaning establishments.
SETBACK LINE — A line parallel to a street line or lot line beyond which
a building does not project. The minimum yard requirements shall be the
minimum required setbacks. All setbacks from public streets shall be
measured from the proposed right-of-way as shown on the adopted Master
Plan.
SIGHT TRIANGLE — A triangular area at the quadrants of street
intersections where unobstructed visibility is maintained along the
intersecting street
SITE PLAN — A development plan for one or more lots on which is shown:
SLOPE — The degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually
expressed in percent or degrees. Slope calculations shall be based on
elevation intervals of 10 feet. For example, a deviation of 10 feet in surface
elevation within a horizontal or linear distance of 100 feet equates to a tenpercent
slope.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the upper surface of
a floor and the upper surface of the floor or roof next above.
The existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including but not
necessarily limited to topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains and
waterways.
A.
The location of all existing and proposed buildings, driveways, parking
spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities,
utility services, landscaping, structures and signs, lighting and
screening devices.
B.
Any other information that may be reasonably required in order to
make an informed determination pursuant to this chapter.
C.
STORY, ABOVE GRADE — Any story having its finished floor surface
entirely above grade, except that a basement shall be considered as
a story above grade where the finished surface of the floor above the
basement is:
A.
§ 240-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-5
1:321
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive or
other way which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway or which
is shown upon a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the County
Recording Officer prior to the appointment of a Planning Board and the
grant to such Board of the power to review plats; and includes the land
between street lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise
pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking areas and other
areas within the street lines.
STREET LINE — The line which separates the publicly owned or controlled
street right-of-way from the private property which abuts upon the street,
as distinct from a sidewalk line, curbline or edge-of-pavement line. On a
street or highway shown on the adopted Master Plan or Official Map of the
Borough, the "street line" shall be considered to be the proposed right-ofway
line for the street.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or
more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale, development or
lease.
(1) More than six feet above grade plane;
More than six feet above the finished ground level for more than
50% of the total building perimeter; or
(2)
(3) More than 12 feet above the finished ground level at any point.
STORY, HALF — A space under a sloping roof which has the line of
intersection of the roof and wall face not more than three feet above the
floor level and in which space the possible floor area with headroom of
five feet or less occupies at least 40% of the total floor area of the story
directly beneath.
B.
STREET, ARTERIAL — Any street that collects and distributes traffic to
and from collector streets and whose routes are intended to provide a
high degree of mobility. The principal function of an arterial is vehicular
movement. An arterial is characterized by access control and
channelized intersections.
A.
STREET, COLLECTOR — A street that collects traffic from local streets
and connects to arterial streets.
B.
STREET, LOCAL — A street which is designed to provide vehicular
access to abutting properties and to discourage through traffic.
C.
SUBDIVISION, CONSOLIDATION — The combining of individual
recorded lots to form a single tract in single ownership.
A.
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR — Any subdivision not classified as a "minor
subdivision."
B.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR — A subdivision of land containing not more
than three lots, each fronting on an existing street, provided that such
subdivision does not involve a planned development, any new street
C.
§ 240-5 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-5
1:322
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation, whether installed on, above or below the
surface of a parcel of land.
TRACT — One or more lots. Existing streets shall not be included in
calculating the area of the tract.
USE — The specific purpose for which land or a building, structure or
facilities is designed, arranged or intended or for which it is or may be
occupied or maintained.
USABLE RECREATION SPACE — An open area of land designed for and
devoted to recreational purposes, e.g., parkland, sports fields, playgrounds,
swimming pools, etc.
UTILITY — Services, including but not limited to sewage treatment, water
supply, gas, electric, telephone and cable television.
WAREHOUSE — A building use primarily for the storage of goods and
materials.
WETLANDS — Those areas as defined by the Freshwater Wetlands
Protection Act, N.J.S.A. 13:9B-1 et seq.
YARD — An open space which lies between the principal or accessory
building or buildings and the nearest lot line and is unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward, except as provided by this chapter.
or extension of any off-tract improvement, the cost of which is to be
prorated pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42.
YARD, FRONT — The area extending across the full width of the lot
between any building and the front lot line and measured perpendicular
to the building at the closest point to the front lot line.
A.
YARD, REAR — The open space extending across the full width of the
lot between the principal building and the rear lot line and measured
perpendicular to the building and the closest point of the rear lot line.
The rear yard setback shall be parallel to the rear lot line.
B.
YARD, SIDE — An open space extending from the front yard to the rear
yard from the principal building and the side lot line and measured
perpendicular from the side lot line closest to the principal building.
C.
§ 240-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-5
1:323

ARTICLE II
Planning Board
§ 240-6. Establishment.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-2 et seq., the Borough of
Edgewater Planning Board shall be comprised of nine members consisting
of the following four classes:
§ 240-7. Terms of members.
A. Class I: the Mayor or the Mayor's designee in the absence of the Mayor.
[Amended 9-20-2010 by Ord. No. 1439-2010]
B. Class II: one of the officials of the municipality, other than a member of
the governing body, to be appointed by the Mayor; provided that, if
there is an Environmental Commission, the member of the
Environmental Commission who is also a member of the Planning Board
as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 shall be deemed to be the Class II
Planning Board member for purposes of this Act in the event that there
be among the Class IV or alternate members of the Planning Board both
a member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment and a member of the
Board of Education.
C. Class III: a member of the Borough Council, appointed by the Council.
D. Class IV: six other citizens of the municipality, to be appointed by the
Mayor. The members of Class IV shall hold no other municipal office,
except that one such member may be a member of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment or Historic Preservation Commission. A member of the
Environmental Commission who is also a member of the Planning Board
as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-I shall be a Class IV Planning Board
member unless there be amongst the Class IV or alternate members
both a member of the Zoning Board or Historic Preservation
Commission and a member of the Board of Education, in which case the
member common to the Planning Board and Environmental
Commission shall be deemed a Class II member. Two Class IV members
shall be appointed as alternates. See § 240-11.
A. The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond with his
official tenure or, if the member is the Mayor's designee in the absence
of the Mayor, the designee shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor
during the Mayor's official tenure. The term of the member composing
Class II shall be for one year or terminate at the completion of his first
term of office, whichever occurs first, except for a Class II member who
is also a member of the Environmental Commission. The term of a Class
II or Class IV member who is also a member of the Environmental
Commission shall be for three years or terminate at the completion of
his term of office as a member of the Environmental Commission,
whichever occurs first. [Amended 9-20-2010 by Ord. No.
1439-2010]
§ 240-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-7
1:325
§ 240-8. Vacancies.
If a vacancy in any class shall occur otherwise than by expiration of term, it
shall be filled by appointment as above provided for the unexpired term.
§ 240-9. Removal for cause and conflict of interest.
Any member other than a Class I member, after a public hearing if he
requests one, may be removed by the Council for cause. No member shall be
permitted to act on any matter in which he has, either directly or indirectly,
any personal or financial interest. An alternate member may, after public
hearing if he requests one, be removed by the Borough Council for cause.
§ 240-10. Organization.
The Planning Board shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from the
members of Class IV and select a Secretary, who may be either a member of
the Planning Board or a municipal employee designated by it.
§ 240-11. Alternate members.
B. The term of the member composing Class III shall be for one year or
terminate at the completion of his term of office, whichever occurs first.
C. The term of a Class IV member who is also a member of the Board of
Adjustment or Board of Education shall terminate whenever he is no
longer a member of such other body or at the completion of his Class IV
term, whichever occurs first.
D. The terms of all Class IV members first appointed pursuant to this
chapter shall be so determined that to the greatest practicable extent
the expiration of such terms shall be distributed evenly over the first
four years after their appointment, as determined by resolution of the
governing body; provided, however, that no term of any member shall
exceed four years, and further provided that nothing herein shall affect
the terms of any present members of the Planning Board, all of whom
shall continue in office until the completion of the terms for which they
were appointed. Thereafter, all Class IV members shall be appointed for
terms of four years except as otherwise hereinabove provided. All terms
shall run from January 1 of the year in which the appointment is made.
E. All members of the Planning Board shall be entitled to a yearly stipend
in the amount of $150. The Board Chairman shall receive an additional
$50 per year. [Added 7-16-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-013]
A. There shall be two alternate members of the Planning Board appointed
by the Mayor and meeting the qualifications of Class IV members of
nine-member Planning Boards. The alternate members shall be
designated at the time of appointment by the Mayor as "Alternate No.
1" and "Alternate No. 2." The terms of the alternate members shall be
for two years, except that the terms of the alternate members shall be
§ 240-7 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-11
1:326
§ 240-12. Quorum.95
If the Planning Board lacks a quorum because any of its regular or alternate
members is prohibited by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23 or 40:55D-23.1 from acting
on a matter due to the member's personal or financial interests therein,
regular members of the Board of Adjustment shall be called upon to serve,
for that matter only, as temporary members of the Planning Board in order
of seniority of continuous service to the Board of Adjustment until there are
the minimum number of members necessary to constitute a quorum to act
upon the matter without any personal or financial interest therein, whether
direct or indirect. If a choice has to be made between regular members of
equal seniority, the Chairman of the Board of Adjustment shall make the
choice.
§ 240-13. Powers and duties.
The Planning Board is authorized to adopt bylaws governing its procedural
operation. It shall also have the following powers and duties:
such that the term of not more than one alternate member shall expire
in any one year; provided, however, that in no instance shall the terms
of the alternate members first appointed exceed two years.
Notwithstanding the aforesaid, the initial terms of the members shall
be arranged so as to accomplish the intent of this section. A vacancy
occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled by the
Mayor for the unexpired term only.
B. The alternate members may participate in discussions of the
proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification
of a regular member of any class. A vote shall not be delayed in order
that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate member. In the
event that a choice must be made as to which alternate member is to
vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
A. To make and adopt and from time to time amend a Master Plan for the
physical development of the Borough, including any areas outside its
boundaries which, in the Board's judgment, bear essential relation to
the planning of the Borough, in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
B. To approve conditional use applications as authorized by state statute.
C. To administer the provisions of the Land Use and Development
Ordinance of the Borough in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter and the Municipal Land Use Law of 1975, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq.
D. To participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans
required by state or federal law or regulations.
95.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 240-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-13
1:327
§ 240-14. Time for approval; expiration of approval.
E. To assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuing planning
process.
F. To review and make recommendations to the Council on the Official
Map of the Borough pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32 and 40:55D-26.
G. To annually prepare a program of municipal capital improvement
projects over a term of six years, and amendments thereto, and
recommend same to the governing body.
H. To consider and make report to the governing body within 35 days after
referral as to any proposed development regulation submitted to it
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26a, and also pass upon
other matters specifically referred to the Planning Board by the
Borough Council pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26b.
I. When reviewing applications for approval of subdivision plats, site
plans or conditional uses, to grant, to the same extent and subject to the
same restrictions as the Zoning Board of Adjustment:
(1) A variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c.
(2) Direct the issuance of a permit for a building or structure either not
related to a street (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36) or in the bed of a mapped
street or public drainageway, flood control basin or public area
reserved on the Official Map (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32).
(3) Whenever relief is requested pursuant to this subsection, notice of
a hearing on the application for development shall include
reference to the request for a variance or direction for issuance of a
permit as the case may be.
J. To perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by ordinance
or resolution of the governing body or other agencies or officers.
A. Minor subdivisions. Minor subdivision approvals shall be granted or
denied within 45 days of the date of submission of a complete
application to the Planning Board or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant. Approval of a minor subdivision shall
expire 190 days from the date of Planning Board approval unless within
such period a plat in conformity with such approval and the provisions
of the Map Filing Law (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9), or a deed clearly describing
the approved minor subdivision, is filed by the applicant with the
County Recording Officer, the Municipal Engineer and the Municipal
Tax Assessor. Any such plat or deed must be signed by the Chairman
and Secretary of the Planning Board before it will be accepted for filing
by the County Recording Officer.
B. Preliminary approval of major subdivisions. Upon submission of a
complete application for a subdivision of 10 or fewer lots, the Planning
§ 240-13 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-14
1:328
§ 240-15. Application procedure.
Applications for development within the jurisdiction of the Planning Board,
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., shall be filed with the
Zoning Officer. The applicant shall complete all portions of the application
form minimally 15 days before the scheduled meeting and submit 16 copies
of the application and 16 copies of the plans and reports associated with the
application. All applications, maps, reports and fees shall be submitted to
the Zoning Officer. The submission of the application shall be accompanied
by a completed checklist as adopted as part of this chapter. (See Appendix
A96.) The Zoning Officer shall inform the applicant of the steps to be taken
to initiate proceedings and of the regular meeting dates of the Board.
§ 240-16. Environmental Commission.
Whenever the Environmental Commission (if any environmental
commission exists) has prepared and submitted to the Planning Board an
index of the natural resources of the municipality, the Planning Board
Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 45 days of the
date of such submission or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant, unless a variance or variances are part
of the submittal, in which case the Board shall act within 95 days or as
provided in § 240-14C. Upon submission of a complete application for a
subdivision of more than 10 lots, the Planning Board shall grant or deny
preliminary approval within 95 days of the date of such submission
or within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
Otherwise, the Planning Board shall be deemed to have granted
preliminary approval for the subdivision.
C. Ancillary powers. Whenever the Planning Board is called upon to
exercise its ancillary powers before the granting of a variance as set
forth in § 240-13I, the Planning Board shall grant or deny approval of
the application within 95 days after the submission by the applicant of a
complete application or within such further time as may be consented
to by the applicant. Failure of the Planning Board to act within the
period prescribed shall constitute approval of the application, and a
certificate of the administrative officer as to the failure of the Planning
Board to act shall be issued on request of the applicant.
D. Final approval. Application for final subdivision approval shall be
granted or denied within 45 days of submission of a complete
application or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant. Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95 days
from the date of the signing of the plat unless within such period the
plat shall have been duly filed by the applicant with the County
Recording Officer. The Planning Board may, for good cause shown,
extend the period for recording for an additional period not to exceed
190 days from the date of the signing of the plat.
96.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 240-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-16
1:329
shall make available to the Environmental Commission a copy of every
application for development to the Planning Board. Failure of the Planning
Board to make such informational copy available to the Environmental
Commission shall not invalidate any hearing or proceeding.
§ 240-17. Rules and regulations.
The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary
to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this chapter. In the
issuance of subpoenas, administration of oaths and taking of testimony, the
provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law of 1953 (N.J.S.A.
2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
§ 240-18. Employment of counsel, experts and staff.
The Planning Board may employ, or contract for, and fix the compensation of
legal counsel, experts and other staff and services as it may deem necessary.
The Board shall not, however, exceed, exclusive of funding or grants, the
amount appropriated by the governing body for its use.
§ 240-16 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-18
1:330
ARTICLE III
Zoning Board of Adjustment
§ 240-19. Establishment; composition.
§ 240-20. Alternate members.
A. A Zoning Board of Adjustment is hereby established, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 et seq., consisting of seven regular members and
two alternate members appointed by the Borough Council. The regular
members shall serve for terms of four years from January 1 of the year
of their appointment. The terms of the members first appointed shall be
so determined that to the greatest practicable extent the expiration of
such terms shall be distributed evenly over the first four years after
their appointment, provided that the initial term of no member shall
exceed four years. Nothing in this chapter shall, however, be construed
to affect the terms of any present members of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, all of whom shall continue in office until the completion of
the terms for which they were appointed.
B. No member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment may hold any elective
office or position under the municipality.
C. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled
for the unexpired term only.
D. All members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be entitled to a
yearly stipend in the amount of $150. The Board Chairman shall receive
an additional $50 per year. [Added 7-16-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-013]
A. There shall be two alternate members of the Board of Adjustment
appointed by the Borough Council. The alternate members shall be
designated at the time of appointment as "Alternate No. 1" and
"Alternate No. 2." The terms of the alternate members shall be for two
years, except that the terms of the alternate members shall be such that
the term of not more than one alternate member shall expire in any one
year; provided, however, that in no instance shall the terms of the
alternate members first appointed exceed two years. Notwithstanding
the aforesaid, the initial terms of the members shall be arranged so as
to accomplish the intent of this section.
B. The alternate members may participate in discussion proceedings but
may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member
may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice
must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1
shall vote.
§ 240-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-21
1:331
§ 240-21. Quorum. [Added 9-20-2010 by Ord. No. 1439-2010]
If the Board of Adjustment lacks a quorum because any of its regular or
alternate members is prohibited by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 from acting on a
matter due to the member's personal or financial interest therein, Class
IV members of the Planning Board shall be called upon to serve, for that
matter only, as temporary members of the Board of Adjustment. The Class
IV members of the Planning Board shall be called upon to serve in order
of seniority of continuous service to the Planning Board until there are the
minimum number of members necessary to constitute a quorum to act upon
the matter without any personal or financial interest therein, whether direct
or indirect. If a choice has to be made between Class IV members of equal
seniority, the Chairman of the Planning Board shall make the choice.
§ 240-22. Officers.
The Board of Adjustment shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from
its members and shall also select a Secretary, who may be either a Board
member or another municipal employee.
§ 240-23. Removal for cause and conflict of interest.
A member may, after public hearing if he requests it, be removed by the
Council for cause. No member shall be permitted to act on any matter
in which he has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or financial
interest. An alternate member may, after public hearing if he requests one,
be removed by the Borough Council for cause.
§ 240-24. Employment of counsel, experts and staff.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment may also employ, or contract for, and
fix the compensation of legal counsel and such experts and other staff
and services as it may deem necessary. The Board shall not authorize
expenditures which exceed, exclusive of funding or grants, the amount
appropriated by the governing body for its use.
§ 240-25. Rules and regulations.
The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary
to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this chapter. In the
issuance of subpoenas, administration of oaths and taking of testimony, the
provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law of 1953 (N.J.S.A.
2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
§ 240-26. Powers granted by law.
A. The Board of Adjustment shall have such powers as are granted by law
to:
(1) Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that
there is error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal made
§ 240-21 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-26
1:332
by an administrative official or agency based on or made in the
enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance.
(2) Hear and decide requests for interpretation of the Zoning Map97 or
Zoning Ordinance or for decisions upon other special questions
upon which such Board is authorized by the Zoning Ordinance to
pass.
(3) Granting of variances.
(a) Where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or
shape of a specific piece of property, or by reason of
exceptional topographic conditions, or by reason of other
extraordinary and exceptional situation or condition of such
piece of property, the strict application of any regulation in the
Zoning Ordinance would result in peculiar and exceptional
practical difficulties to or exceptional and undue hardship upon
the owner of such property, a variance from such strict
application may be granted, so as to relieve such difficulties or
hardship; provided, however, that no variance shall be granted
under this subsection to allow a structure or use in a district
restricted against such structure or use, and further provided
that the proposed development does not require approval by
the Planning Board of a subdivision, site plan or conditional
use approval.
(b) In particular cases and for special reasons, grant a variance to
allow a principal use or structure in a district restricted against
such use or principal structure; an expansion of a
nonconforming use; a deviation from a specification or
standard pertaining solely to a conditional use; an increase in
the permitted floor area ratio; an increase in the permitted
density, except as applied to the required lot area for a lot or
lots for detached one- or two-family dwelling unit buildings,
which lot or lots are either an isolated undeveloped sized lot or
lots resulting from a minor subdivision; or a height of a
principal structure which exceeds by 10 feet or 10% the
maximum height permitted in the district for a principal
structure, but only by the affirmative vote of five members of
the Board.
B. No variance or other relief may be granted under the provisions of this
section unless such variance or other relief can be granted without
substantial detriment to the public good and will not substantially
impair the intent and purpose of the zone plan and the Zoning
Ordinance. Any application under any subsection of this section may be
referred to any appropriate person or agency, including the Planning
Board, for its report, provided that such reference shall not extend the
period of time within which the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act.
97.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 240-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-27
1:333
§ 240-27. Additional powers.
§ 240-28. Appeals and applications.
A. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall, in addition to the powers
specified in § 240-26 of this article, have power given by law to:
(1) Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 for a
public building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public
drainage way, flood control basin or public area reserved on the
Official Map.
(2) Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36 for a
building or structure not related to a street.
B. The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to grant, to the same
extent and subject to the same restrictions as the Planning Board,
subdivision or site plan approval or conditional use approval pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67 whenever the Board is reviewing an application
for approval of a use variance pursuant to Article III, § 240-26A(3)(b) of
this chapter.
A. Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person
aggrieved or by an officer, department, board or bureau of the
municipality affected by any decision of the administrative officer. Each
appeal shall be taken within the 20 days prescribed by the statute by
filing a notice of appeal with the officer from whom the appeal was
taken, together with 14 copies of said notice with the Zoning Officer.
Said notice of appeal shall specify the grounds of said appeal. The
officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the
Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action
appealed from was taken.
B. Applications addressed to the original jurisdiction of the Board of
Adjustment without prior application to an administrative officer shall
be filed with the Zoning Officer. The applicant shall complete all
portions of the application form minimally 15 days prior to the
scheduled meeting and submit 16 copies of the application and 16
copies of the plans and reports associated with the application. The
submission of the application shall be accompanied by a completed
checklist as adopted as part of this chapter (see Appendix A98). The
Zoning Officer shall inform the applicant of the steps to be taken to
initiate proceedings and of the regular meeting dates of the Board.
C. Appeals from Board of Adjustment to governing body. An appeal from
any decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment granting a use variance
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-17d may be taken to the
governing body, provided that such appeal shall be made within 10 days
98.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 240-27 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-28
1:334
§ 240-29. Power to reverse or modify decisions.
In exercising the above-mentioned power, the Board of Adjustment may, in
conformity with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., or amendments
thereto, or subsequent statutes applying, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly,
or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from
and make such other requirement, decision or determination as ought to be
made, and to that end have all the powers of the administrative officer from
whom the appeal was taken.
§ 240-30. Expiration of variance.
Any variance from the terms of this chapter hereafter granted by the Board
of Adjustment permitting the erection or alteration of any structures or
permitting a specified use of any premises shall expire by limitation unless
such construction or alteration shall have actually commenced on each
and every structure permitted by said variance or unless such permitted
use has actually been commenced within one year from the date of entry
of the judgment or determination of the Board of Adjustment; except,
however, that the running of the period of limitation herein provided shall
be tolled from the date of filing an appeal from the decision of the Board of
Adjustment to the governing body, or to a court of competent jurisdiction,
until the termination in any manner of such appeal or proceeding.
§ 240-31. Time for decision.
The Board of Adjustment shall render its decision not later than 120 days
after the date an appeal is taken from the decision of an administrative
officer or of the submission of a complete application for development to
the Board pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70, or as otherwise
provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. Failure of the Board to render a
decision within such one-hundred-twenty-day period or as otherwise
provided, within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant,
shall constitute a decision favorable to the applicant.
of the date of publication of such final decision of the Board of
Adjustment.
D. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action in respect
to which the decision appealed from was made, unless the officer from
whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of Adjustment after the
notice of appeal shall have been filed with him that by reason of facts
stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent
peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed
otherwise than by a restraining order of the Superior Court of New
Jersey on application or notice to the officer from whom the appeal is
taken and on due cause shown.
§ 240-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-31
1:335

ARTICLE IV
Provisions Applicable to Both Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment
§ 240-32. Conflicts of interest.
No member of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act
on any matter in which he has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or
financial interest. Whenever any such member shall disqualify himself from
acting on a particular matter, he shall not continue to sit with the Board
on the hearing of such matter or participate in any discussion or decision
relating thereto.
§ 240-33. Meetings.
§ 240-34. Minutes of meetings.
Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall include
the names of the persons appearing and addressing the Board and of
the persons appearing by attorney, the action taken by the Board and
the findings, if any, made by it and reasons therefor. The minutes shall
thereafter be made available for public inspection during normal business
hours at the office of the Municipal Clerk. Any interested party shall have
the right to compel production of the minutes for use as evidence in any
A. Meetings of both the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
shall be scheduled no less often than once a month, and any meeting so
scheduled shall be held as scheduled unless canceled for lack of
applications for development to process.
B. Special meetings may be provided for at the call of the Chairman or on
the request of any two Board members, which meetings shall be held on
notice to the Board's members and the public in accordance with all
applicable legal requirements. In addition, any applicant may request a
special meeting, which shall either be granted or denied by the Board.
[Amended 7-16-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-013]
C. No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being
present.
D. All actions shall be taken by majority vote of a quorum except as
otherwise required by any provision of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.).
E. All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be open to the
public. Notice of all such meetings shall be given in accordance with the
requirements of the Open Public Meetings Law, P.L. 1975, c. 231
(N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.). An executive session for the purpose of
discussing and studying any matters to come before either board shall
not be deemed a regular or special meeting in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-9.
§ 240-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-34
1:337
legal proceeding concerning the subject matter of such minutes. Such
interested party may be charged a fee for reproduction of the minutes for
his use as provided for in the rules of the Board.
§ 240-35. Hearings.
§ 240-36. Notices of hearings.
Notices of hearings shall be given for all applications for development
except minor subdivision approval and final subdivision approval pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12. Whenever a hearing is required on an application for
A. Rules. The Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment may make
rules governing the conduct of hearings before such bodies, which rules
shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.,
or of this chapter.
B. Oaths. The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as he may
designate shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
evidence, including witnesses and documents presented by the parties,
and the provisions of the County and the Municipal Investigations Law,
P.L. 1953, c. 38 (N.J.S.A. 2A:67-1 et seq.), shall apply.
C. Testimony. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding
officer, and the right to cross-examine shall be permitted to all
interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if
not represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to
reasonable limitations as to time and number of witnesses.
D. Evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the
hearing, but the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence.
E. Records. Each board shall provide for the verbatim recording of the
proceedings by either stenographer or mechanical or electronic means.
The Board shall furnish a transcript or duplicate recording in lieu
thereof on request to any interested party at his expense. The
Edgewater Borough Clerk shall retain copies of the minutes and
recordings for both approving boards.
F. Qualification. When any hearing before the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall carry over two or more meetings, a member
of the Board who was absent for one or more of the meetings shall be
eligible to vote on the matter upon which the hearing was conditioned,
notwithstanding his/her absence from one or more of the meetings;
provided, however, that such Board member has available to him/her a
transcript or recording of the meeting from which he/she was absent
and certifies, in writing, to the Board that he/she has read such
verbatim transcript or listened to such recording.
§ 240-34 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-36
1:338
development pursuant to this section, the applicant shall give notice thereof
as follows:
A. Public notice shall be given by publication in the official newspaper of
the municipality, if there is one, or in a newspaper of general circulation
in the municipality at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing.
B. Notice shall be given to the owners of all real property, as shown on the
current tax duplicate or duplicates, located within 200 feet in all
directions of the property which is the subject of such hearing, provided
that this requirement shall be deemed satisfied by notice to a
condominium association, in the case of any unit owner whose unit has
a unit above or below it, or a horizontal property regime, in the case of a
co-owner whose apartment has an apartment above or below it. Such
notice shall be given by either serving a copy thereof on the owner as
shown on the current tax duplicate or his agent in charge of the
property or by mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to the property
owner at his address as shown on the current tax duplicate. Notice to a
corporate owner may be made by service upon its president, a vice
president, secretary or other person authorized by appointment or by
law to accept service on behalf of the corporation.
C. Notice of all hearings on applications for development involving
property located within 200 feet of an adjoining municipality shall be
given by personal service or certified mail to the clerk of such
municipality.
D. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the County
Planning Board of a hearing on an application for development of
property adjacent to an existing county road or proposed road shown on
the Official County Map or on the County Master Plan, adjoining other
county land or situate within 200 feet of a municipal boundary.
E. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Commissioner of Transportation of a hearing on an application for
development of property adjacent to a state highway.
F. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Director of the Division of State Regional Planning in the Department of
Community Affairs of a hearing on an application for development of
property which exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling units. Such notice
shall include a copy of any maps or documents required to be on file
with the Municipal Clerk pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10b.
G. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail of a hearing
on an application of a major subdivision or a site plan not defined as a
minor site plan to a public utility, cable television company or local
utility which possesses a right-of-way or easement within the
municipality and has registered with the municipality in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12.1.
§ 240-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-36
1:339
H. All notices herein above specified in this section shall be given at least
10 days prior to the date fixed for hearing, and the applicant shall file
an affidavit of proof of service with the board holding the hearing on the
application for development.
I. Any notice made by certified mail as hereinabove required shall be
deemed complete upon mailing in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-14.
J. Form of notice. All notices required to be given pursuant to the terms of
this chapter shall state the date, time and place of the hearing; the
nature of the matters to be considered; identification of the property
proposed for development by street address, if any, or by reference to
lot and block numbers as shown on the current tax duplicate in the
Municipal Tax Assessor's office; and the location and times at which any
maps and documents for which approval is sought are available as
required by law.
K. Notice regarding Master Plan. The Planning Board shall give:
(1) Public notice of a hearing on adoption, revision or amendment of
the Master Plan; such notice shall be given by publication in the
official newspaper of the Borough at least 10 days prior to the date
of the hearing.
(2) Notice by personal service or certified mail to the clerk of an
adjoining municipality of all hearings on adoption, revision or
amendment of the Master Plan involving property situated within
200 feet of such adjoining municipality at least 10 days prior to the
date of any such hearing.
(3) Notice by personal service or certified mail on the County Planning
Board of:
(a) All hearings on the adoption, revision or amendment of the
Master Plan at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing;
such notice shall include a copy of any such proposed Master
Plan, or any revision or amendment thereto; and
(b) The adoption, revision or amendment of the Master Plan not
more than 30 days after the date of such adoption, revision or
amendment; such notice shall include a copy of the Master
Plan or revision or amendment thereto.
L. Notice of hearing on ordinance or capital improvement program.
(1) Notice by personal service or certified mail shall be made to the
clerk of an adjoining municipality of all hearings on the adoption,
revision or amendment of a development regulation involving
property situated within 200 feet of such adjoining municipality at
least 10 days prior to the date of any such hearing.
§ 240-36 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-36
1:340
§ 240-37. List of property owners furnished. [Amended 9-20-2010
by Ord. No. 1439-2010]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12c, the Tax Assessor of the
Borough of Edgewater shall, within seven days after receipt of a request
therefor and upon receipt of payment of a fee of not to exceed $0.25 per
name or $10, whichever is greater, make and certify a list from the current
tax duplicate of names and addresses of owners to whom the applicant is
required to give notice pursuant to Article IV, § 240-36B, of this chapter.
§ 240-38. Decisions.
(2) Notice by personal service or certified mail shall be made to the
County Planning Board of all hearings on the adoption, revision or
amendment of the Municipal Capital Improvement Program or
Municipal Official Map not more than 30 days after the date of such
adoption, revision or amendment. Any notice provided hereunder
shall include a copy of the proposed development regulation, the
Municipal Official Map or the Municipal Capital Improvement
Program, or any proposed revision or amendment thereto, as the
case may be.
M. (Reserved)99
A. Each decision on any application for development shall be set forth in
writing as a resolution of the Board, which resolution shall include
findings of fact and legal conclusions based thereon. The memorializing
resolution shall be adopted at a meeting held not later than 60 days
after the date of the meeting at which the approving authority voted to
grant or deny approval.
B. Prior to a resolution of approval being memorialized, the applicant shall
present five sets of plans which indicate any and all map changes
required by the Board at the time of approval.
C. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the Board within 10 days of the
date of decision to the applicant or, if represented, then to his attorney,
without separate charge. A copy of the decision shall also be mailed to
all persons who have requested it and have paid the fee prescribed by
the Board for such service. A copy of the decision shall also be filed in
the office of the Municipal Clerk, who shall make a copy of such filed
decision available to any interested party upon payment of a fee
calculated in the same manner as those established for copies of other
public documents in the municipality.
99.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection M, Additional form of notice, added 6-16-2008 by Ord.
No. 1389-2008, was repealed 7-16-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-012.
§ 240-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-39
1:341
§ 240-39. Publications of decisions.
A brief notice of every final decision shall be published in the official
newspaper of the municipality. Such publication shall be arranged by the
Zoning Officer without separate charge to the applicant. Said notice shall
be sent to the official newspaper for publication within 10 days of the date
of any such decision.
§ 240-40. Payment of taxes.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39 and 40:55D-65, every
application for development submitted to the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall be accompanied by proof that no taxes or
assessments for local improvements are delinquent on the property which
is the subject of such application; or, if it is shown that taxes or assessments
are delinquent on said property, approvals or other relief granted by either
board shall be conditioned upon either the prompt payment of such taxes or
assessments or the making of adequate provision for the payment thereof in
such a manner that the municipality will be adequately protected.
§ 240-39 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-40
1:342
ARTICLE V
Administration, Enforcement and Fees
§ 240-41. Administration and enforcement.
§ 240-42. Enforcement officer.
A. Administrative officer; receiving applications for development; issuing
approval certificates. The administrative officer for the purpose of the
enforcement of this chapter, and except as otherwise set forth in
Chapter 71, Article XV, Land Use Administrator, shall be the Zoning
Officer, who is hereby given the duty, power and authority to
respectively enforce the provisions of this chapter under the applicable
powers and authority as provided by law. The Zoning Officer shall
examine all applications under his or her jurisdiction and shall approve
all required inspections to ensure compliance with this chapter.
[Amended 9-20-2010 by Ord. No. 1439-2010]
B. Administration.
(1) Subdivisions. Any owner of land lying within the Borough shall,
prior to subdividing or resubdividing of land as defined in this
chapter, and before conveying legal or equitable title to such
subdivision or any part thereof, apply to the Planning Board for
review and approval of the subdivision plat pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
(2) Site plan. Prior to the issuance of any construction permit or
certificate of occupancy, as the case may be, for any new structure,
addition to or alteration of an existing structure, a site plan shall be
submitted to the Planning Board or to the Board of Adjustment as
provided by statute, for its review and approval.
C. Enforcement. The rules, regulations and standards contained in this
chapter shall be considered the minimum requirements for the
protection of the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the
Borough. Any action taken by the Borough under the terms of this
chapter shall give primary consideration to the purposes and provisions
of this chapter and to the welfare of the entire community. Moreover, if
an applicant or his agent can clearly demonstrate that, because of the
peculiar conditions pertaining to his land, the literal enforcement of one
or more of these regulations is impractical or will exact undue hardship,
the appropriate municipal agency may permit such exceptions as may
be reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of the rules,
regulations and standards established by this chapter.
A. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to administer and enforce the
provisions of this chapter and, in so doing, to inspect periodically the
structures and land in the Borough, to investigate violations of the
chapter coming to his attention, to serve notice upon property owners
to abate any condition found to exist in violation of any provision(s) of
§ 240-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-42
1:343
§ 240-43. Construction permits and plans; certificates of occupancy.
No construction permit and no certificate of occupancy shall be issued by
the Zoning Officer except upon application therefor in conformity with all
the provisions of this chapter. No sign erection permit shall be issued by
the Zoning Officer except upon application therefor in conformity with the
terms of this chapter.
§ 240-44. Stop orders and construction permit revocations.
§ 240-45. Violations and penalties.
this chapter, to sign complaints where justified and to cooperate with
other Borough officials in the prosecution of violators. The enumeration
herein of the duties of the Construction Official and Zoning Officer shall
not mean that other officials and employees shall be relieved of their
obligation to enforce this chapter. The Construction Official and Zoning
Officer or other Borough employees authorized by the Borough shall
have the right to inspect any lot or building at reasonable times for the
purpose of investigating possible violations of this chapter.
B. If the Zoning Officer finds any substantial deviation from any approved
plans, he shall notify the permittee and the Borough Clerk, in writing, of
the deviation. The Zoning Officer and the Borough may take such action
as is provided in this chapter.
A. Stop orders. In the event that a permittee shall fail to comply with any
condition or regulation or provisions of an approved plan, the Borough
Engineer or the Zoning Officer may issue a stop order on all
construction work within the area encompassed by the approved plan
and which order may include requirements for the prompt correction of
adverse conditions. Thereafter, no construction work of any type shall
be performed within the area of the approved plan except such work as
is in accordance with the requirements of the Borough official as set
forth in said order or in accordance with the approved plan.
B. Permit revocation. In the event of a failure to comply with any condition
of an approved soil erosion and sediment control plan, tree removal
plan or steep slope disturbance plan, upon recommendation of the
Borough Engineer or Zoning Officer, the Borough may revoke any
construction permit for any property upon which such noncompliance
occurs or for any property affected by such noncompliance. The
Borough may also seek to enjoin the violation or take such other steps
as permitted by law.
C. Revocation of construction permit or certificate of occupancy. In the
event of a failure to comply with any condition of final site plan
approval, the Zoning Officer or Borough Engineer, on his or her
initiative, may revoke the construction permit or certificate of
occupancy, as the case may be, and seek to enjoin the violation or take
such other steps as permitted by law.
§ 240-42 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-45
1:344
§ 240-46. Fees.
A. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter or who
fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects,
raises, moves, extends, enlarges, alters or demolishes any structure in
violation of any detailed statement or plan submitted hereunder or who
puts into use any lot or premises in violation of any detailed statement
or plans submitted hereunder or who refuses reasonable opportunity to
inspect any premises shall, upon conviction thereof by any court
authorized by law to hear and determine the matter, be liable to a fine
of not more than $1,000, or to imprisonment for a term of not more than
90 days, or both, as such court in its discretion may impose. Each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
B. If before final subdivision approval any person as owner or agent
transfers or sells or agrees to transfer or sell, except pursuant to an
agreement expressly conditioned on final subdivision for which
municipal approval is required, such persons shall be subject to a
penalty not to exceed $1,000, and each lot disposition so made may be
deemed a separate violation.
C. In addition, the Borough may institute and maintain a civil action:
(1) For injunctive relief; or
(2) To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to such
a contract of sale if a certificate of compliance has not been issued
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-56, but only if the municipality
has a Planning Board and has adopted by ordinance standards and
procedures in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38.
D. In any such action, the transferee, purchaser or grantee shall be
entitled to a lien upon the portion of the land from which the
subdivision was made that remains in the possession of the developer
or his assigns or successors to secure the return of any deposits made
or purchase price paid and, also, a reasonable search fee, survey
expense and title closing expense, if any. Any such action must be
brought within two years after the date of the recording of the
instrument of transfer, sale or conveyance of said land or within six
years if unrecorded.
A. General.
(1) Every application for development shall be accompanied by a
payment of a fee in accordance with a schedule hereinafter set
forth. The application charge is a flat fee to cover direct
administrative expenses and is not refundable.
(2) Where one application for development includes several approval
requests, the sum of the individual required fees shall be paid.
§ 240-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-46
1:345
(3) No fees shall be returned to the applicant after public hearing has
commenced.
(4) If any applicant desires a court reporter, the cost of taking
testimony and transcribing it and providing a copy of the transcript
for the Board hearing the application shall be at the expense of the
applicant, who shall arrange for the reporter's attendance.
(5) Schedule of application fees to be paid at the time of the filing of
the application.
Submission Application Fee
Sketch plat for classification/concept plan $50
Minor subdivision plat $100
Major subdivision/preliminary $100 plus $25 per lot
Major subdivision/final $50 plus $25 per
proposed lots
Site plan
For each 20,000 square feet of lot area
up to 3 acres
$200
For each acre over 3 acres $300
For each 1,000 square feet of floor area
up to 10,000 square feet
$150
For each 1,000 square feet of floor area
over 10,000 square feet
$100
Variances
Appeals in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70a
$200
Interpretations in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70b
$200
Hardship applications in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c
$200
Conditional use $200
Use in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d
$250
Amendments
No expansion of building or outside
facility
$200
If expansion is proposed, fees
established for site plans apply
See site plan fees
Appeals pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34
and 40:55D-36
$100
B. Resolution, publication, and copy fees.
§ 240-46 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-46
1:346
(1) In addition to application fees, applicants or appellants to the
Planning Board, Zoning Board of Adjustment or Mayor and Council
shall pay the following fees:
(a) Copy of decision (resolution), per page or part thereof: $1.
(b) Publication in newspaper of notice of hearing and notice of
final decision: cost of publication.
(c) Copies of minutes of meetings, per page or part thereof: $1.
(d) Copies of rules and regulations, per page or part thereof: $1.
(e) Copies of transcript or duplicate of recording of proceedings:
cost.
(f) Copies of notices of all meetings, annual fee: $20.
(2) The above noted fees apply only to applicants and appellants of a
development application. Fees for copies requested by members of
the general public are regulated under Chapter 318 of the Code of
the Borough of Edgewater.
C. Inspection fees.
(1) In addition to the fees set forth for the review of subdivision plans
and site plans, there shall also be an inspection fee of 2.5% of the
estimated cost of improvements on site plans and an inspection fee
of 5% of the estimated cost of the improvements for subdivision, as
estimated by the Borough Engineer and payable at the time of the
commencement of construction. This charge shall be for the
purpose of defraying the costs of inspections of the installation of
the improvements required by the Planning Board.
(2) All permits, determinations, resolutions or certificates of approval
are subject to the payment of all fees required in this section.
(3) All applicants or appellants other than a department, board or
agency of the Borough shall pay the applicable fees unless such fee
is specifically waived by the Borough Council. Such waivers shall
only be considered for nonprofit organizations.
D. Special meeting fees. [Added 7-16-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-013]
(1) The fee for all special meetings, whether requested by the
applicant or commenced by the Board, is $2,000.
(2) In the event that a special meeting is necessary pursuant to
§ 240-33, the time of the Board's professionals required to prepare
for and follow up after such special meeting shall be charged
against such professional review escrow account. The professional
review escrow account for such a meeting shall be a minimum of
$500. The professional review escrow amount shall be posted by
the applicant prior to or at the commencement of the special
§ 240-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-46
1:347
§ 240-47. Payment for professional services, escrow deposits.
In addition to the filing fees and any other fees or payments required
by this chapter, the applicant for any development application, appeal or
other matter pursuant to this chapter shall be responsible to reimburse the
Borough for payments made to professionals for services rendered to the
Borough related to such application, appeal or other matter. The following
provisions shall apply to such payments:
meeting. The applicant shall be required to deposit any additional
funds into the professional review escrow account which may be
required to cover costs for professional services in excess of the
initial deposit.
(3) Each sitting member of the Board shall be provided $200 from the
Borough for attendance at any special meeting. Such funds shall be
paid out of the amounts collected under § 240-46D(1).
A. Initial deposits for professional services. The following escrow fees
shall be collected by the Zoning Officer at the time of the filing of the
application. These fees are to be applied for the review of applications
by the professional staff/consultants and shall include all office review,
phone correspondence, preparation of reports, conferences,
appearance at meetings or other purposes under the provisions of this
chapter or the Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.). For
purposes of this section, "professional staff" shall include the Borough
Planner, Borough Engineer and board attorneys, and such other
professionals as may be deemed necessary by the Planning Board or the
Zoning Board of Adjustment to review an application. Deposits shall be
paid by personal check, certified check, cashier's check or bank money
order. In the case of proposals requiring a combination of approvals,
such as subdivision, site plan and/or variance(s), the applicant shall
deposit an amount equal to the sum of the deposits required for each
application. In the event that there is no new schedule of fees filed by
the professionals, the schedule previously filed by the professional shall
prevail.
B. Subsequent deposits for professional services. In the event that the
amount in the individual account for professional services should
become depleted to less than 25% of the initial deposit required by this
chapter, and if the Zoning Officer determines that additional funds are
necessary to cover the cost of processing said application, the Zoning
Officer shall notify the applicant immediately of such depletion. Upon
receiving such notice, the applicant shall deposit additional funds as
necessary to make the amount in the account not less than 50% of the
initial deposit required by this chapter for professional services.
C. Failure to maintain deposit for professional services. If the required
funds for professional services are not deposited in a timely manner, the
Zoning Officer shall notify the Borough agency having jurisdiction over
the application, the applicant and all Borough experts. No further
§ 240-46 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-47
1:348
§ 240-48. Performance and maintenance guarantees.
action shall be taken on the application unless the deposits have been
made by the applicant as required above. In the event that the time
for action by a Borough agency as required by this chapter shall expire
prior to the payment of the required deposits, the reviewing agency
shall have the option of dismissing the application.
D. Vouchers for payment of professional services. All payments charged to
a deposit required by this section shall be made pursuant to written
monthly vouchers for each application from the professional(s), stating
the hours spent, the hourly rate and the expenses incurred. The office of
the professional(s) shall render a written final accounting to the
applicant on the uses to which the deposit was put.
E. Procedure for payment of vouchers; appeals of charges. The following
procedure shall apply to the payment of vouchers for professional
services pursuant to this section:
(1) The office of the professional(s) shall submit a copy of said voucher
to the applicant.
(2) Within 14 days of the mailing of said vouchers, the applicant may
request, in writing, a hearing on the reasonableness of the charges
contained in said vouchers. Any such hearing shall be held by the
Borough agency with jurisdiction over the application.
(3) In the event that the applicant requests such hearing, no payments
shall be made pursuant to the disputed voucher(s) until the
Borough agency shall have ruled on the appeal. If the Borough
agency finds in favor of the applicant, payment pursuant to said
voucher(s) shall be adjusted accordingly.
(4) All vouchers for payment of professional services pursuant to this
section shall be submitted to the Borough agency for whom the
services were performed. The Borough agency shall at a public
hearing approve or deny payment of the vouchers. No voucher shall
be denied payment without giving the professional submitting the
voucher an opportunity to be heard concerning the reasonableness
of said voucher.
(5) If no hearing is requested as outlined above, or if the Borough
agency finds in favor of the professional, payment shall be made
pursuant to the voucher.
(6) If approved by the Borough agency, the voucher shall be directed to
the Borough Finance Director for reimbursement to the
professional for services rendered.
A. Before execution of the final subdivision plat, as a condition of final site
plan approval, or as a condition to the granting of a development
approval pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., the applicant shall have
§ 240-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-48
1:349
installed all improvements required by the Planning Board, except
that the Borough Council may require and shall accept in accordance
with the standards adopted herein for the purpose of assuring the
installation and maintenance of on-tract improvements the following:
(1) The furnishing of a performance guarantee in favor of the Borough
in an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of installation for all
improvements not installed prior to final approval.
(2) A maximum of 10% of the total guarantee required shall be in cash.
All of the improvements shall be subject to inspection and approval
by the Borough Engineer, who shall be notified by the developer at
least 48 hours prior to the start of the construction. No
underground installations shall be covered until inspected and
approved.
B. Provision for a maintenance guarantee to be posted with the Borough
Council for a period not to exceed two years after final acceptance of
the improvements, in an amount not to exceed 15% of the cost of the
improvement.
C. The time allowed for installation of the improvements for which the
performance guarantee has been provided may be extended by the
Borough Council by resolution. As a condition or as part of any such
extension, the amount of any performance guarantee shall be increased
or reduced, as the case may be, to an amount not to exceed 120% of the
cost of installation, as determined as of the time of the passage of the
resolution.
D. If the required improvements are not completed or corrected in
accordance with the performance guarantee, the obligor and surety, if
any, shall be liable thereon to the Borough for the reasonable cost of the
improvements not completed or corrected, and the Borough may either
prior to or after the receipt of the proceeds thereof complete such
improvements.
E. Incomplete or unsatisfactory improvements.
(1) Upon substantial completion of all required street improvements
(except for the top course) and appurtenant utility improvements
and the connection of same to the public system, the obligor may
request of the Borough Council, in writing, by certified mail, that
the Borough Engineer prepare, in accordance with the itemized
cost estimate prepared by the Borough Engineer and appended to
the performance guarantee pursuant to Subsection A of this section
a list of all uncompleted or unsatisfactory completed
improvements. A copy of the request shall be sent to the Borough
Engineer. The request shall indicate which improvements have
been completed and which improvements remain uncompleted in
the judgment of the obligor. Thereupon the Borough Engineer shall
inspect all improvements covered by the request and shall file a
written list and report with the Borough Council, with a copy to the
§ 240-48 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-48
1:350
obligor, not later than 45 days after the receipt of the obligor's
request.
(2) The list prepared by the Borough Engineer shall state, in detail,
with respect to each improvement determined to be incomplete or
unsatisfactory, the nature and extent of the incompleteness of each
incomplete improvement or the nature and extent of, and remedy
for, the unsatisfactory state of each completed improvement
determined to be unsatisfactory, or the nature and extent of, and
remedy for, the unsatisfactory state of each completed
improvement determined to be unsatisfactory. The report shall also
identify each improvement determined to be complete and
satisfactory together with a recommendation as to the amount of
reduction to be made in the performance guarantee relating to the
completed and satisfactory improvement, in accordance with the
itemized cost estimate prepared by the Borough Engineer and
appended to the performance guarantee pursuant to Subsection A
of this section.
F. Reduction in performance guarantee.
(1) The Borough Council, by resolution, shall either approve the
improvements determined to be complete and satisfactory by the
Borough Engineer, or reject any or all of these improvements and
shall approve and authorize the amount of reduction to be made in
the performance guarantee relating to the improvements accepted,
in accordance with the itemized cost estimate prepared by the
Borough Engineer. This resolution shall be adopted not later than
45 days after receipt of the list and report prepared by the Borough
Engineer. Upon adoption of the resolution by the Borough Council,
the obligor shall be released from all liability pursuant to its
performance guarantee, with respect to those approved
improvements, except for that portion adequately sufficient to
secure completion or correction of the improvements not yet
approved, provided that 30% of the amount of the performance
guarantee posted may be retained to ensure completion and
acceptability of all improvements.
(2) In the event that the obligor has made a cash deposit with the
Borough or approving authority as part of the performance
guarantee, then any partial reduction granted in the performance
guarantee pursuant to this subsection shall be applied to the case
deposit in the same proportion as the original cash deposit bears to
the full amount of the performance guarantee.
G. If any portion of the required improvements is rejected, the approving
authority may require the obligor to complete or correct such
improvements and, upon completion or correction, the same procedure
of notification, as set forth in this section, shall be followed.
§ 240-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-48
1:351
H. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to limit the right of the
obligor to contest by legal proceedings any determination or lack of a
determination of the Borough Council or the Borough Engineer.
I. The obligor shall reimburse the Borough for all reasonable inspection
fees paid to the Borough Engineer for the foregoing inspection of
improvements; provided that the Borough may require of the developer
a deposit for the inspection fees in an amount not to exceed, except for
extraordinary circumstances, the greater of $500 or 5% of the cost of
improvements, which cost shall be determined pursuant to Section 15
of P.L. 1991, c. 256 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4). For those developments for
which the reasonably anticipated fees are less than $10,000, fees may,
at the option of the developer, be paid in two installments. The initial
amount deposited by a developer shall be 50% of the reasonably
anticipated fees. When the balance on deposit drops to 10% of the
reasonably anticipated fees because the amount deposited by the
developer has been reduced by the amount paid to the Borough
Engineer for inspection, the developer shall deposit the remaining 50%
of the anticipated inspection fees. For those developments for which the
reasonably anticipated fees are $10,000 or greater, fees may, at the
option of the developer, be paid in four installments. The initial amount
deposited by a developer shall be 25% of the reasonably anticipated
fees. When the balance on deposit drops to 10% of the reasonably
anticipated fees because the amount deposited by the developer has
been reduced by the amount paid to the Borough Engineer for
inspection, the developer shall make additional deposits of 25% of the
reasonably anticipated fees. The Borough Engineer shall not perform
any inspection if sufficient funds to pay for those inspections are not on
deposit.
J. In the event that final approval is by stages or sections of development
pursuant to Subsection A of Section 29 of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-38), the provisions of this section shall be applied by stage or
section.
K. To the extent that any of the improvements have been dedicated to the
Borough on the subdivision plat or site plan, the Borough Council shall
be deemed, upon the release of any performance guarantee required
pursuant to Subsection A of this section, to accept dedication for public
use of streets or roads and any other improvements made thereon
according to site plans and subdivision plats approved by the approving
authority, provided that such improvements have been inspected and
have received final approval by the Borough Engineer.
L. Building permits in a subdivision or site plan or approved subsection
thereof, except for model buildings in the first subsection, will be issued
only when all improvements, with the exception of the following, shall
have been installed to serve all lots and structures within the
subdivision or site plan or approved subsection thereof and approved by
the Borough Engineer:
§ 240-48 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-48
1:352
§ 240-49. Developer's agreement.
§ 240-50. Off-tract improvements other than sanitary sewer and
water improvements.
(1) The final bituminous surface course of streets;
(2) Street signs;
(3) Dry wells and swales as may be required;
(4) Monuments;
(5) Shade trees;
(6) Sidewalks; and
(7) In the case of site plans only, landscaping.
M. Permits for model buildings in the front subsection or 10% of the total
number to be built in said subsection, whichever is less, not to exceed
six, may be issued on commencement of construction of improvements.
N. Installation of sidewalks and/or walkways on a lot shall be completed
prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for that lot.
O. Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, upon
completion of all improvements but prior to acceptance by the Borough
Council of such improvements and prior to the release of any
performance guarantee which may have been posted, deeds must be
received, free and clear of all mortgages and encumbrances, for all fee
and other property interests and improvements to be conveyed to the
Borough.
P. A site plan bond shall be posted prior to earth disturbance.
A. Within 60 days of the adoption of a resolution granting either final
subdivision approval or final site plan approval and prior to the
execution of the final subdivision plat, there shall be an agreement
submitted to the Zoning Officer by the approving board attorney.
B. The Zoning Officer then distributes copies of the agreement to the
Mayor and Council, board members, board professional experts,
developer and any other agency deemed necessary.
C. All comments from the individuals listed above shall be submitted to the
approving board attorney prior to the next scheduled board meeting.
After review by the board, the board forwards its comments to the
Mayor and Council.
D. The agreement shall be executed by the Mayor and Council and then
forwarded to the county to be filed.
§ 240-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-50
1:353
A. Pursuant to the powers established in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42, the following
standards are hereby promulgated with respect to determining the
proportionate or pro rata share of an applicant for a required off-tract
improvement. Prior to the granting of final approval of a site plan or
subdivision, the applicant shall have installed or made cash payments in
the manner provided for below with respect to the immediate or
ultimate installation of any required off-tract improvement:
(1) Allocation of costs; criteria in determining allocation. The
allocation or costs for off-tract improvements as between the
applicant, other property owners and the Borough, or any one or
more of the foregoing, shall be determined by the Planning Board
with the assistance of the appropriate Borough agencies on the
basis of the total cost of the off-tract improvements, the increase in
market values of property affected and any other benefits
conferred, the needs created by the application, population and
land use projections for the general area of the applicant's property
and other areas to be served by the off-tract improvements, the
estimated time of construction of the off-tract improvements and
the condition and periods of usefulness, which periods may be
based upon the criteria of N.J.S.A. 40A:22-2. The following criteria
may also be considered as well as any other reasonable criteria
which would aid in said determination:
(a) Street, curb, gutter, sidewalk, shade trees, streetlights, street
signs and traffic light improvements may also be based upon
the anticipated increase of traffic generated by the application
and the anticipated benefit thereto.
(b) Drainage facilities may also be based upon or be determined by
the drainage created by or affected by any particular land use,
considering the percentage relationship between the acreage
of the application and the acreage of the total drainage basin;
the use of a particular site and the amount of area to be
covered by impervious surfaces on the site itself; and the use,
condition or status of the remaining area of the drainage basin.
(2) Improvements to be constructed at the sole expense of the
applicant. In cases where reasonable and necessary need for an offtract
improvement or improvements is necessitated or required by
the proposed development application and where no other property
owners receive a special benefit thereby, the Board may require the
applicant, as a condition of approval, at the applicant's expense, to
provide for and construct such improvements as if such were ontract
improvements in the manner provided hereafter and as
otherwise provided by law.
(3) Payment of allocated costs. In the event that the improvement
required shall be constructed as a general or a local improvement,
the estimated cost of the off-tract improvement allocated to the
applicant shall be deposited with the municipality in the form of
§ 240-50 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-50
1:354
cash. Said deposit shall be paid by the subdivider to the Borough
Treasurer, who shall provide a suitable depository therefor, and
such funds shall be used only for the off-tract improvements for
which they are deposited or shall be refunded to the subdivider as
hereinafter set forth.
(4) Deposit of funds. All funds paid by an applicant pursuant to this
chapter shall be used only for the improvements for which they are
deposited or improvements serving the same purpose.
(5) Redetermination of assessment upon completion of improvements.
Upon completion of off-tract improvements required pursuant to
this chapter, the applicant's liability hereunder shall be
recalculated in accordance with the actual as compared with the
estimated cost of the improvements. To the extent that such
recalculation shall increase or decrease the amount of any cash
deposit made by the applicant hereunder, the applicant shall
forthwith either pay the amount of such increase to the
municipality, or the municipality shall forthwith refund the amount
of such decrease to the applicant.
B. Omissions. Omissions from the bond of any improvement will in no way
be construed as to relieve the developer from his legal obligation to
conform to the required improvements as provided for in this chapter.
C. Certification. Prior to the final acceptance of any of the required
improvements by the Borough, the subdivision owner or owners shall
have submitted satisfactory affidavits certifying that no unpaid bills,
liabilities or liens against such improvements and installations are
outstanding.
§ 240-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-50
1:355

ARTICLE VI
Development Review Procedures
§ 240-51. General procedures for site plan and subdivision review.
A. Purpose. Such regulations are deemed necessary to achieve the
following purposes.
(1) Promote orderly development: to protect the character and to
maintain the stability of all areas within the community and to
promote the orderly and beneficial development of such areas.
(2) Promulgate rules and regulations: to provide rules, regulations and
procedures, where applicable and to the extent the same have not
been otherwise promulgated by ordinance in the Borough of
Edgewater, which will guide the appropriate development of lands
within the Borough in a manner which will promote the public
health, safety, morals and general welfare.
(3) To protect against hazards and danger: to secure safety from fire,
flood, panic and other natural and man-made disasters.
(4) Design standards: to encourage the design and location of streets
which will promote the free flow of traffic while discouraging the
location of such facilities and routes which will result in congestion.
(5) Creative development techniques: to promote a desirable physical
environment through creative development techniques, design and
arrangement.
(6) Open spaces: to promote the conservation of open space and to
protect the natural resources and to prevent overcrowding through
improper land use.
B. Exceptions to design and performance standards. The approving
authority, when acting upon applications, shall have the power to grant
such exceptions from the subdivision and site plan requirements of this
chapter as may be reasonable and within the general purpose and
intent of the provisions for subdivisions, plat, site plan review and
approval, if the literal enforcement of one or more provisions of this
chapter is impracticable or will exact undue hardship because of
peculiar conditions pertaining to land in question.
C. Submission of concept plan for informal review.
(1) An informal review of a concept plan is optional. At the request of
the developer, the Planning Board shall grant an informal review of
a concept plan for a development for which the developer intends
to prepare and submit an application for development. The purpose
will be to review concepts to assist the applicant in the preparation
of subsequent plans. Other than classification, no decisions will be
made, no hearings held and no formal action taken. Neither the
§ 240-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-51
1:357
§ 240-52. Preliminary plats required.
Preliminary plats are required for all site plans and subdivisions.
developer nor the approving authority shall be bound by this
informal review.
(2) Filing procedure and information for concept review.
(a) The developer shall file with the secretary, at least 15 days
prior to the meeting of the approving authority, 16 copies of the
concept plan and five copies of the completed application form.
(b) The concept plan is considered a sketch or general plan neither
fully engineered nor surveyed. Information used to prepare the
concept plan can be available from secondary source
information such as the Soil Conservation Survey Map or
United States Geodetic Survey Maps, but should be sufficiently
detailed to allow the Planning Board to make suggestions on
general site design and layout for circulation, stormwater
management, location of open space and buffers and building
arrangements and to determine how the Land Use Code affects
the proposal.
A. Filing procedure.
(1) The following must be submitted to the office of the Zoning Officer:
16 copies of the application, all plot plans, maps and other papers
required by virtue of any provision of this chapter, as well as the
applicable fee and certification by the Tax Collector that all taxes
are paid to date. The applicant must include envelopes addressed
to the Board professionals, experts and Board members in order to
expedite the mailings.
(2) A corporation or partnership applying for permission to subdivide a
parcel of land or for a site plan or variances shall list the names and
addresses of all stockholders or individual partners owning at least
10% of its stock of any class or at least 10% of the interest in the
partnership, as the case may be. If a corporation or partnership
owns 10% or more of the stock of a corporation, or a ten-percent or
greater interest in a partnership, subject to the above disclosure,
that corporation or partnership shall list the names and addresses
of its stockholders holding 10% or more of its stock or a ten-percent
or greater interest in the partnership, as the case may be, and this
requirement shall be followed by every corporate stockholder or
partner in a partnership until the names and addresses of the
noncorporate stockholders and individual partners exceeding the
ten-percent ownership criterion established in this subsection have
been listed. No Planning Board, Board of Adjustment or municipal
governing body shall approve the application of any corporation or
partnership which does not comply with this requirement of
§ 240-51 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-52
1:358
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-48.1. The penalty for concealment by a corporation
or a partnership shall be as outlined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-48.1.
(3) Simultaneously with filing the application, copies of the plans shall
be forwarded by the office of the Zoning Officer to the following
persons:
(a) The Borough Engineer.
(b) The planning consultant.
(c) The Fire Prevention Bureau (site plans only).
(d) The Chief of Police and/or Police Director (site plans only).
[Amended 3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 1541-2017]
B. Action by approving authority.
(1) The approving authority shall review the submission for its
completeness and take action on accepting or rejecting the
submission as a complete application. If rejected, the applicant
shall be notified, in writing, within 45 days of submission in
accordance with § 240-14.
(2) Public hearing. If accepted as an application, a public hearing date
shall be set by the approving authority and notice given.
(3) Upon submission of an application, the administrative officer shall
submit one copy of the plat and supporting data to the above
named experts listed in Subsection A(3) for review and action. Each
shall have not more than 30 days from receipt of the plan to report
to the approving authority. In the event of a recommendation of
disapproval, such report shall state the reasons therefor.
(4) The approving authority shall grant or deny preliminary
subdivision approval within the following time periods unless some
further time has been consented to by the developer. Otherwise,
the approving authority shall be deemed to have granted
preliminary approval of the subdivision.
(a) A subdivision of 10 or fewer lots: within 45 days of the date of a
complete submission.
(b) A subdivision with more than 10 lots: within 95 days of the date
of a complete submission.
(5) The approving authority shall grant or deny preliminary site plan
approval within the following time periods unless some further
time has been consented to by the developer. Otherwise, the
approving authority shall be deemed to have granted preliminary
approval of the site plan.
(a) A site plan which involves 10 dwelling units or less: within 45
days of the date of a complete submission.
§ 240-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-52
1:359
(b) A site plan which involves more than 10 acres or more than 10
dwelling units: within 95 days of the date of a complete
submission.
(6) If the approving authority required any substantial amendment in
the layout of improvements in either a site plan or subdivision, and
that plan had been the subject of a hearing, an amended
application shall be submitted and proceeded upon as in the case of
the original application for development. The approving authority
shall, if the proposed development complies with this chapter,
grant preliminary approval.
(7) The approving authority may approve, disapprove or approve with
conditions the application. The decision shall be in writing and
shall be sent to the applicant and the newspaper as required by
§ 240-39. If the approving authority grants preliminary approval,
its chairman and secretary, or the vice chairman or assistant
secretary in their absence, respectively, and the Municipal
Engineer shall sign each page of the plat indicating the approval. If
the plat is conditionally approved, it shall not be signed until all
conditions are corrected on the plat. If the corrections are not
completed within 90 days of the conditional approval, the
conditional approval shall lapse, unless the applicant requests an
extension.
(8) Preliminary approval shall confer upon the applicant the following
rights for a three-year period from the date of the preliminary
approval; otherwise the approval shall be void:
(a) That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be changed, including but not
limited to use requirements; layout and design standards for
streets, curbs and sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions; offtract
improvements; and any requirements peculiar to site plan
approval, except that nothing herein shall be construed to
prevent the Borough from modifying, by ordinance, such
general terms and conditions of preliminary approval as relate
to public health and safety.
(b) That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before
the expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or a
section or sections of the preliminary plat.
(c) That the applicant may apply for, and the approving authority
may grant, extensions on such preliminary approval for
additional periods of at least one year but not to exceed a total
extension of two years.
(9) In the case of a development for an area of 50 acres or more, the
approving authority may grant the rights referred to in Subsection
B(8)(a), (b) and (c) above for such period of time longer than three
years as shall be determined by the approving authority to be
§ 240-52 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-52
1:360
§ 240-53. Submission of final subdivision plat.
reasonable taking into consideration the number of dwelling units
and nonresidential floor area permissible under preliminary
approval, the potential number of dwelling units and nonresidential
floor area of the section(s) awaiting final approval, economic
conditions and the comprehensiveness of the development,
provided that, if the design standards have been revised, such
revised standards may govern.
A. Filing procedure.
(1) Prior to the expiration of preliminary plat approval, the developer
shall file with the Zoning Officer, at least 15 days prior to the
meeting of the approving authority, two translucent tracing cloth or
Mylar copies; nine black-on-white paper prints of the plat; two
completed copies of the application form and final plat checklist;
the performance guaranty approved by the governing body,
including off-tract improvements, if any; any maintenance
guaranties; the applicable fee; certification by the Tax Collector
that all taxes are paid to date; certification by the Soil Conservation
District pursuant to the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act,
Chapter 251 of the Laws of 1975 (N.J.S.A. 4-24-39 et seq.) and, if
common open space lot or lots are included in the application, a
separate map showing the individual lot or lots that are to be
designated as common open space, which map shall have shown
thereon the data listed on the Application Checklist in Appendix
A.100
(2) Where utility services are to be extended to the development, the
final plat shall be accompanied by letters directed to the chairman
of the approving authority and signed by a responsible officer of the
water company, sewer authority and utility which provides gas,
telephone and electricity that has jurisdiction in the area. Such
letters shall approve each proposed utility installation design and
state who will construct the facility.
(3) The final plat shall be accompanied by a statement by the
Municipal Engineer that he is in receipt of a map showing all
utilities and other improvements (both in the development and offtract
improvements) in exact location and elevation; that he has
examined the street drainage, erosion, stormwater control and
excavation plans and found that the interests of the Borough and of
nearby properties are fully protected and identifying those portions
of any improvements already installed; and that the developer has
either:
100. Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 240-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-53
1:361
(a) Installed all improvements in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter and the preliminary plat approval,
with a maintenance guaranty accompanying the final plat; or
(b) Posted a performance guaranty that has been approved by the
governing body.
B. Action by approving authority of final subdivision plat.
(1) The approving authority shall review the submission for its
completeness and take action on accepting or rejecting the
submission as a complete application. If rejected, the applicant
shall be notified within 45 days of submission. (See § 240-14.) If
accepted as a complete application, the approving authority shall
grant final approval if the detailed drawings, specifications and
estimates conform to the standards established by this chapter, the
conditions of previous reviews, the changes and/or conditions of
previous reviews, the changes and/or conditions required on the
informal plat in cases where there has been no preliminary plat,
and the standards prescribed by the Map Filing Law, N.J.S.A.
46:23-9.9 et seq. In the case of a minor or exempt subdivision or
minor or exempt site plan where there has been no previous
submission of an informal or preliminary plat, the approving
authority may waive the required notices and hearing. In the case
of a planned development, the approving authority may permit
minimal deviations from the conditions of preliminary plat approval
necessitated by a change of conditions beyond the control of the
developer since the date of preliminary approval. Minimal
deviations shall not require the developer to submit another
application for preliminary approval.
(2) Final approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days after
submission of a complete application to the administrative officer
or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant. An approved final plat shall be signed by the chairman
and secretary of the approving authority, or the vice chairman or
assistant secretary in their absence, respectively. Failure of the
approving authority to act within the period prescribed shall
constitute final approval, and a certificate of the Zoning Officer as
to the failure of the approving authority to act shall be issued on
request of the applicant. Such certificate shall be sufficient in lieu
of the written endorsement or other evidence of approval herein
required and shall be so accepted by the County Recording Officer
for purposes of filing subdivision plats.
(3) Whenever review or approval of the application by the County
Planning Board is required by N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3 or 40:27-6.6, the
approving authority shall condition any approval that it grants
upon timely receipt of a favorable report from the County Planning
Board or upon its failure to submit a report within the required
time period.
§ 240-53 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-53
1:362
(4) Final approval of a minor subdivision shall expire 190 days from the
date of municipal approval unless a plat in conformity with such
approval, including any conditions imposed by the approving
authority, and in conformity with the provisions of the Map Filing
Law (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.), or a deed clearly describing the
approved minor subdivision is filed by the developer with the
County Recording Officer, the Municipal Engineer and the Borough
Tax Assessor. Such plat or deed accepted for such filing shall have
been signed by the chairman and secretary of the approving
authority or the vice chairman or assistant secretary in their
absence, respectively. In reviewing the application for development
for a proposed minor subdivision, the approving authority may
accept a plat not in conformity with the Map Filing Law, provided
that, if the developer chooses to file the minor subdivision by plat
rather than deed, such plat shall conform to the provisions of said
law.
(5) Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95 days from the
date of signing of the plat unless within such a period the plat shall
have been duly filed by the developer with the County Recording
Officer. The approving authority may for good cause shown extend
the period for recording for an additional period not to exceed 190
days from the date of the signing of the plat. No subdivision plat
shall be accepted for filing by the County Recording Officer until it
has been approved by the approving authority as indicated on the
instrument by the signature of the chairman and secretary of the
approving authority, or the vice chairman or assistant secretary in
their absence, respectively, or a certificate has been issued as to
the failure of the approving authority to act within the required
time. The signatures of the chairman and secretary shall not be
affixed until the developer has posted the required guaranties. If
the County Recording Officer records any plat without such
approval, such recording shall be deemed null and void, and, upon
request of the municipality, the plat shall be expunged from the
official records. It shall be the duty of the County Recording Officer
to notify the Planning Board, in writing, within seven days of the
filing of any plat, identifying such instrument by its title, date of
filing and official number.
(6) Provided that the approved final subdivision plat has been filed
with the County Recording Officer, the zoning requirements
applicable to the preliminary approval first granted to a site plan or
a major subdivision and all other rights conferred upon the
developer pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.), whether conditionally or otherwise, shall not be
changed for a period of two years after the date of final approval. If
the developer has followed the standards prescribed for final
approval, the approving authority may extend such period of
protection for extensions of one year, but not to exceed three
extensions. Upon granting of final approval, the rights conferred
§ 240-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-53
1:363
§ 240-54. Submission of final site plan.
upon the applicant by the granting of preliminary approval shall be
terminated upon final approval.
(7) Provided that the approved final plat of a minor subdivision has
been filed with the County Recording Officer, the zoning
requirements and general terms and conditions, whether
conditional or otherwise, upon which minor subdivision approval
was granted shall not be changed for a period of two years after the
date of minor subdivision approval.
(8) In the case of a subdivision or site plan for a planned development
of 50 acres or more or a conventional subdivision or site plan of 150
acres or more, the approving authority may grant the rights
referred to in Subsection B(6) and (7) above for such period of time
longer than two years, as shall be determined by the approving
authority to be reasonable, taking into consideration the number of
dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible under final
approval, economic conditions and the comprehensiveness of the
development. The developer may apply for and the approving
authority may thereafter grant an extension of final approval for
such additional period of time as shall be determined by the
approving authority to be reasonable taking into consideration the
number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible
under final approval, the number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area remaining to be developed, economic
conditions and the comprehensiveness of the development.
(9) The developer shall supply sufficient copies of the approved final
plat so the administrative officer can distribute one copy to each of
the following: Borough Clerk, Construction Official, Tax Assessor,
County Planning Board, Borough Planning Board and any other
agency or person directed by the approving authority and shall
supply one translucent cloth or Mylar copy to the Municipal
Engineer.
A. Filing procedure.
(1) The site plan and an application for final approval shall be
submitted to the Zoning Officer with the required fee. If there have
been no changes in the approved preliminary site plan, the same
plan may be used in connection with the application for final
approval and no further final plan shall be required for approval.
Ten white prints (blue or black-on-white) of the site plan shall
accompany the application. Ten completed copies of the application
form and final plat checklist must be submitted along with the
prints. The performance guaranty approved by the governing body,
including off-tract improvements, if any; any maintenance
guaranties; the applicable fee; certification by the Tax Collector
that all taxes are paid to date; certification by the Soil Conservation
§ 240-53 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-54
1:364
District pursuant to the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act,
Chapter 251 of the Laws of 1975(N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.).
(2) Where utility services are to be extended to the development, the
final site plan shall be accompanied by letters directed to the
chairman of the approving authority and signed by a responsible
officer of the water company, sewer authority and utility which
provides gas, telephone and electricity that has jurisdiction in the
area. Such letters shall approve each proposed utility installation
design and state who will construct the facility.
(3) The final site plan shall be accompanied by a statement by the
Municipal Engineer that he is in receipt of a map showing all
utilities and other improvements (both in the development and offtract
improvements) in exact location and elevation; that he has
examined the street drainage, erosion, stormwater control and
excavation plans and found that the interests of the Borough and of
nearby properties are fully protected and identifying those portions
of any improvements already installed; and that the developer has
either:
(a) Installed all improvements in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter and the preliminary plat approval,
with a maintenance guaranty accompanying the final plat; or
(b) Posted a performance guaranty that has been approved by the
governing body.
B. Action by approving authority on final site plan.
(1) The approving authority shall review the submission for its
completeness and take action on accepting or rejecting the
submission as a complete application. If rejected, the applicant
shall be notified within 45 days of submission. (See § 240-14.) If
accepted as a complete application, the approving authority shall
grant final approval if the detailed drawings, specifications and
estimates conform to the standards established by this chapter, the
conditions of previous reviews, the changes and/or conditions of
previous reviews, the changes and/or conditions required on the
informal plat in cases where there has been no preliminary plat and
the standards prescribed by the Map Filing Law, N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9
et seq. In the case of a minor or exempt subdivision or minor or
exempt site plan where there has been no previous submission of
an informal or preliminary plat, the approving authority may waive
the required notices and hearing. In the case of a planned
development, the approving authority may permit minimal
deviations from the conditions of preliminary plat approval
necessitated by a change of conditions beyond the control of the
developer since the date of preliminary approval. Minimal
deviations shall not require the developer to submit another
application for preliminary approval.
§ 240-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-54
1:365
§ 240-55. As-built plans; certification of completed improvements.
(2) Final approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days after
submission of a complete application to the administrative officer
or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant. An approved final plat shall be signed by the chairman
and secretary of the approving authority, or the vice chairman or
assistant secretary in their absence, respectively. Failure of the
approving authority to act within the period prescribed shall
constitute final approval, and a certificate of the administrative
officer as to the failure of the approving authority to act shall be
issued on request of the applicant. Such certificate shall be
sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence of
approval herein required and shall be so accepted by the County
Recording Officer for purposes of filing subdivision plats.
(3) The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval
first granted to a site plan and all other rights conferred upon the
developer pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, whether
conditionally or otherwise, shall not be changed for a period of two
years after the date of final approval. If the developer has followed
the standards prescribed for final approval, the approving authority
may extend such period of protection for extensions of one year, but
not to exceed three extensions. Upon granting of final approval, the
rights conferred upon the applicant by the granting of preliminary
approval shall be terminated upon final approval.
(4) Upon final approval by the approving board, a copy of the plat shall
be filed with each of the following: the Zoning Officer, Engineer of
the Board, Borough Clerk, Construction Official, Borough Planner,
Tax Assessor and any other agency or person directed by the
approving authority.
A. Preparation. After installation of the improvements required by this
chapter, the subdivider or applicant for site plan approval shall cause to
be prepared, signed and sealed by a licensed professional engineer of
the State of New Jersey plans showing the location, as built, of all
improvements required by this chapter, including, without intending to
limit the generality hereof, the location of water mains, gas mains and
underground supply lines for light, power and telephone service, septic
systems, well heads and package treatment plans and all of their
appurtenances.
B. Alternative. In lieu of providing the foregoing as-built plans, the
applicant's engineer may certify by letter addressed to the Board that
the improvements have been constructed within the approved
preliminary plat and final plat in the case of a subdivision and the
approved final plat in the case of a site plan. In the event of any changes
from the approved preliminary or approved final plat in the case of a
subdivision, such plats shall be resubmitted to the approving board, in
§ 240-54 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-55
1:366
all details to show all such changes, duly signed and sealed by a
licensed professional engineer of the State of New Jersey.
§ 240-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-55
1:367

ARTICLE VII
Design Standards for Subdivision
§ 240-56. General statement.
§ 240-57. Existing permits, approvals and variances.
Nothing in this chapter shall require any changes in a building permit, site
plan or zoning variance which was approved before the enactment of this
chapter, provided that construction shall have been started within one year
from the effective date of this chapter and the project shall be continuously
pursued to completion; otherwise said approvals and permits shall be void.
§ 240-58. Streets.
All developments shall be served by paved streets. The arrangement of
streets not shown on the Master Plan or Official Map shall provide for the
appropriate extension of existing streets, conform to the topography, as far
as practical, and allow for continued extension into adjoining undeveloped
tracts with a minimum right-of-way of 50 feet. When a development adjoins
land capable of being developed further, suitable provisions shall be made
for future street access.
A. All developments shall conform to design standards encouraging sound
development patterns within the Borough. Where an official map or
master plan has been adopted, the development shall conform to same.
B. Character of land. Lands identified in the Master Plan as critical areas
or having severe or moderate soil characteristics, particularly as the
lands relate to flooding, improper drainage, shallow depth to water
table, steep slopes, rock formations, utility easements or similar
features shall not be used as buildable areas unless adequate and
acceptable methods meeting the regulations of this chapter and all
other regulations are incorporated.
C. Residential site improvement standards. Applications for residential
subdivisions shall comply with the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:21.
A. Local streets. Local streets shall be so designed as to discourage
through traffic unless deemed necessary by the approving authority.
B. Subdivision abutting arterial streets. Subdivisions abutting arterial
streets may be required to provide a reverse frontage with a buffer strip
for planting or some other means of separation of through and local
traffic, as the approving authority may determine to be appropriate.
C. Pavement width of streets. The pavement width of all streets shall be a
minimum of 30 feet for all local streets and may be greater for collector
and arterial streets.
D. Minimum right-of-way width. The right-of-way width shall be measured
from lot line to lot line and shall not be less than 50 feet in any case,
§ 240-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-58
1:369
except when shown at a greater width on the Master Plan or Official
Map of the Borough of Edgewater or when said street constitutes an
extension of an existing street with a greater width than 50 feet.
E. Substandard street right-of-way and pavement width. In connection
with subdivisions that adjoin or include existing streets that do not
conform to widths as shown on the Master Plan or Official Map, or the
street width requirements of this chapter, the applicant shall dedicate
additional right-of-way or pavement width along either one or both
sides of said road. If the subdivision is along one side only, 1/2 of the
required extra width shall be dedicated.
F. Street grades. Grades of arterial and collector streets shall not exceed
6%. Grades on other streets shall not exceed 10%. Maximum grades on
any streets within 100 feet of an intersection shall be 3%. No street
shall have a minimum grade of less than 1/2%. Road cross sections
(crown) shall range between 2% and 3%.
G. Street intersections. No local streets shall be part of a four-way
intersection. Intersecting street center lines shall be as nearly at right
angles as possible, and in no case shall they be less than 60° at the point
of intersection. The block corners at intersections shall be rounded at
the curbline with a curve having a radius of not less than 20 feet.
Curblines shall be parallel to the center line. Approaches to all
intersections shall follow a straight line for at least 100 feet measured
from the curbline of the intersecting streets to the beginning of the
curve. No more than two street center lines shall meet or intersect at
any one point. Collector and/or arterial streets intersecting another
street from opposite sides shall either be directly opposite each other
without offset or shall have at least 250 feet offset distance between
center lines. Street jogs with center-line offsets on local streets of less
than 125 feet shall be prohibited. Any development abutting an existing
street which is classified as an arterial or collector street shall adhere
as closely as possible to having no more than one new street every 800
feet on the same side of the street.
H. Reverse curve tangents. A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be
introduced between reverse curves on arterial and collector streets.
I. Street line deflection. When connecting street lines deflect from each
other at any one point by more than 10° and not more than 45°, they
shall be connected by a curve with a radius of not less than 100 feet, for
minor streets, and 300 feet, for arterial and collector streets.
J. Change in grade. All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical
curves of sufficient degree of curvature to provide a smooth transition
and proper sight distance.
K. Cul-de-sac streets. Cul-de-sac streets shall not exceed a length of 600
feet. A turnaround shall be provided at the end of the cul-de-sac with a
right-of-way radius of not less than 50 feet and a curbline radius of not
less than 40 feet. The center point for the radius shall be on the center
§ 240-58 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-58
1:370
line of the associated street or, if offset, to a point where the curbline
radius becomes a tangent to one of the curblines of the associated
street. If a dead-end street is of a temporary nature, a similar
turnaround shall be provided and provisions made for future extension
of the street and reversion of the excess right-of-way to the adjoining
properties.
L. Streets shall be constructed in accordance with the standard
specifications of the New Jersey Department of Transportation.
Pavement section shall consist of the following:
(1) Arterial and collector streets.
(a) Dense graded aggregate subbase: six inches compacted
thickness.
(b) Bituminous stabilized base course: six inches compacted
thickness.
(c) FABC surface course: two inches compacted thickness.
(2) Local streets.
(a) Dense graded aggregate subbase: six inches compacted
thickness.
(b) Bituminous stabilized base course: four inches compacted
thickness.
(c) FABC surface course: two inches compacted thickness.
(3) Where subbase conditions are wet, springy or of such nature that
surfacing would be inadvisable without first treating the subbase,
these areas shall be excavated to a depth of at least 12 inches
below the proposed subgrade and filled with a suitable subbase
material, as determined by the Municipal Engineer. Where
required by the Engineer, a system of porous concrete pipe,
subsurface drains shall be constructed beneath the surface of the
paving and connected to a suitable drain. After the subbase
material has been properly placed and compacted, the surfacing
material shall be applied.
M. All streets, together with curbs, and sidewalks appurtenant thereto and
all driveways, internal roads and alleys in planned community
developments, commercial or industrial developments shall be
constructed in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. All
streets, curbs and sidewalks in residential developments shall be
constructed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:21, Residential Site
Improvement Standards.
N. Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be required along both sides of a street in all
subdivisions, unless waived by the approving authority. A minimum
walkway width of four feet, set back minimally four feet from the
§ 240-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-58
1:371
§ 240-59. Street signs, street names and traffic signs.
curbline, shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of
the Borough Engineer and in conformance with Chapter 240 of the
Code of the Borough of Edgewater.
O. Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of existing streets,
lots shall begin at such new line, and all setbacks shall be measured
from such new line.
P. Where the property to be subdivided is next to or includes a railroad
right-of-way, suitable provisions shall be made for such things as road
crossings, screening or buffers, freight access, warning signals and
signs in recognition of the relationship between the railroad and the
subdivision.
Q. Curbing. Curbing shall be required on both sides of all streets within a
subdivision. Belgian (granite) block or concrete curbs shall be used on
all Borough streets according to the following standards:
(1) Construction of all curbs shall conform to NJDOT Standards and
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, 1989, Section
605, and supplements thereto, and shall meet the Borough
Engineer's approval. All concrete to be used shall be Class B, as
specified in NJDOT Standards and Specifications and supplements
thereto.
(2) Granite curbs shall have a ten- to twelve-inch vertical length.
(3) Curbs shall be set in a Class B concrete base at least six inches
thick in front and rear of the granite block and at least nine inches
thick below the block. The combined block and concrete base shall
have a minimum vertical dimension of 18 inches.
(4) Curbs shall have a six-inch exposed vertical face above the finished
pavement surface.
(5) Joints shall measure 3/8 inch to 1/2 inch in width.
(6) The curb height at all driveway openings shall be lowered to a point
two inches above the finished pavement.
(7) The curbing shall be designed to provide barrier-free curb ramps
constructed in accordance with the Design Standards for Curb
Ramps for the Physically Handicapped of the New Jersey
Department of Transportation.
A. Design and placement of traffic signs included in the Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways shall follow
the requirements specified in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices for Streets and Highways, published by the United States
Department of Transportation and adopted by the New Jersey
Department of Transportation.
§ 240-58 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-59
1:372
§ 240-60. Block patterns.
§ 240-61. Streetlighting.
A lighting plan prepared by a qualified individual shall be provided with
major subdivision applications. Streetlighting standards of a type and
number approved by the approving authority and Municipal Engineer shall
be installed at street intersections and elsewhere as deemed necessary by
the approving authority, with intersections involving collector and arterial
streets receiving priority consideration for streetlights. The lights shall be
installed solely for the purpose of illuminating the roadways and shall be of
such a nature as to minimize the illumination on adjacent properties. The
developer shall provide for the installation of underground service.
§ 240-62. Lots.
B. There shall be at least two street signs furnished at each four-way
intersection and one street sign at each T intersection. All signs shall be
installed free of visual obstruction and shall show the name of both
intersecting streets. The design of street name signs should be
consistent, of a style appropriate to the community, of a uniform size
and color, and erected in accordance with local standards.
C. At signalized intersections, street signs shall be located on the
overhead arm supporting the traffic signal or otherwise suitably
suspended over the intersection. Roadway clearance shall be a
minimum of 15 feet from the bottom of the sign or supporting
equipment to the top of the paved surface.
D. Street names. No new street shall have a name which will duplicate or
so nearly duplicate in spelling or phonetic sound the names of existing
streets in Edgewater, Fort Lee, Cliffside Park and North Bergen. The
continuation of an existing street shall have the same name. The names
of new streets must be approved by the Mayor and Council.
A. Block length and width or acreage within adjacent roads shall be such
as to accommodate the size of lot required in the area by the Zoning
Ordinance and to provide for convenient access, circulation control and
safety of street traffic.
B. In blocks of 1,000 feet or more in length, pedestrian crosswalks may be
required in locations deemed necessary by the approving authority.
Such walkway shall be at least 10 feet wide in right-of-way with a fivefoot-
wide improved pavement surface. Said walkway may also include
other improvements, including streetlighting.
C. For all uses, including commercial, industrial and planned development
group areas, block sizes shall be sufficient to accommodate the
proposed uses and to permit reasonable access, circulation and firefighting
and emergency services.
§ 240-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-62
1:373
§ 240-63. Easements and natural features.
§ 240-64. Water mains, culverts, storm and sanitary sewers.
All installations of water mains, culverts and storm and sanitary sewers
shall be connected with an approved system and shall be adequate to handle
all present and probable future development.
§ 240-65. Public utilities.
A. Lot dimensions and areas shall not be less than the requirements of the
Zoning Ordinance.
B. Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight
streets and radial to curved streets.
C. Each lot must front upon an approved and improved street with a rightof-
way width of at least 50 feet in width, except as provided herein.
D. Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of existing streets,
lots shall begin at such extra width line, and all setbacks shall be
measured from such line.
E. Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for their
intended use, due to such factors as rock formations, drainage
conditions, watercourses, historic sites, flood conditions or similar
circumstances, the approving agency may, after adequate investigation,
withhold approval of such lots.
A. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway,
channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or
drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such
watercourses. The size of such easements or rights-of-way shall be
approved by the Borough Engineer.
B. Natural features such as trees, brooks, hilltops and views shall be
preserved whenever possible in designing any subdivision containing
such features.
A. For all major subdivisions, the applicant shall arrange with the serving
utility for the underground installation of all utility distribution supply
lines and service connections in accordance with the provisions of the
applicable standard terms and conditions incorporated as part of its
tariffs, as the same are then on file with the State of New Jersey Board
of Public Utility Commissioners, and shall submit to the approving
authority, prior to the granting of final approval, a written instrument
from each serving utility which shall evidence full compliance with the
provisions of this subsection; provided, however, that lots in such
subdivisions which abut existing streets where overhead electric or
telephone distribution supply lines have theretofore been installed on
any portion of the street involved may be supplied with electric and
telephone service from such overhead lines, but the service connections
§ 240-62 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-65
1:374
§ 240-66. Soil erosion and sediment control.
All development applications shall comply with the regulations set forth in
the Edgewater Soil Removal Ordinance, Chapter 362.
§ 240-67. Monuments.
Monuments shall be the size and shape required by N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.11
(the Map Filing Law, as amended), shall be placed in accordance with said
statute and shall be indicated on the final plat.
§ 240-68. Shade trees and landscaping.
from the utilities' overhead lines shall be installed underground.
However, the applicant shall not be required to install electric
distribution supply lines underground if the Board of Public Works of
the Borough of Edgewater requires such lines to utilize a voltage of 26
kilovolts or greater and the Board of Public Works passes a resolution
declaring that such distribution lines would present exceptional
operation and/or safety problems if installed underground. The location
of access facilities for servicing the utility in the proposed subdivision
shall be developed in conjunction with and as part of the complete
subdivision plan.
B. Whenever the utility is not installed in the public right-of-way, an
appropriate utility easement not less than 20 feet in width shall be
provided.
C. The approving agencies of the Borough of Edgewater may in their
discretion waive the installation of the underground utilities where
such installation will result in peculiar and exceptional practical
difficulties to or exceptional and undue hardship upon the applicant by
reason of exceptional topographic conditions or by reason of other
extraordinary and exceptional situation or condition of the lands in such
subdivision. The Borough shall make the determination as to the
location of aboveground utility poles.
D. Utility areas shall be planted with grass or ground cover or treated with
other suitable cover material.
A. Shade trees shall be provided in all major subdivisions and in minor
subdivisions where deemed appropriate by the Planning Board. Trees
shall be planted within the subdivision along each side of the street at
proper intervals and in types, sizes and locations conducive to healthy
growth, with graded and seeded or sodded planting strips within street
rights-of-way, and according to any standards adopted by the governing
body or Borough Shade Tree Board so as not to interfere with street
paving, sidewalks or utilities.
B. All trees shall have a minimum diameter of 2 1/2 inches measured three
feet above the ground and shall be of a species approved by the
§ 240-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-68
1:375
§ 240-69. Environmental impact report.
approving authority. Trees shall be planted 40 feet to 60 feet apart and
parallel to, but no more than 20 feet from, the curbline and shall be
balled and burlapped, nursery grown, free from insects and disease,
and true species and variety.
C. A landscape plan prepared by a certified landscape architect, certified
by the New Jersey Board of Landscape Architects, or other qualified
individual shall be submitted with each major subdivision application.
Landscaping shall be provided to promote a desirable visual
environment, screen parking and loading areas, provide windbreaks for
winter winds and summer cooling for buildings, streets and parking and
to mitigate adverse visual impacts.
D. Landscaped areas located within 50 feet of a street right-of-way shall
consist of a mix of shade trees, vegetative ground covers, including
both perennials and annuals, shrubs and turf. Installed landscape
ground cover materials such as stones, pebbles and other nonorganic
materials shall not be permitted. These requirements apply to all
properties with 100 feet or more of street frontage. Irrigation systems
for the landscaped areas are required to be installed to ensure the
continued viability of the plantings. [Added 10-1-2001 by Ord. No.
1219-2001]
A. At the Board's discretion, an environmental impact report may be
required to accompany preliminary subdivisions.
B. The environmental impact report shall comply with the following
unless, as a result of data submitted prior to the preliminary plat, the
approving authority shall have waived or modified certain portions of
these requirements:
(1) A description of the development specifying what is to be done
during construction and operation, how it is to be done and
practical alternate plans to achieve the objective(s), all with the
intent of minimizing environmental impacts.
(2) An inventory of the following on-site environmental conditions and
an assessment of the probable impact of the development upon
them: water supply; water quality; air quality; geology; soils; rock
and properties thereof, including erosion capabilities and
limitations; floodplain protection; sewage disposal; topography,
including slopes in excess of 15%; vegetation protection; wetlands;
noise characteristics and levels; land use; site aesthetics; and
historic landmarks. Air and water quality shall be described with
reference to standards of the Department of Environmental
Protection of the State of New Jersey, and soils shall be described
with reference to Natural Resources Conservation Service
categories and characteristics as they relate to such things as
§ 240-68 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-69
1:376
§ 240-70. Off-site and off-tract improvements.
Before final approval the approving authority may require the payment
of the developer's pro rata share of the following off-site and off-tract
erosion, sewage capability, floodplains and seasonal high-water
table.
(3) A list and the status of the approvals needed from federal, state or
county agencies, including comments of these governmental
agencies.
(4) An evaluation of any adverse environmental impacts which cannot
be avoided, including air and water pollution, noise, sedimentation
and siltation, increase in Borough services or capital needs and
consequences to the Borough tax structure.
(5) A description of steps to be taken to avoid or minimize adverse
environmental impacts during construction and operation,
including shipping, receiving, storage and the methods of handling
the identified quantities of chemical, corrosive, toxic and hazardous
materials anticipated in all aspects of the operation, as well as
attaching appropriate maps, schedules and other explanatory data.
C. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the approving authority may waive all
or part of an environmental impact report if sufficient evidence is
submitted to support that conclusion. Waivers shall be based upon
consideration of the following by the approving authority:
(1) The stability of the soil during and after the proposed alteration.
(2) The drainage patterns and effect on surface water runoff.
(3) The potential effect on animals and significant plant species.
(4) Potential air and water pollution, especially any potential
environmental changes on critical slope areas or sewage disposal
system.
(5) Problems related to rock removal.
(6) The amount of resulting displacement of soil.
(7) Potential noise pollution.
(8) Increased problems of industrial or nonindustrial waste disposal
(subject to review of such problems by the Board of Health).
(9) Circumstances or conditions that are peculiar to the site or the
application under consideration that are not generally applicable to
sites or applications in the same general locality and that would
result in the imposition of undue burden on the applicant if an
environmental impact report were required.
§ 240-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-70
1:377
improvements: street improvements, water system, sewerage, drainage
facilities and easements therefor.
A. Essential off-site and off-tract improvements may be required to be
installed or a performance guaranty furnished in lieu thereof, with the
total cost borne by the developer.
(1) Where a development has no direct access to an improved street or
public or private central water supply or central sanitary sewer and
does not qualify for individual sewage disposal systems, the
approving authority may nevertheless grant final approval if the
developer shall acquire and improve such street between the
development and an existing improved street and, in the case of
water/sewer system(s), if the developer shall acquire and improve
such water and sanitary sewer connections between the
development and existing facilities as approved by the approving
authority, governing body and serving utility company.
(2) Where drainage waters are diverted from the development into
other drainage systems or onto other lands or streets and they are
not adequate to accommodate the additional waters, the approving
authority may grant final approval if the developer shall acquire,
improve and dedicate to the Borough such enlarged, additional or
new drainage facilities as approved by the approving authority and
governing body.
(3) Such off-site and off-tract improvements shall be subject to the
design standards of this chapter. In lieu of the developer
performing such off-site and off-tract work, the developer may
request and the governing body may enter into an agreement for
such work to be performed by the Borough or its contractors at the
cost of the developer.
(4) Where the approving authority determines that off-site and off-tract
improvements are essential to the development and the developer
does not consent to the improvements, the application shall be
denied, without prejudice, to a future application at such time as
the conditions no longer apply.
B. Advisable off-site and off-tract improvements. Where the approving
authority determines that off-site and off-tract improvements would be
advisable, although not essential, and the improvements would promote
the objectives of this chapter and can be most appropriately
accomplished in connection with the development, and particularly
where the off-site and off-tract improvements would be required to be
made as a local improvement by the Borough with the costs thereof to
be assessed against all properties specially benefitted thereby,
including the property of the developer, the following provisions shall
apply:
§ 240-70 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-70
1:378
(1) During the processing of the application, the approving authority
shall refer its recommendations for off-site and off-tract
improvements to the governing body.
(2) If the governing body concurs, the Municipal Engineer or other
authority retained by the Borough shall determine the nature of the
off-site and off-tract improvements, including:
(a) The needs created by the applicant's proposed development.
(b) The then-existing needs in the area notwithstanding any work
of the applicant.
(3) The Municipal Engineer or other authority shall estimate and
report the costs of such work, including all costs to be in any local
improvement ordinance and those to be assessed to the developer,
and including costs for construction, engineering, any easement or
right-of-way acquisition, legal work, advertising, contingencies,
bonding and assessments.
(4) Based upon the above report and the recommendations of the
approving authority, the governing body shall determine whether
to undertake such off-site and off-tract improvements as a local
improvement.
(5) If the governing body will not adopt such ordinance, the final
development shall be designed accordingly, and the approving
authority shall proceed on that basis.
(6) If the determination shall be to adopt such local improvements
ordinance, the governing body shall proceed in the following
manner:
(a) If sufficient funds are available for the initial appropriation, the
governing body may appropriate such funds and adopt such
ordinance. All subsequent proceedings for the making and
assessment of the cost of the off-site and off-tract
improvements shall be in accordance with such ordinance.
(b) If sufficient funds are not available for the initial appropriation,
the governing body may determine the anticipated amount that
the lands of the applicant would be expected to be assessed.
[1] The amount determined by the governing body shall then
be deposited by the applicant with the Borough Treasurer
prior to final approval and prior introduction of such local
improvement ordinance.
[2] Such deposit shall be made concurrent with an agreement
between the applicant and the Borough concerning the
uses of the deposit, which shall include the following
stipulations: that said funds shall be used by the Borough
solely for the construction of such off-site and off-tract
§ 240-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-70
1:379
improvements as specified in said agreement and for the
other expenses incidental thereto and the acquisition of
any easements or rights-of-way in connection therewith;
that such deposit may be appropriated by the Borough,
with other funds of the Borough, toward the
accomplishment of such purposes and may be co-mingled
with other appropriated funds and expended by the
Borough within a specified time agreed upon by the
applicant, said funds shall be returned to the applicant;
that, upon completion of the work by the Borough or its
contractors, the properties specially benefitted by such
improvements shall be assessed as provided by law,
including the property of applicant; and that the
applicant's deposit shall be credited against the
assessment made upon the applicant's property, whether
or not the applicant is then the owner thereof, and if
such deposit was less than the amount ultimately assessed
against such property, then the owner(s) of said property
shall pay the difference between the deposit, the amount
assessed, and the excess shall be refunded to the applicant
without interest.
[3] Where said off-site and off-tract improvements are found
by the approving authority to be advisable and important
to the sound development of the site, although the off-site
and off-tract improvements may not be found to be the
type of essential off-site and off-tract improvements as
defined above, but the developer is unwilling to make such
deposit as specified above, then there shall be no final
approval until funds become available for the initial
appropriation required to adopt the local improvement
ordinance.
(7) The determination of the governing body whether or not to proceed
toward the adoption of a local improvement ordinance shall be
made within 30 days after the referral by the approving authority
unless such time shall be extended with the consent of the
applicant. If the determination is not made within the designated
period, the approving authority may proceed as if the governing
body had determined that it would not adopt such local
improvement ordinance.
§ 240-70 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-70
1:380
ARTICLE VIII
Design Standards for Site Plans
§ 240-71. General statement.
§ 240-72. Existing permits, approvals and variances.
Nothing in this chapter shall require any changes in a building permit, site
plan or zoning variance which was approved before the enactment of this
chapter, provided that construction shall have been started within one year
from the effective date of this chapter and the project shall be continuously
pursued to completion; otherwise said approvals and permits shall be void.
§ 240-73. Curbs.
Unless waived by the approving authority, granite (belgian) block or
concrete curb shall be installed along all streets, driveways and parking
areas in according to the following standards:
A. All developments shall conform to design standards encouraging sound
development patterns within the Borough. Where an Official Map or
Master Plan has been adopted, the development shall conform to same.
B. Character of land. Lands identified in the Master Plan as critical areas
or having severe or moderate soil characteristics, particularly as the
lands relate to flooding, improper drainage, shallow depth to water
table, steep slopes, rock formations, utility easements or similar
features, shall not be used as buildable areas unless adequate and
acceptable methods meeting the regulations of this chapter and all
other regulations are incorporated.
C. Applications for residential developments shall comply with the
standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:21, Residential Site Improvement
Standards, with the exception of parking requirements.
A. Construction of all curbs shall conform to NJDOT Standards and
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, 1989, Section 605,
and supplements thereto, and shall meet the Borough Engineer's
approval. All concrete to be used shall be Class B, as specified in NJDOT
Standards and Specifications and supplements thereto.
B. Granite curbs shall have a ten- to twelve-inch vertical length.
C. Curbs shall be set in a Class B concrete base at least six inches thick in
front and rear of the granite block and at least nine inches thick below
the block. The combined block and concrete base shall have a minimum
vertical dimension of 18 inches.
D. Curbs shall have a six-inch exposed vertical face above the finished
pavement surface.
E. Joints shall measure 3/8 inch to 1/2 inch in width.
§ 240-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-73
1:381
§ 240-74. Sidewalks. [Amended 5-6-2002 by Ord. No. 1236-2002]
Sidewalks shall be required to be installed along all public streets and
rights-of-way, private access drives and roads and at such other locations
as may be determined by the approving authority to be in the interest of
public safety considering the probable volume of pedestrian traffic, school
bus stops, and the development's location in relation to other populated
areas and the general type of improvement intended. Sidewalks shall be
required to be at least four feet wide and located as determined by the
approving authority. Sidewalks shall be placed upon a compacted subgrade
overlaid with at least four inches of porous material such as sand or gravel.
Concrete sidewalks shall be at least six inches thick, of Class B concrete
having a twenty-eight-day compressive strength of 4,000 pounds per square
inch, and shall be air-entrained. Blacktop or sidewalks of other approved
materials shall be constructed as approved by the approving authority
upon the advice of the Borough Engineer. Where sidewalks cross curbs,
curb ramps shall be provided. Preformed expansion joint material shall be
placed at twenty-foot maximum intervals where sidewalks abut curbing or a
structure.
§ 240-75. Drainage.
All streets shall be designed to accommodate storm drainage along streets,
including the installation of drainage inlets and pipes. Any system shall
be adequate to handle all water which originates within the development
and beyond, calculated on the basis of maximum potential development as
permitted under this chapter. No water shall be diverted as to overload
existing drainage structures on other lands without proper and approved
provisions being made for taking care of these conditions, including off-tract
improvements.
F. The curb height at all driveway openings shall be lowered to a point two
inches above the finished pavement.
G. The curbing shall be designed to provide barrier-free curb ramps
constructed in accordance with the Design Standards for Curb Ramps
for the Physically Handicapped of the New Jersey Department of
Transportation.
A. A twenty-five-year storm curve shall be used in computing stormwater
runoff.
B. The pipe size shall be determined by acceptable drainage design
procedures but shall not be less than 15 inches in diameter.
C. Drainage inlets shall be located at intervals of not more than 400 feet or
such shorter distances as required to prevent the flow of surface water
from exceeding six cubic feet per second at the drainage inlet. Access
manholes shall be placed at maximum five-hundred-foot intervals
throughout the system and at pipe junctions.
§ 240-73 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-75
1:382
§ 240-76. Easements.
§ 240-77. Environmental impact report.
D. Dished gutters on Borough streets shall be permitted only at
intersections involving local streets. Dished gutters shall not be
permitted on arterial or collector streets.
E. Storm drain pipes running longitudinally along streets shall not be
located under curbing.
F. Storm drain pipes shall be the size specified and laid to the exact lines
and grades approved by the Municipal Engineer. Specifications for
manholes, inlets and storm drains shall follow the 1989 State Highway
Specifications, as amended.
G. Grading shall direct drainage away from all buildings, prevent the
collection of stormwater in pools and avoid the concentration of
stormwater from one lot to another.
H. Where any development is traversed by a watercourse or drainage
ditch, a drainage right-of-way easement shall be provided and
dedicated to the Borough of sufficient width to accommodate expected
stormwater runoff in the future based upon reasonable growth
potential in the Borough. A minimum of 15 feet beyond the bank top on
at least one side shall be provided for access to the drainage right-ofway.
See § 240-76.
I. Where storm drain pipes are installed outside of streets, easements or
rights-of-way shall be required in accordance with § 240-76.
A. Easements shall be along side and/or rear property lines where possible
and shall not be less than 15 feet wide.
B. All easements shall be dimensioned on the plat and shall be identified
as follows: "(insert purpose of easement) easement granted to the
Borough of Edgewater as provided for in the Edgewater Land Use and
Development Regulations Ordinance."
A. At the Board's discretion, an environmental impact report may be
required to accompany site plan applications.
B. The environmental impact report shall comply with the following
unless, as a result of data submitted prior to the preliminary plat, the
approving authority shall have waived or modified certain portions of
these requirements:
(1) A description of the development specifying what is to be done
during construction and operation, how it is to be done and
practical alternate plans to achieve the objective(s), all with the
intent of minimizing environmental impacts.
§ 240-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-77
1:383
(2) An inventory of the following on-site environmental conditions and
an assessment of the probable impact of the development upon
them: water supply; water quality; air quality; geology; soils; rock
and properties thereof, including erosion capabilities and
limitations; floodplain protection; sewage disposal; topography,
including slopes in excess of 15%; vegetation protection; wetlands;
noise characteristics and levels; land use; site aesthetics; and
historic landmarks. Air and water quality shall be described with
reference to standards of the Department of Environmental
Protection of the State of New Jersey, and soils shall be described
with reference to Natural Resources Conservation Service
categories and characteristics as they relate to such things as
erosion, sewage capability, floodplains and seasonal high-water
table.
(3) A list and the status of the approvals needed from federal, state or
county agencies, including comments of these governmental
agencies.
(4) An evaluation of any adverse environmental impacts which cannot
be avoided, including air and water pollution, noise, sedimentation
and siltation, increase in Borough services or capital needs and
consequences to the Borough tax structure.
(5) A description of steps to be taken to avoid or minimize adverse
environmental impacts during construction and operation,
including shipping, receiving, storage and the methods of handling
the identified quantities of chemical, corrosive, toxic and hazardous
materials anticipated in all aspects of the operation, as well as
attaching appropriate maps, schedules and other explanatory data.
C. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the approving authority may waive all
or part of an environmental impact report if sufficient evidence is
submitted to support that conclusion. Waivers shall be based upon
consideration of the following by the approving authority:
(1) The stability of the soil during and after the proposed alteration.
(2) The drainage patterns and effect on surface water runoff.
(3) The potential effect on animals and significant plant species.
(4) Potential air and water pollution, especially any potential
environmental changes on critical slope areas or sewage disposal
system.
(5) Problems related to rock removal.
(6) The amount of resulting displacement of soil.
(7) Potential noise pollution.
§ 240-77 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-77
1:384
§ 240-78. Fire protection.
§ 240-79. Floodplain regulations.
(8) Increased problems of industrial or nonindustrial waste disposal
(subject to review of such problems by the Board of Health).
(9) Circumstances or conditions that are peculiar to the site or the
application under consideration that are not generally applicable to
sites or applications in the same general locality and that would
result in the imposition of undue burden on the applicant if an
environmental impact report were required.
A. Wherever a central water supply system exists, provision shall be made
of fire hydrants along streets and/or on the walls of nonresidential
buildings as approved by the servicing fire department or Municipal
Engineer and in accordance with the Insurance Services Office of New
Jersey. The midpoint of all lots served by a central water supply shall be
within 500 feet of a functioning fire hydrant. Hydrants shall have fire
hose threads conforming to the fire company equipment with no less
than two two-and-five-tenths-inch hydrant discharges. Hydrants shall
be set plumb with discharges 18 inches above grade. The system shall
be pressure-tested to assure its capability of sustaining the required
pressure at each hydrant.
B. Where streams or ponds exist on the site or are proposed, and there is
no central water supply, easements and facilities shall be provided to
draft water for fire-fighting purposes, including access suitable for firefighting
equipment, designed and constructed in accordance with the
Insurance Services Office of New Jersey.
A. Floodplains shall be preserved and not be built upon. Where a property
containing a floodplain is proposed for development or other
improvements, no proposed structures shall be located within the onehundred-
year floodplain. The uses permitted in the one-hundred-year
floodplain shall be limited to general farming, overflow parking or areas
serving the peak parking and loading demands, lawns and yard space,
gardens, detention basins, ponds and open space/recreation areas not
requiring structures. No septic systems shall be located in the onehundred-
year floodplain. The one-hundred-year floodplain shall be at
least as designated on the streams identified on the Floodway Maps
prepared by the National Flood Insurance Program, or such broader
areas on those streams as might result from an on-site evaluation. On
streams not identified by the National Flood Insurance Program, the
one-hundred-year floodplain shall be as delineated by a developer's
engineer and approved by the Borough Engineer.
B. The purposes shall be to:
(1) Prevent the encroachment of development into flood hazard areas
in order to protect human life and health.
§ 240-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-79
1:385
§ 240-80. Lighting.
(2) Implement the rules and regulations of the New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection.
(3) Guide construction, regrading and other encroachments that might
otherwise occur in flood hazard areas to other locations outside
flood hazard areas through cluster zoning, transfer of development
credits and other planned developments.
(4) Prevent pollution during low- or high-water periods by eliminating
unsanitary or dangerous substances in flood hazard areas.
(5) Minimize public expenditures for flood control projects, repairs to
public facilities and utility services and rescue and relief efforts.
(6) Minimize disruption in homes, businesses and places of
employment.
(7) Give better assurance that buyers are notified of the limits of
properties in a flood hazard area and that those who occupy
properties in these areas assume responsibility for their actions.
A. A lighting plan prepared by a qualified individual shall be provided with
site plan applications.
B. The intensity, shielding, direction and reflecting of lighting shall be
subject to site plan approval by the approving authority.
C. All parking areas, walkways, building entrances, loading areas and
driveways required for nonresidential or multifamily uses shall be
adequately illuminated during the hours of operation which occur after
sunset. Any adjacent residential zone or use shall be shielded from the
glare of illumination from site lighting and automobile headlights.
D. The light intensity at ground level shall average 0.5 footcandle;
however, variations are permitted depending upon the intensity of the
use. The light intensity shall not exceed 0.3 footcandle along any
property line and shall be so arranged and shielded to reflect the light
away from adjoining streets or properties.
E. The lighting plan shall indicate the proposed light intensity (including
existing fixtures to remain) at ground level where 0.5 footcandle occur.
Manufacturer's lighting detail and specifications, including footcandle
distributions, shall be provided. All lights shall be concealed-source
nonglare lighting and shall be focused downward so that the direct
source of light is not visible from adjoining streets or properties. The
minimum footcandle in the areas used by the public shall be 0.5; the
maximum footcandle is 1.0.
F. The mounting height of lighting fixtures shall be not more than 20 feet
or the height of the building, whichever is less, measured from the
ground level to the center line of the light source.
§ 240-79 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-80
1:386
§ 240-81. Natural features.
Natural features, such as trees, brooks, swamps, hilltops and views, shall
be preserved whenever possible. On individual lots, care shall be taken
to preserve selected trees to enhance soil stability and the landscape
treatment of the area.
§ 240-82. Off-site and off-tract improvements.
Before final approval, the approving authority may require the payment
of the developer's pro rata share of the following off-site and off-tract
improvements: street improvements, water system, sewerage, drainage
facilities and easements therefor.
G. Shade trees shall be planted a minimum of 10 feet from any
freestanding light fixture.
H. No lighting source shall be visible from windows, streets and
driveways, nor shall lighting shine directly into or reflect into windows
or onto streets and driveways to interfere with driver vision.
I. No lighting shall be of a rotating, pulsating or other intermittent
frequency.
A. Essential off-site and off-tract improvements may be required to be
installed or a performance guaranty furnished in lieu thereof, with the
total cost borne by the developer.
(1) Where a development has no direct access to an improved street or
public or private central water supply or central sanitary sewer and
does not qualify for individual sewage disposal systems, the
approving authority may nevertheless grant final approval if the
developer shall acquire and improve such street between the
development and an existing improved street and, in the case of
water/sewer system(s), if the developer shall acquire and improve
such water and sanitary sewer connections between the
development and existing facilities as approved by the approving
authority, governing body and serving utility company.
(2) Where drainage waters are diverted from the development into
other drainage systems or onto other lands or streets and they are
not adequate to accommodate the additional waters, the approving
authority may grant final approval if the developer shall acquire,
improve and dedicate to the Borough such enlarged, additional or
new drainage facilities as approved by the approving authority and
governing body.
(3) Such off-site and off-tract improvements shall be subject to the
design standards of this chapter. In lieu of the developer
performing such off-site and off-tract work, the developer may
request and the governing body may enter into an agreement for
§ 240-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-82
1:387
such work to be performed by the Borough or its contractors at the
cost of the developer.
(4) Where the approving authority determines that off-site and off-tract
improvements are essential to the development and the developer
does not consent to the improvements, the application shall be
denied, without prejudice, to a future application at such time as
the conditions no longer apply.
B. Advisable off-site and off-tract improvements. Where the approving
authority determines that off-site and off-tract improvements would be
advisable, although not essential, and the improvements would promote
the objectives of this chapter and can be most appropriately
accomplished in connection with the development, and particularly
where the off-site and off-tract improvements would be required to be
made as a local improvement by the Borough with the costs thereof to
be assessed against all properties specially benefited thereby, including
the property of the developer, the following provisions shall apply:
(1) During the processing of the application, the approving authority
shall refer its recommendations for off-site and off-tract
improvements to the governing body.
(2) If the governing body concurs, the Municipal Engineer or other
authority retained by the Borough shall determine the nature of the
off-site and off-tract improvements, including:
(a) The needs created by the applicant's proposed development.
(b) The then-existing needs in the area notwithstanding any work
of the applicant.
(3) The Municipal Engineer or other authority shall estimate and
report the costs of such work, including all costs to be in any local
improvement ordinance and those to be assessed to the developer,
and including costs for construction, engineering, any easement or
right-of-way acquisition, legal work, advertising, contingencies,
bonding and assessments.
(4) Based upon the above report and the recommendations of the
approving authority, the governing body shall determine whether
to undertake such off-site and off-tract improvements as a local
improvement.
(5) If the governing body will not adopt such ordinance, the final
development shall be designed accordingly, and the approving
authority shall proceed on that basis.
(6) If the determination shall be to adopt such local improvements
ordinance, the governing body shall proceed in the following
manner:
§ 240-82 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-82
1:388
(a) If sufficient funds are available for the initial appropriation, the
governing body may appropriate such funds and adopt such
ordinance. All subsequent proceedings for the making and
assessment of the cost of the off-site and off-tract
improvements shall be in accordance with such ordinance.
(b) If sufficient funds are not available for the initial appropriation,
the governing body may determine the anticipated amount that
the lands of the applicant would be expected to be assessed.
[1] The amount determined by the governing body shall then
be deposited by the applicant with the Borough Treasurer
prior to final approval and prior to introduction of such
local improvement ordinance.
[2] Such deposit shall be made concurrent with an agreement
between the applicant and the Borough concerning the
uses of the deposit, which shall include the following
stipulations: that said funds shall be used by the Borough
solely for the construction of such off-site and off-tract
improvements as specified in said agreement and for the
other expenses incidental thereto and the acquisition of
any easements or rights-of-way in connection therewith;
that such deposit may be appropriated by the Borough,
with other funds of the Borough, toward the
accomplishment of such purposes and may be co-mingled
with other appropriated funds and expended by the
Borough within a specified time agreed upon by the
applicant, said funds shall be returned to the applicant;
that, upon completion of the work by the Borough or its
contractors, the properties specially benefitted by such
improvements shall be assessed as provided by law,
including the property of applicant; and that the
applicant's deposit shall be credited against the
assessment made upon the applicant's property, whether
or not the applicant is then the owner thereof, and if such
deposit was less than the amount ultimately assessed
against such property, then the owner(s) of said property
shall pay the difference between the deposit and the
amount assessed, and the excess shall be refunded to the
applicant without interest.
[3] Where said off-site and off-tract improvements are found
by the approving authority to be advisable and important
to the sound development of the site, although the off-site
and off-tract improvements may not be found to be the
type of essential off-site and off-tract improvements as
defined above, but the developer is unwilling to make such
deposit as specified above, then there shall be no final
approval until funds become available for the initial
§ 240-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-82
1:389
§ 240-83. Public utilities.
All public services shall be connected to approved public utilities systems
where they exist.
appropriation required to adopt the local improvement
ordinance.
(7) The determination of the governing body whether or not to proceed
toward the adoption of a local improvement ordinance shall be
made within 30 days after the referral by the approving authority
unless such time shall be extended with the consent of the
applicant. If the determination is not made within the designated
period, the approving authority may proceed as if the governing
body had determined that it would not adopt such local
improvement ordinance.
A. The distribution supply lines and service connections shall be installed
underground, except that lots which abut streets with existing
overhead electric or telephone distribution supply lines and service
connections may be supplied with electric and telephone service from
those overhead lines, but the service connections shall be installed
underground. In the case of existing overhead utilities, should a road
widening or an extension of service or other such condition occur as a
result of the development and necessitate the replacement, relocation
or extension of such utilities, such replacement, relocation or extension
shall be underground.
B. The developer shall submit to the approving authority, prior to final
approval, a written instrument from each serving utility indicating full
compliance or intended full compliance with the provisions of this
section.
C. Where natural foliage is not sufficient to provide year-round screening
of any utility apparatus appearing above the surface of the ground,
other than utility poles, the applicant shall provide sufficient live
screening to conceal such apparatus year round.
D. On any lot where soil conditions, rock formations, woods or other
special conditions exist and the applicant deems it a hardship to comply
with the provisions of this section, the applicant may apply to the
approving authority for an exception from the terms of this section.
Where overhead lines are permitted as the exception, the alignments
and pole locations shall be routed to avoid locations along horizons,
avoid the clearing of swaths through treed areas by selective cutting
and a staggered alignment, by planting trees in open areas at key
locations to minimize the views of the poles and alignments, by
following rear lot lines and other interior locations, and similar design
and location considerations to lessen the visual impact of overhead. The
Borough shall make the determination as to the location of utility poles.
§ 240-82 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-84
1:390
§ 240-84. Shade trees and landscaping.
§ 240-85. Sight triangles.
Sight triangles shall be required at each quadrant of an intersection of
streets and the intersection of streets and driveways. The area within
sight triangles shall be either dedicated as part of the street right-of-way
or maintained as part of a lot adjoining the street and set aside on any
subdivision or site plan as a sight triangle easement. Within a sight triangle,
no grading, planting or structure shall be erected or maintained more
than 36 inches above the center line grade of either intersecting street
A. Shade trees shall be provided in all site plans where deemed
appropriate by the Planning Board. All shade trees shall have a
minimum diameter of 2.5 inches measured three feet above the ground
and shall be of a species approved by the approving authority. Trees
shall be planted 40 to 60 feet apart and parallel to, but no more than 20
feet from, the curbline and shall be balled and burlapped, nurserygrown,
free from insects and disease and true species and variety.
Stripping trees from a lot or filling around trees on a lot shall not be
permitted unless it can be shown that grading requirements necessitate
removal of trees, in which case those lots shall be replanted with trees
to reestablish the character of the area and to conform to adjacent lots.
Dead or dying trees shall be replaced by the developer during the next
recommended planting season. Parking lots shall be planted as
required in § 240-166, Off-street parking requirements.
B. All trees shall have a minimum diameter of 2 1/2 inches measured three
feet above the ground and shall be of a species approved by the
approving authority. Trees shall be planted 40 to 60 feet apart and
parallel to, but no more than 20 feet from, the curbline and shall be
balled and burlapped, nursery grown, free from insects and disease and
true species and variety.
C. A landscape plan prepared by a certified landscape architect, certified
by the New Jersey Board of Landscape Architects or other qualified
individual, shall be submitted with each site plan application.
Landscaping shall be provided to promote a desirable visual
environment, screen parking and loading areas, to provide windbreaks
for winter winds and summer cooling for buildings, streets and parking
and to mitigate adverse visual impacts.
D. Landscaped areas located within 50 feet of a street right-of-way shall
consist of a mix of shade trees, vegetative ground covers, including
both perennials and annuals, shrubs and turf. Installed landscape
ground cover materials such as stones, pebbles, and other nonorganic
materials shall not be permitted. These requirements apply to all
properties with 100 feet or more of street frontage. Irrigation systems
for the landscaped areas are required to be installed to ensure the
continued viability of the plantings. [Added 10-1-2001 by Ord. No.
1219-2001]
§ 240-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-85
1:391
or driveway or lower than eight feet above their center lines, excluding
street name signs and official traffic regulation signs. Where any street or
driveway intersection involves earth banks or vegetation, including trees,
the developer shall trim and grade to provide the sight triangle. The sight
triangle is that area outside the right-of-way bounded by the intersecting
street lines and a straight line which connects sight points located on
each of the two intersecting street center lines: arterial streets at 300
feet, collector streets at 200 feet and local streets at 90 feet. Where the
intersecting streets are both arterial and collector, two overlapping sight
triangles shall be required, formed by connecting the sight points noted
above with a sight point 90 feet on the intersecting street. Any development
requiring site plan approval shall provide sight triangles at each driveway,
with the driveway classified as a local street for purposes of establishing
distances. The classifications of existing and proposed streets shall be those
shown on the adopted Master Plan or as designated by the approving
authority where a new street is not included on the Master Plan. A sight
triangle easement shall be expressed on the plat as follows: "Sight triangle
easement subject to grading, planting and construction restrictions as
provided for in the Edgewater Land Use and Development Regulations
Ordinance." Portions of a lot set aside for the sight triangle may be
calculated in determining the lot area and minimum setbacks required by
the zoning provisions.
§ 240-86. Soil erosion and sediment control.
All development applications shall comply with the regulations set forth in
the Edgewater Soil Removal Ordinance, Chapter 362.
§ 240-87. Stormwater runoff.
A. All developments shall incorporate on-site stormwater facilities that
will encourage the recharging of underground aquifers and/or the
slowing down of the rate stormwater leaves the site.
B. Where the amount of runoff determined by the Municipal Engineer is
sufficient to justify detention of peak flow, one or more detention basins
shall be required. Each detention basin shall have a capacity to accept
all surface water directed to it from a one-hundred-year storm event
with outlets to permit complete draining of the maximum capacity of
the detention basin in not more than 36 hours.
C. Developments may incorporate other on-site stormwater detention or
impoundment facilities in the following manner:
(1) Swales to retard water runoff. Water velocity shall not exceed three
feet per second. The water may be directed to impact-still basins to
evaporate and percolate. The swales shall be seeded and
maintained in lawn area, as appropriate.
(2) Impoundment/detention basins along streams that maintain steady
flows of water may be constructed, provided that they meet the
§ 240-85 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-87
1:392
§ 240-88. Compliance with stormwater runoff regulations. [Added
4-20-2009 by Ord. No. 1410-2009]
All development applications subject to the provisions of Chapter 374 of the
Code of the Borough of Edgewater, including, but not limited to, single- and
two-family residential development and development that will ultimately
disturb one or more acres of land, shall comply with all stormwater runoff
requirements and all other regulations contained in Chapter 374 therein.
§ 240-89. Topsoil redistribution.
Topsoil available at the site and moved during the course of construction
shall be redistributed to all areas uncovered in the course of construction.
Whenever sufficient topsoil is not available at the site, additional topsoil
shall be obtained and distributed in such a manner as to provide a cover of
at least six inches of topsoil or other approved cover to prevent soil erosion
on the areas uncovered during the course of construction or excavation. No
topsoil shall be removed from the site of the development or used as spoil.
§ 240-90. Water supply.
standards and have the approval of the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
(3) Detention of stormwater on roof surfaces may be designed.
D. Where storm drains are installed outside streets, easements or rightsof-
way shall be required in accordance with § 240-76, Easements.
Stormwater management plans shall be designed and prepared in
accordance with the latest NJDEP guidelines for stormwater
management.
A. Where water is accessible from a servicing utility, the developer shall
arrange for the construction of water mains in such a manner as to
make adequate water service available to each lot, dwelling unit or use.
The system shall be designed with adequate capacity and sustained
pressure for present and probable future development.
B. Where public water is not available, potable water supply shall be
provided to each lot or dwelling unit by wells from groundwater supply.
Such wells shall be designed in accordance with the requirements and
standards of the Borough and/or state agency having jurisdiction.
C. Where water distribution systems are installed outside streets,
easements or rights-of-way shall be required in accordance with
§ 240-76, Easements.
D. Where no municipal consent for a public utility franchise for water has
been granted, upon completion of the water plant and distribution
system these public facilities shall, at the option of the Borough, be
transferred to the Borough.
§ 240-87 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-91
1:393
§ 240-91. Recycling.
A. There shall be included in any new multifamily housing development
that requires subdivision or site plan approval an indoor or outdoor
recycling area for the collection and storage of residentially generated
recyclable materials. The dimensions of the recycling area shall be
sufficient to accommodate recycling bins or containers which are of
adequate size and number and which are consistent with anticipated
usage and with current methods of collection in the area in which the
project is located. The dimensions of the recycling area and the bins or
containers shall be determined in consultation with the municipal
recycling coordinator, and shall be consistent with the district recycling
plan adopted pursuant to Section 3 of the P.L. 1987, c. 102 (N.J.S.A.
13:1E-99.13), and any applicable requirements of the Municipal Master
Plan adopted pursuant to Section 26 of P.L. 1987, c. 102.
B. The recycling area shall be conveniently located for the residential
disposition of source-separated recyclable materials, preferably near,
but clearly separated from, a refuse dumpster.
C. The recycling area shall be well lit and shall be safely and easily
accessible by recycling personnel and vehicles. Collection vehicles shall
be able to access the recycling area without interference from parked
cars or other obstacles. Reasonable measures shall be taken to protect
the recycling area and the bins or containers placed therein against
theft of recyclable materials, bins or containers.
D. The recycling area or the bins or containers placed therein shall be
designed so as to provide protection against adverse environmental
conditions which might render the collected materials unmarketable.
Any bins or containers which are used for the collection of recyclable
paper or cardboard, and which are located in an outdoor recycling area
shall be equipped with a lid, or otherwise covered, so as to keep the
paper or cardboard dry.
E. Signs clearly identifying the recycling area and the materials accepted
therein shall be posted adjacent to all points of access to the recycling
area. Individual bins or containers shall be equipped with signs
indicating the materials to be placed therein.
F. Landscaping and/or fencing shall be provided around any outdoor
recycling area and shall be developed in an aesthetically pleasing
manner.
§ 240-91 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-91
1:394
ARTICLE IX
Zoning Provisions
§ 240-92. Zoning districts. [Amended 12-17-2012 by Ord. No.
1485-2012; 9-15-2014 by Ord. No. 1512-2014]
For the purpose of this chapter, the Borough of Edgewater is hereby divided
into 18 zone districts as follows:
R-1 Single-Family Residential District
R-2 Single- and Two-Family Residential District
R-3 Multifamily Residential District
R-4 Multifamily Residential District
R-5 Multifamily Residential District
R-40 Single-Family Residential District
SRH Senior Housing District
MCRD Mixed-Use Commercial/Residential Development District
CBD Central Business District
B-1 Neighborhood Business District
B-2 Shadyside Mixed-Use District
B-3 Waterfront Commercial District
B-4 Tradesman Commercial District
MXD-1 Mixed-Use District
MXD-2 Mixed-Use District
MXD-3 Mixed-Use District
OR-1 Office and Research District
P Public District
§ 240-93. Zoning Map. [Amended 3-18-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-001]
§ 240-94. Interpretation of district boundaries.
A. The location and boundaries of said districts are hereby established on
the Zoning Map of the Borough of Edgewater prepared by CME
Associates, dated January 12, 2018, as amended or supplemented,
which hereby is made a part of this chapter.101
B. Said map or maps and all notations, references and designations shown
thereon shall be, as such, a part of this chapter as if the same were fully
described and set forth herein.
A. Zoning district boundary lines are intended to follow street center lines,
railroad rights-of-way, streams and lot lines unless otherwise indicated
101. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 240-92 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-94
1:395
§ 240-95. Schedule of regulations.
The regulations which control development in each district are set forth in
the attached Schedules X-1 and X-2, which are also supplemented by other
sections of this chapter.102
§ 240-96. Application of regulations.
by dimensions on the Zoning Map. Dimensions shall be in feet,
measured horizontally and measured from the street right-of-way line,
even if the center line of that street serves as a zoning district line.
Any disputed zoning district line shall be determined by the Board of
Adjustment.
B. Where a street or public way serves as the zoning district line and it is
lawfully vacated, the former center line shall be the zoning district line.
A. No building shall be erected, moved, altered, constructed,
reconstructed or enlarged except as specified in this chapter, nor shall
any land or building be used for any purpose or in any manner except in
conformity with all the regulations, requirements and/or restrictions
specified in this chapter for the district in which such building or land is
located.
B. In interpreting and applying this chapter, the requirements contained
herein are declared to be the minimum requirements for the protection
and promotion of the public health, safety, morals and general welfare.
102. Editor's Note: Schedules X-1 and X-2 are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 240-94 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-96
1:396
ARTICLE X
General Use and Design Provisions
§ 240-97. Prohibited uses.
All uses not expressly permitted in each zone district are prohibited.
§ 240-98. Existing uses.
Except as otherwise specified for nonconforming uses, structures, sites or
lots, any use, building or structure existing at the time of the enactment of
this chapter may be continued even though such use, building or structure
may not conform to the provisions of this chapter for the district in which it
is located.
§ 240-99. Height exceptions.
With the exception of single- and two-family dwellings as permitted in this
chapter, roof equipment structures for the housing of elevators, stairways,
ventilating fans, air-conditioning equipment or similar equipment required
to operate and maintain the building and fire or parapet walls, skylights,
amateur radio towers, spires, cupolas, flagpoles, chimneys or similar
structures may be erected above the height limits prescribed by this
chapter, but in no event shall these structures exceed 15 feet above the
roofline of the building on which it is located. The height limitations
required in each zone shall not apply to house of worship steeples, public
school buildings and structures, municipally owned buildings, masts,
flagpoles, barns, silos, water towers and commercial radio and television
towers. The maximum height for these uses shall not exceed 50 feet.
§ 240-100. Required area.
The area or dimension of any lot, yard or other space shall not be reduced
to less than the minimum required by this chapter, and, if already existing
at less than the minimum required by this chapter, said area or dimension
may be continued and shall not be further reduced.
§ 240-101. Off-street parking.
All off-street parking and loading shall be located on the lot on which the
principal use is located.
§ 240-102. Merger.
A lot which at the time of the adoption of this chapter fails to comply with
the minimum lot size requirements of this article may be used for any use
permitted in the district in which it is located, provided that said lot is in
single ownership at the time of the adoption hereof and providing all yard
requirements hereof are complied with. In the event that an undeveloped lot
which fails to comply with the minimum lot size requirements of this article
is contiguous and in single ownership with another lot, such lots shall be
§ 240-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-102
1:397
deemed merged and construed to be one lot for all purposes. Use thereof as
other than one lot is prohibited except as may be authorized by subdivision
approval.
§ 240-103. Number of buildings restricted.
There shall be no more than one principal building on each lot except as
permitted for in the following districts and as regulated herein:
§ 240-104. Lots with one or more principal buildings.
The following requirements shall be applicable to lots with more than one
principal building:
§ 240-105. Limitation on number of uses on each lot. [Amended
12-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1485-2012; 9-15-2014 by Ord. No.
1512-2014]
There shall be no more than one principal use on each lot, with the
exception of the following: Multiple uses shall be permitted in the CBD,
B-1, B-2, B-3 and MCRD Zones, provided that in the MCRD, CBD and B-2
Districts, residential apartments shall not be permitted below the second
floor of the building.
§ 240-106. Waterfront access requirements. Amended 3-20-2006 by
Ord. No. 1331-2006]
A. R-3 Multifamily Residential District.
B. R-4 Multifamily Residential District.
C. R-5 Multifamily Residential District.
D. MCRD Mixed-Use Commercial/Residential Development District.
E. (Reserved)103
F. B-3 Waterfront Commercial Business District.
G. OR-1 Office and Research District.
A. The front, side and rear yard requirements shall be complied with for all
buildings.
B. Buildings in any nonresidential zone shall not be closer to another
building than the height of the tallest building on site, except as
otherwise provided herein.
C. The off-street parking and loading requirements shall be computed
separately for all buildings.
103. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, B-2A District, was repealed 12-17-2012 by Ord. No.
1485-2012, 9-15-2014 by Ord. No. 1512-2014.
§ 240-102 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-106
1:398
§ 240-107. Open space.
For the purposes of calculating open space requirements in all zones, no
more than 20% of the open space requirement shall consist of riparian
lands. This limitation on utilizing riparian area is to ensure that the open
space provided is pedestrian accessible.
§ 240-108. Socioeconomic studies.
All residential developments in excess of 20 dwelling units shall submit
a socioeconomic impact study. This study shall present data which will
indicate the impact that the development will have on the local population,
school system, recreation needs, and other municipal services. The study
should address the current capacity of the schools, a five-year projection of
school capacity, and an impact analysis indicating the manner in which the
development will affect the student population. This study should also be
submitted to the Edgewater School Board.
§ 240-109. Traffic studies.
New development applications which exceed 20 dwelling units and/or
25,000 square feet of nonresidential square footage shall submit a traffic
study to the approving authority.
A. Every development application shall include suitable provision for a
pedestrian walkway along the bank of the Hudson River. Said walkway
shall consist of a minimum thirty-foot easement area and a minimum
sixteen-foot travel lane. The New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection manual entitled "Hudson Waterfront Walkway Plan" will
serve as a guide in the development of this walkway relative to design
and building material elements. Where NJDEP requires a minimum
walkway width greater than that set forth above, its requirement shall
apply.
B. Within the thirty-foot easement area there shall be landscaping and
lighting in addition to the travel lane. Suitable access to said walkway
shall be provided to enable its use by all Borough residents.
C. As recommended in the Borough Master Plan, one perpendicular
access shall be provided from River Road to the Hudson River way
every 300 feet "to ensure that this amenity is retained as an integral
part of the community and remains available to the Borough residents
as an active and passive recreation resource." Applicants shall be
required to identify all perpendicular access points within 1,000 feet of
the subject property. Any single development shall be not be required to
provide more than two access points regardless of the amount of
property frontage.
§ 240-106 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-110
1:399
§ 240-110. Viewsheds.
New development applications for construction along the waterfront and
along the west side of River Road shall be required to include a viewshed
study which indicates the impact that the development will have on the
views of the skyline from River Road and properties to the west.
§ 240-111. Common vehicular access and shared parking areas.
Site plan applications in all nonresidential zones shall be required to
provide, where possible, common driveway access with adjoining
properties. Additionally, applicants shall be required to provide interior
linkages between adjoining parking lots, where possible, to facilitate access
between parking areas. This is not meant to imply that parking for one use
may be used to meet the parking requirement for the adjoining use.
§ 240-112. Architectural facade treatments.
All visible facades, including front, side and rear, must be treated with
the same architectural facade treatment to provide a desirable visual
appearance.
§ 240-110 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-112
1:400
ARTICLE XI
Supplementary Zoning Regulations
§ 240-113. Lot regulations.
§ 240-114. Yard regulations.
A. Every principal building shall be built upon a lot with usable frontage
upon a street or streets, as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-7, and shall be
improved to meet the Borough's standards or accepted by the Borough.
B. The minimum lot width shall be measured at the required front yard
setback line. However, in cases of irregularly shaped lots whose sides
are not parallel, the lot width may be measured at either the required
front yard setback or front lot line, as follows:
(1) In cases of irregularly shaped lots whose sides are not parallel and
the lot width is measured at the required front yard setback, the
street frontage shall not be less than 60% of the minimum lot width
required, provided that the lot width measured at the front yard
setback line shall conform to the minimum width specified in the
zoning schedule for the district in which the lot is contained.
(2) In cases of irregularly shaped lots whose sides are not parallel, the
lot width may be measured at the front lot line, provided that the
width of the lot measured at the required front yard setback line
shall not be less that 85% of the required lot width measured at the
front lot line.
C. Within any sight triangle, no grade, vegetation, sign or other object
shall be allowed to exceed a height of 30 inches above the adjacent
roadway or be placed in such manner as to limit or obstruct the sight
distance of motorists entering or leaving the intersection. Said triangle
shall be formed by the street lines of such lot and a line drawn between
points along such street lines 25 feet distant from their point of
intersection.
D. Where a single lot under individual ownership extends from one street
to another, defined herein as a "through lot," both frontages shall be
subject to the front yard requirements of this chapter.
A. No yard or other open space provided about any building for the
purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be
considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building.
B. The sketch maps in the Appendix illustrate the delineation of the yards
for measurement purposes regarding corner lots and other lots.104
Corner lots shall have two front yards for measurement purposes;
provided, however, that the front yard setback requirement may be
reduced by five feet along one front yard. The determination as to which
104. Editor's Note: The sketch maps are on file in the Borough offices.
§ 240-113 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-114
1:401
§ 240-115. Landscaped and buffer areas. [Amended 12-17-2012 by
Ord. No. 1485-2012; 9-15-2014 by Ord. No. 1512-2014]
A landscape buffer area shall be provided along all external property lines,
except for properties with frontage along the Hudson River where the
applicant shall be required to install a riverfront walkway pursuant to this
chapter. The following landscaping requirements shall apply:
Buffer From Adjacent
Nonresidential Use
(feet)
Buffer From Residential
Use
(feet)
R-3 10* 10*
R-4 15 20
R-5 15 25
front yard setback may be reduced shall be at the discretion of the
applicant. All yards other than front yards of a corner lot shall be
construed as side yards and shall conform to the side yard setback
requirement of the zone district in which the lot is located.
C. All front yards must face upon a dedicated public street, provided that,
on streets less than 50 feet in width, the required front yard shall be
increased by 1/2 the difference between the width of the street and 50
feet, and provided that any lot which abuts a street with a proposed
right-of-way greater than 50 feet in width, as shown on the Master Plan
of the Borough of Edgewater, shall have a front yard setback measured
from the nearest line shown on the Master Plan of the Borough of
Edgewater.
D. Projections into required yards; general exceptions.
(1) The ordinary projection of parapets, windowsills, doorposts,
rainwater leaders and similar ornamental or structural fixtures
may project a maximum distance of eight inches into required
yards.
(2) Front steps may project a maximum distance of four feet into a
required yard. [Amended 9-18-2006 by Ord. No. 1345-2006]
(3) Chimneys or flues may project a maximum distance of three feet
into required yards.
(4) Patios and decks. Patios may be located in any required rear or side
yard. Decks must meet the yard requirement of the principal
building to which they are attached.
(5) Fences and walls may project into any required yard, subject to
§ 240-135 where applicable.105
105. Editor's Note: See § 240-137, Fences and walls.
§ 240-114 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-115
1:402
Buffer From Adjacent
Nonresidential Use
(feet)
Buffer From Residential
Use
(feet)
MCRD 15 25
CBD 10 15
B-1 0 10
B-3 15 25
B-4 0 10
OR-1 15 25
MXD-1 10 10
MXD-2 10 10
MXD-3 10 10
NOTES:
* Except for permitted one- and two-family residences in an R-3 Zone,
where no buffer is required.
A. The landscape area shall provide a year-round visual screen to
minimize adverse impacts from the site on adjacent properties.
B. If the landscape area is less than 10 feet wide, the applicant may be
required to erect and landscape a six-foot-high stockade fence within
the buffer area parallel to the lot line of the abutting residential lot.
C. The landscape areas shall be maintained and kept clean of all debris,
rubbish, weeds and tall grass. Any screen planting shall be maintained
permanently, and any plant material which does not live shall be
replaced within one year or one growing season.
D. No structure, activity, storage of materials, driveways or parking of
vehicles shall be permitted in the landscape area, except permitted
signs as specified in the district regulations. Driveways may be
permitted to bisect the landscape area only to provide direct vehicular
access from the street into the lot.
E. Requirements for planting in landscape area.
(1) A solid and continuous landscaped screen shall be planted and
maintained to conceal the parking and loading areas, eliminate the
glare of vehicle lights throughout the year and camouflage the
building from the abutting residential areas. The landscaped
screen shall consist of evergreen trees, such as hemlock, Douglas
fir, Norway spruce, etc. Evergreen trees shall not be less than eight
feet high when planted, and the lowest branches shall be not more
than one floor above the ground. In the event that the existing
evergreen trees do not cover the required area from the ground,
§ 240-115 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-115
1:403
§ 240-116. Protection of steep slope areas. [Added 4-18-2011 by
Ord. No. 1452-2011106]
said landscaping screen shall be supplemented with evergreen
shrubbery.
(2) In addition to the landscaped screen, shade trees shall be planted
by the applicant at a distance of not more than 40 feet from each
other.
(3) If the landscape area includes existing growth of evergreen and
deciduous trees and shrubbery, but not enough to provide a
suitable screen as required above, existing trees and shrubbery
may remain and shall be supplemented by additional evergreen
plantings to provide the required landscaped screen. In the event
that the approving authority finds that additional plantings of
evergreens will not grow satisfactorily in said buffer areas, a
stockade fence(s) six feet high shall be erected in the buffer area.
F. The approving authority shall have the power to waive any of the
requirements or details specified above if it determines an adequate
buffer can be provided in less than the required width while
maintaining the purposes of this section. The approving authority, when
considering waiving any of the buffer requirements, shall review the
proposed plat and the standards and purposes of this chapter and, to
these ends, shall consider the location of buildings, parking areas,
outdoor illumination and topographic features of the area, and existing
features, such as trees and streams; the efficiency, adequacy and safety
of the proposed layout of driveways, streets, sidewalks and paths; the
adequacy and location of screening and parking areas, structures and
uses; and such other matters as may be found to have a material
bearing on the above standards and objectives.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the intensity of use in
areas of steeply sloping terrain in order to limit soil loss, erosion,
excessive stormwater runoff, the degradation of surface water and to
maintain the natural topography and drainage patterns of land.
B. Background. Disturbance of steep slopes results in accelerated erosion
processes from stormwater runoff and the subsequent sedimentation of
waterbodies with the associated degradation of water quality and loss
of aquatic life support. Related effects include soil loss, changes in
natural topography and drainage patterns, increased flooding potential,
further fragmentation of forest and habitat areas, and compromised
aesthetic values. It has become widely recognized that disturbance of
steep slopes should be restricted or prevented based on the impact
disturbance of steep slopes can have on water quality and quantity, and
the environmental integrity of landscapes.
106. Editor's Note: This section also repealed former § 240-116, Protection of critical slope
areas.
§ 240-115 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-116
1:404
C. Applicability. This section shall be applicable to new development or
land disturbance on a steep slope within Edgewater.
D. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
DISTURBANCE — The placement of impervious surface, the exposure
of movement of soil or bedrock, or the clearing, cutting, or removing of
vegetation.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any structure, surface, or improvement that
reduces or prevents absorption of stormwater into land, and includes
porous paving, paver blocks, gravel crushed stone, decks, patios,
elevated structures, and other similar structures, surfaces, or
improvements.
REDEVELOPMENT — The construction of structures or improvements
on areas which previously contained structures or other improvements.
STEEP SLOPES — Any slope equal to or greater than 20% as measured
over any minimum run of 10 feet. Steep slopes are determined based
on contour intervals of two feet or less.
E. Designation of areas. The percent of slope (rise in feet per horizontal
distance) shall be established by measurement of distance
perpendicular to the contour of the slope. The percent of slope shall be
calculated for each two-foot contour interval. For example, any location
on the site where there is a one-foot rise over a ten-foot horizontal run
constitutes a ten-percent slope; a one-and-one-half-foot rise over a tenfoot
horizontal run constitutes a fifteen-percent slope; a two-foot rise
over a ten-foot horizontal run constitutes a twenty-percent slope.
F. Steep slope limits.
(1) For steep slopes, any disturbance shall be prohibited except as
provided below:
(a) Redevelopment within the limits of existing impervious
surfaces; and
(b) New disturbance necessary to protect public health, safety or
welfare, such as necessary linear development with no feasible
alternative; to provide an environmental benefit, such as
remediation of a contaminated site; to prevent extraordinary
hardship on the property owner peculiar to the property; or to
prevent extraordinary hardship, provided the hardship was not
created by the property owner, that would not permit a
minimum economically viable use of the property based upon
reasonable investment. For example, redevelopment within the
footprint of existing impervious cover should be allowed to
support efforts to revitalize development that has fallen into
disrepair.
(2) Conditions on permitted disturbances.
§ 240-116 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-116
1:405
(a) Any permitted excavation, soil removal or disturbance of soil
shall be consistent with the intent of this article and shall be
executed in a manner that will not cause excessive erosion or
other unstable conditions.
(b) Provision shall be made for any structures or protective
measures that may be required for the protection of the public
safety, including but not limited to retaining walls, headwalls,
and fences.
(c) Provision shall be made for the proper disposition of surface
water runoff so that it will not create unstable conditions.
Appropriate storm drainage facilities shall be constructed as
deemed necessary and adequate protective measures shall be
provided for downstream properties.
(d) The applicant shall demonstrate through site plans depicting
proposed development and topography that new disturbance is
not located in areas with a twenty-percent-or-greater slope.
G. Conflicts and severability.
(1) Conflicts: All other ordinances, parts of ordinances, or other local
requirements that are inconsistent or in conflict with this section
are hereby superseded to the extent of any inconsistency or
conflict, and the provisions of this section apply.
(2) Severability and interpretation:
(a) Interpretation: This section shall be so construed as not to
conflict with any provision of New Jersey or Federal law.
(b) Notwithstanding that any provision of this section is held to be
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction,
all remaining provisions of Ordinance shall continue to be of
full force and effect.
(3) The provisions of this section shall be cumulative with, and not in
substitution for, all other applicable zoning, planning and land use
regulations.
H. Enforcement, violation and penalties. A prompt investigation shall be
made by the appropriate personnel of Edgewater of any persons or
entity believed to be in violation hereof. If, upon inspection, a condition
which is in violation of this section is discovered, a civil action may be
brought in the Special Part of the Superior Court, or in the Superior
Court, if the primary relief sought is injunctive or if penalties may
exceed the jurisdictional limit of the Special Civil Part, by the filing and
serving of appropriate process. Nothing in this section shall be
construed to preclude the right of Edgewater, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
26:3A2-25, to initiate legal proceedings hereunder in Municipal Court.
The violation of any subsection of this section shall constitute a
§ 240-116 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-116
1:406
§ 240-117. Performance standards.
separate and distinct offense independent of the violation of any other
subsection, or of any order issued pursuant to this section. Each day a
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
A. General application. All nonresidential uses, either existing or
proposed, shall be subject to the following standards.
B. Compliance with performance standards.
(1) Prior to commencement of construction and/or operation. Any
application for a building permit or a certificate of occupancy for a
use which shall be subject to performance standards shall be
accompanied by a sworn statement by the owner of subject
property that said use shall be operated in accordance with the
performance standards set forth herein.
(2) Continued compliance. Continued compliance with performance
standards shall be required, and enforcement of continued
compliance with these performance standards shall be enforced by
the Construction Official, Borough Engineer, Health Officer and
Fire Prevention Bureau.
C. Determination where performance standards are to be measured. The
location where determinations are to be made for measurement of
performance standards shall be made as follows:
(1) At property lines of the use creating such element for vibration,
glare, air pollution, odor, dust, water pollution or noise.
(2) At the point of emission for smoke.
D. Performance standards.
(1) Vibration. No vibration shall be permitted which is detectable
without instruments at points of measurement specified in
Subsection C herein.
(2) Glare. No direct or sky-reflected glare shall be visible at the points
of measurement specified in Subsection C herein.
(3) Smoke.
(a) The emission standard of this chapter or as promulgated by the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection,
whichever is more restrictive, shall pertain.
(b) No emission shall be permitted, from any chimney or
otherwise, of visible gray smoke at a shade equal to or darker
than No. 1 on the Power's Micro-Ringelmann Chart published
by McGraw Hill Publishing Company, Inc., copyright 1954,
§ 240-116 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-117
1:407
being a direct facsimile reduction of a standard Ringelmann
Chart as issued by the United States Bureau of Mines.
(c) The provision of this subsection shall not apply to:
[1] Visible gray smoke of a shade not darker than No. 2 of said
chart which may be emitted for not more than four
minutes in any thirty-minute period.
[2] Smoke resulting from any fire ignited solely for the
purpose of training or research in fire prevention or
protection.
[3] Smoke from locomotives, the shade or appearance of
which is equal to but not darker than No. 3 of the Power's
Micro-Ringelmann Chart for a period or periods
aggregating no more than 30 seconds in any three
consecutive minutes, or smoke of said density for a period
aggregating no more than four minutes in any 15
consecutive minutes when building a new fire.
[4] Household fireplaces.
(4) Odors. There shall be no emission of odorous gases or other
odorous matter in such quantities as to be offensive as measured as
set forth in Subsection C.
(5) Fly ash and dust. No emission of any fly ash or dust shall be
permitted to be discharged from any stack, chimney or by other
means into the open air in excess of the quantity set forth in
regulations promulgated by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
(6) Noise. See Chapter 271, Noise, of the Code of the Borough of
Edgewater.107
(7) Radioactivity or electrical disturbance. No activities shall be
permitted which emit dangerous radioactivity. No activities shall be
permitted where electrical disturbances adversely affect the
operation of any equipment. All applicable federal and state
regulations shall be complied with.
(8) Fire and explosion hazard.
(a) All activities involving storage of flammable and explosive
materials shall be provided with adequate safety devices
against the hazard of fire and explosion and adequate firefighting
and fire-suppression equipment and devices standard
in this industry. Burning of waste materials in open fires is
prohibited. The relevant provisions of state and local laws and
regulation shall also apply.
107. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 240-117 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-117
1:408
§ 240-117.1. MXD-1 Zone regulations. [Added 12-17-2012 by Ord.
No. 1485-2012, 9-15-2014 by Ord. No. 1512-2014]
(b) All raw materials, fuels and finished products shall be stored in
underground tanks. The storage of crude oil or any other
volatile or inflammable liquid in aboveground tanks with
individual capacity greater than 500 gallons is prohibited.
(9) Liquids or solid waste. There shall be no discharge of any wastes of
any kind into any river, reservoir, pond or lake. The discharge of
untreated wastes into any streams shall also be prohibited. All
methods of sewage and industrial waste treatment and disposal
shall be approved by the Borough and the New Jersey State
Department of Environmental Protection.
A. Objectives.
(1) To allow for an expansion of the types of uses permitted in the area
to encourage redevelopment.
(2) To promote a vibrant, pedestrian-friendly walkable environment,
complete with retail and restaurant uses at ground level.
(3) To potentially allow for pedestrian-only access on nights and
weekends.
(4) To create a cohesive development plan and community in
conjunction with the current B-2 Shadyside District.
(5) To establish a district with a coordinated and aesthetically
attractive composition of building facades.
(6) To establish economic anchors to draw steady crowds, create an
active street life and encourage spinoff businesses.
(7) Elements to be considered:
(a) Dense/compact form.
(b) Pedestrian-oriented.
(c) Connected street network.
(d) Well-defined edge.
(e) Municipal anchors.
(f) Economic anchors.
(g) Mixed-use development.
(h) Quality urban spaces.
§ 240-117 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-117.1
1:409
(8) Develop contextual design standards that ensure that the new
development responds to the traditional architectural styles of the
community:
(a) Adopt illustrative design standards.
(b) Illustrate both building design and site design.
(c) Address building type and architectural elements.
(d) Address streetscape (proportions, roof types, pitches and
materials).
(e) Review setback and height restrictions.
(f) Create height-to-width standards.
B. Zone designations. This zone shall be designated as the Mixed-Use
District – 1 (MXD-1) Zone.
C. Definitions. For purposes of this section only, the following definitions
shall apply:
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR) — The gross floor area of buildings or
structures on a lot divided by the gross total lot area.
GROSS ACREAGE — The total land area of tax lots(s), including water
bodies.
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all
enclosed floors of a building, including cellars, basements, mezzanines,
penthouses, corridors, and lobbies from the exterior face of the exterior
walls or from the center line of a common wall separating two
buildings, but excluding any space with floor-to-ceiling height of less
than six feet six inches. This does not include balconies, terraces or
roofs. In determining the gross floor area, any floor space that is
constructed or intended to be used solely for parking motor vehicles,
for loading or unloading of motor vehicles, or for refuse storage
chambers, refuse storage and material recovery chambers, material
recovery chambers, refuse storage and material recovery rooms, refuse
chutes, other types of facilities provided for the separation of refuse, or
for access facilities for telecommunications and broadcasting services,
or occupied solely by machinery or equipment for any lift, airconditioning
or heating system or any similar service, shall be excluded
from the gross floor area of a building.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has a coefficient of runoff of
0.75 or greater. No more than 50% of graveled areas shall be permitted
to be applied as a pervious surface.
LOT COVERAGE — The portion of a lot that is covered by impervious
surface. A green roof on any building or garage structure that provides
adequate vegetation and passive recreation use for the occupants may
be counted as pervious coverage at 75% (i.e., 100 square feet of a
"green" roof would count as 75 square feet of pervious ground surface).
§ 240-117.1 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-117.1
1:410
NET ACREAGE — The total land area of a tax lot, excluding water
bodies.
PERVIOUS COVERAGE — The percentage of a lot covered by pervious
surface(s).
PERVIOUS SURFACE — Any surface that does not meet the definition
of an impervious surface.
D. Uses.
(1) Permitted uses.
(a) Hotels (above first floor).
(b) Office (above first floor).
(c) Multifamily residential (above first floor).
(d) Retail and service establishments, excluding automobile sales.
(e) Restaurants.
(f) Financial institutions (no drive-through).
(g) Workshops for craftsmen (artists, carpenters, etc.) with a retail
component only.
(h) Child-care centers.
(i) Real estate offices.
(2) Conditional uses.
(a) Essential services, subject to § 240-142.
(b) Veterans, civic, and community clubs, subject to § 240-146.
(3) Accessory uses.
(a) Off-street parking and loading facilities, including parking
decks.
(b) Signs.
(c) Fences.
(d) Child-care centers, subject to § 240-140.
E. Lot, height and yard restrictions. See Chapter 240, Schedule X-2.108
F. Desired design standards. The same design standards set forth in
§ 240-130C are applicable to the MXD-1 Zone.
108. Editor's Note: Schedule X-2 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 240-117.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-117.1
1:411
§ 240-117.2. MXD-2 Zone regulations. [Added 12-17-2012 by Ord.
No. 1485-2012, 9-15-2014 by Ord. No. 1512-2014]
G. Signs. Signage shall be subject to the requirements of Article XVIII of
this chapter.
H. Other provisions superseded. In the event of any inconsistency between
the provisions of this section and any other section of Chapter 240, the
provisions of this section shall prevail.
A. Objectives.
(1) To create high-end mixed-use buildings and structures.
(2) To attract larger businesses than were permitted under prior B-4
zoning regulations.
B. Zone designations. This zone shall be designated as the Mixed-Use
District – 2 (MXD-2) Zone.
C. Definitions. For purposes of this section only, the following definitions
shall apply:
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR) — The gross floor area of buildings or
structures on a lot divided by the gross total lot area.
GROSS ACREAGE — The total land area of tax lots(s), including water
bodies.
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all
enclosed floors of a building, including cellars, basements, mezzanines,
penthouses, corridors, and lobbies from the exterior face of the exterior
walls or from the center line of a common wall separating two
buildings, but excluding any space with floor-to-ceiling height of less
than six feet six inches. This does not include balconies, terraces or
roofs. In determining the gross floor area, any floor space that is
constructed or intended to be used solely for parking motor vehicles,
for loading or unloading of motor vehicles, or for refuse storage
chambers, refuse storage and material recovery chambers, material
recovery chambers, refuse storage and material recovery rooms, refuse
chutes, other types of facilities provided for the separation of refuse, or
for access facilities for telecommunications and broadcasting services,
or occupied solely by machinery or equipment for any lift, airconditioning
or heating system or any similar service, shall be excluded
from the gross floor area of a building.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has a coefficient of runoff of
0.75 or greater. No more than 50% of graveled areas shall be permitted
to be applied as a pervious surface.
LOT COVERAGE — The portion of a lot that is covered by impervious
surface. A green roof on any building or garage structure that provides
adequate vegetation and passive recreation use for the occupants may
§ 240-117.1 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-117.2
1:412
be counted as pervious coverage at 75% (i.e., 100 square feet of a
"green" roof would count as 75 square feet of pervious ground surface).
NET ACREAGE — The total land area of a tax lot, excluding water
bodies.
PERVIOUS COVERAGE — The percentage of a lot covered by pervious
surface(s).
PERVIOUS SURFACE — Any surface that does not meet the definition
of an impervious surface.
D. Uses.
(1) Permitted uses.
(a) Hotels.
(b) Office.
(c) Multifamily residential (above first floor).
(d) Retail and service establishments, excluding automobile sales.
(e) Restaurants.
(f) Financial institutions (no drive-through).
(g) Workshops for craftsmen (artists, carpenters, etc.) with a retail
component only.
(h) Child-care centers.
(2) Conditional uses.
(a) Essential services, subject to § 240-142.
(b) Veterans, civic, and community clubs, subject to § 240-146.
(3) Accessory uses.
(a) Off-street parking and loading facilities, including parking
decks.
(b) Signs.
(c) Fences.
(d) Child-care centers, subject to § 240-140.
E. Lot, height and yard restrictions. See Chapter 240, Schedule X-2.109
F. Desired design standards. The same design standards set forth in
§ 240-130C are applicable to the MXD-1 Zone.
109. Editor's Note: Schedule X-2 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 240-117.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-117.2
1:413
§ 240-117.3. MXD-3 Zone regulations. [Added 12-17-2012 by Ord.
No. 1485-2012, 9-15-2014 by Ord. No. 1512-2014]
G. Signs. Signage shall be subject to the requirements of Article XVIII of
this chapter.
H. Other provisions superseded. In the event of any inconsistency between
the provisions of this section and any other section of Chapter 240, the
provisions of this section shall prevail.
A. Objectives.
(1) To allow for an expansion of the types of uses permitted in the area
to encourage redevelopment.
(2) To promote a vibrant, pedestrian-friendly walkable environment,
complete with retail and restaurant uses at ground level.
(3) To potentially allow for pedestrian-only access on nights and
weekends.
(4) To create a cohesive development plan and community in
conjunction with the current B-2 Shadyside District.
(5) To establish a district with a coordinated and aesthetically
attractive composition of building facades.
(6) To establish economic anchors to draw steady crowds, create an
active street life and encourage spinoff businesses.
(7) Elements to be considered:
(a) Dense/compact form.
(b) Pedestrian-oriented.
(c) Connected street network.
(d) Well-defined edge.
(e) Municipal anchors.
(f) Economic anchors.
(g) Mixed-use development.
(h) Quality urban spaces.
(8) Develop contextual design standards that ensure that the new
development responds to the traditional architectural styles of the
community:
(a) Adopt illustrative design standards.
(b) Illustrate both building design and site design.
§ 240-117.2 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-117.3
1:414
(c) Address building type and architectural elements.
(d) Address streetscape (proportions, roof types, pitches and
materials).
(e) Review setback and height restrictions.
(f) Create height-to-width standards.
B. Zone designations. This zone shall be designated as the Mixed-Use
District – 3 (MXD-3) Zone.
C. Definitions. For purposes of this section only, the following definitions
shall apply:
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR) — The gross floor area of building or
structures on a lot divided by the gross total lot area.
GROSS ACREAGE — The total land area of tax lots(s), including water
bodies.
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all
enclosed floors of a building, including cellars, basements, mezzanines,
penthouses, corridors, and lobbies from the exterior face of the exterior
walls or from the center line of a common wall separating two
buildings, but excluding any space with floor-to-ceiling height of less
than six feet six inches. This does not include balconies, terraces or
roofs. In determining the gross floor area, any floor space that is
constructed or intended to be used solely for parking motor vehicles,
for loading or unloading of motor vehicles, or for refuse storage
chambers, refuse storage and material recovery chambers, material
recovery chambers, refuse storage and material recovery rooms, refuse
chutes, other types of facilities provided for the separation of refuse, or
for access facilities for telecommunications and broadcasting services,
or occupied solely by machinery or equipment for any lift, airconditioning
or heating system or any similar service, shall be excluded
from the gross floor area of a building.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has a coefficient of runoff of
0.75 or greater. No more than 50% of graveled areas shall be permitted
to be applied as a pervious surface.
LOT COVERAGE — The portion of a lot that is covered by impervious
surface. A green roof on any building or garage structure that provides
adequate vegetation and passive recreation use for the occupants may
be counted as pervious coverage at 75% (i.e., 100 square feet of a
"green" roof would count as 75 square feet of pervious ground surface).
NET ACREAGE — The total land area of a tax lot, excluding water
bodies.
PERVIOUS COVERAGE — The percentage of a lot covered by pervious
surface(s).
§ 240-117.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-117.3
1:415
PERVIOUS SURFACE — Any surface that does not meet the definition
of an impervious surface.
D. Uses.
(1) Permitted uses.
(a) Hotels (above first floor).
(b) Office (above first floor).
(c) Multifamily residential (above first floor).
(d) Retail and service establishments, excluding automobile sales.
(e) Restaurants.
(f) Financial institutions (no drive through).
(g) Workshops for craftsmen (artists, carpenters, etc.) with a retail
component only.
(h) Child-care centers.
(i) Real estate offices.
(2) Conditional uses.
(a) Essential services, subject to § 240-142.
(b) Veterans, civic, and community clubs, subject to § 240-146.
(3) Accessory uses.
(a) Off-street parking and loading facilities, including parking
decks.
(b) Signs.
(c) Fences.
(d) Child-care centers, subject to § 240-140.
E. Lot, height and yard restrictions. See Chapter 240, Schedule X-2.110
F. Desired design standards. The same design standards set forth in
§ 240-130C are applicable to the MXD-3 Zone.
G. Signs. Signage shall be subject to the requirements of Article XVIII of
this chapter.
H. Other provisions superseded. In the event of any inconsistency between
the provisions of this section and any other section of Chapter 240, the
provisions of this section shall prevail.
110. Editor's Note: Schedule X-2 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 240-117.3 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-118
1:416
§ 240-118. Pedestrian protection at construction sites. [Added
9-16-2008 by Ord. No. 1393-2008]
A. Temporary construction fence.
(1) Prior to the commencement of any site clearance, demolition,
excavation or other construction activity, a developer shall erect a
temporary construction fence along the entire boundary of the
construction site. Wherever it is safe and practical to do so, the
fence shall be located on the side of any existing sidewalk
("walkway") closest to the construction site, so as to preserve said
walkway for public use during the period of construction activity.
(2) The temporary construction fence shall be eight feet in height and
shall be constructed of nonclimbable, chain-link material.
(3) The temporary construction fence shall provide for gated access to
the construction site, which gate shall remain closed except during
working hours when construction activity is actively taking place,
and the gate shall be padlocked at the close of the workday.
(4) The temporary construction fence shall be maintained in good
condition until construction activity at the site is completed, at
which time the fence shall be removed. A certificate of occupancy
shall not be issued prior to removal of the construction fence.
(5) The temporary construction fence is authorized under this section
for reasons of public safety, and the provisions in Chapter 240 of
the Borough Code, § 240-137, Fences and walls, shall otherwise
remain in full force and effect.
B. Pedestrian walkways.
(1) Wherever safe and feasible, all existing pedestrian walkways shall
be preserved for continued public use during site clearance,
demolition, excavation or other construction activity. The developer
shall ensure that all pedestrian walkways in use are restored to
good repair along the entire length of the construction site prior to
commencement of any site clearance, demolition, excavation or
other construction activity.
(2) Where there is no existing walkway along a property boundary
which abuts a public is roadway, the developer shall install a
walkway along the entire length of the construction site prior to
commencement of any site clearance, demolition, excavation or
other construction activity.
(3) The developer shall ensure that all pedestrian walkways measure
at least four feet in width, are composed of a durable walking
surface and otherwise conform to § 240-74 of the Borough Code,
entitled "Sidewalks."
§ 240-118 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-118
1:417
(4) The developer shall maintain all walkways in good repair
throughout the course of construction. A certificate of occupancy
shall not issue if a walkway is not in good repair at the time of the
application.
C. Development review procedure.
(1) All applications for site plan approval and subdivision review shall
provide that the requirements in this section regarding temporary
construction fences and pedestrian walkways have been or will be
complied with, as the case may be. Final approval of plans shall not
be granted unless said plans contain drawings and provisions for a
temporary construction fence and walkway(s) in accordance with
this section.
(2) The Code section and title of this section shall be recited in every
developer's agreement after the effective date of this section and
the terms hereof incorporated therein and made a part thereof.
(3) The provisions of this section shall be applicable to every
construction site in the Borough in which a certificate of occupancy
has not been issued as of the effective date of this section, except as
otherwise provided herein.
D. Enforcement. The Code Officer for the Borough shall issue a cease and
desist order at any construction site failing to abide by the foregoing
provisions for a temporary construction fence or a walkway until such
time as there is full compliance with this section.
§ 240-118 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-118
1:418
ARTICLE XII
Nonconforming Uses, Structures or Lots
§ 240-119. Continuation.
A lawful use of land, buildings or structures existing at the effective date
of this chapter may be continued on the lot or in the structure although it
may not conform to this chapter, and any such structure may be restored
or repaired in the event of partial destruction thereof; provided, however,
that none shall be enlarged, extended, relocated, converted to another
use or altered except in conformity with this chapter, except as permitted
below. Land on which a nonconforming use or structure is located and
any nonconforming lot shall not be subdivided so as to be made more
nonconforming.
§ 240-120. Abandonment.
A nonconforming use shall be considered abandoned if it is terminated by
the owner, if a nonconforming use involving a structure is discontinued
for 12 consecutive months, or if a nonconforming use of land without
structure(s) ceases for a period of six months. The subsequent use of the
abandoned building, structure and/or land shall be in conformity with this
chapter.
§ 240-121. Maintenance.
Maintenance may be made to a nonconforming use, structure or lot,
provided that the maintenance work does not change the use, expand the
building or the functional use of the building, increase the area of a lot used
for a nonconforming purpose or increase the nonconformity in any manner.
§ 240-122. Restoration and repairs.
A. Any nonconforming building, structure or use which has been
condemned or damaged by fire, explosion, flood, windstorm or act of
God shall be examined by the following three people: the Borough
Engineer, the owner or an architect or engineer selected by the owner,
and a third person agreed to by the Borough Engineer and the owner. If
the value of repairing the condition is greater than 50% of the value of
replacing the entire structure, it shall be considered completely
destroyed and may be rebuilt to the original specifications only upon
approval of a use variance as provided by state statutes.
B. Where the value of repairing the condition is determined to be less than
50% of the value of replacing the entire structure, the nonconforming
structure or use may be rebuilt and used for the same purpose as
before, provided that it does not exceed the height, area and bulk of the
original structure. The reconstruction shall commence within 12
consecutive months of the date the building was damaged or
condemned with the reconstruction carried out without interruption;
§ 240-119 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-122
1:419
otherwise the damaged structure shall not be rebuilt as a
nonconforming use or building.
§ 240-122 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-122
1:420
ARTICLE XIII
Regulations Governing Certain Principal Permitted Uses
§ 240-123. Mixed-Use Commercial/Residential Development
(MCRD) Zone.
A. Purpose. The purpose and intent of this district is to allow for a
development involving a mixture of compatible commercial, office,
attached residential land uses and related activities and public spaces
to be accommodated in a group of structures designed to enhance and
promote the southerly portion of the Borough of Edgewater. This area
shall be planned on the basis of an integrated, comprehensive design
with respect to the location and relationship of buildings, parking,
landscape amenity, architectural elements, public open space areas,
environmental features, roads, pedestrian walkways, access to the
surrounding road network and utilities.
B. Description of the Mixed-Use Commercial/Residential Development
District. The MCRD Zone shall be deemed to constitute the following
lands: Block 91, Lot 1, as shown on the Glenwood Mall illustration in the
1998 Borough of Edgewater Master Plan Reexamination Report.
C. Permitted uses. In the Mixed-Use Commercial/Residential Development
District, no buildings or structures shall be erected nor shall any land or
building be designed, used or intended to be used for any purpose other
than the following:
(1) Principal permitted uses. Banks, business and professional offices,
child-care centers, financial institutions, hotels, multifamily
residential, retail and service commercial uses and restaurants
(eating and drinking establishments) and marinas.
(2) Accessory uses. Off-street parking and loading facilities, including
parking decks; signs; accessory storage within a fully enclosed
permanent structure for materials, goods and supplies intended for
sale or consumption on the premises; recreation facilities; fences
and walls; accessory retail sales in office and hotel buildings,
including newsstands, tobacconists, gift shops, restaurants, beauty
parlors and related uses and activities; and other customary
accessory uses and buildings which are clearly incidental to the
principal uses and buildings permitted in this zone.
(3) Conditional uses: essential services, as defined and regulated by
the chapter.
D. Area and bulk regulations.
(1) Tract development.
(a) A minimum of 15 acres shall be required for development in
the Mixed-Use Commercial/Residential Development District.
§ 240-123 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-123
1:421
Proposed roads bisecting a tract shall not render a tract
noncontiguous.
(b) A minimum street frontage of 500 feet of frontage on a major
arterial road, as defined in the identified in the Borough
Master Plan.
(c) Building setbacks. Buildings shall be set back from the River
Road right-of-way a minimum of 50 feet. A minimum setback of
15 feet shall be maintained from the tract's northerly and
southerly external property lines to the parking deck. All
buildings atop the deck shall be set back minimally 25 feet
from the tract's north and south property lines.
(d) Building and impervious coverage. The maximum permitted
coverage by building decks and other impervious material shall
be 85%. The maximum permitted coverage by buildings and
other impervious material on the roof of the deck shall be 80%.
(e) Floor area ratio. No single nonresidential use shall be
permitted to exceed a floor area ratio (FAR) of 0.3, provided
that the total amount of retail and office development shall in
no event exceed 400,000 square feet of gross floor area within
the entire area encompassed by the MCRD Zone, and further
provided that any other regulation set forth herein restricting
intensity of use for any particular use, which may be more
restrictive, shall apply.
(f) Density. The maximum permitted residential density for all
residential development in an MCRD Zone shall be 25 dwelling
units per acre.
(g) Landscaped perimeter. A minimum fifteen-foot-wide
landscaped buffer shall be maintained along all external
property lines, except that no such landscaped buffer shall be
required along the Hudson River side of the property where
the applicant shall be required to install a riverfront walkway
pursuant to the Borough Master Plan and applicable State of
New Jersey requirements or where main access driveways
from New River Road abut the external property line. The
buffer shall consist of a landscaped and planted area.
(h) Parking. The tract shall incorporate underground parking as a
principal approach to its overall design. This shall ensure that
the at-grade design will not consist of a substantial open lot
with its associated expanse of blacktop. Surface-level parking
shall not constitute more than 25% of all on-site parking. The
height of any parking deck wall which parallels River Road,
and which is situated within 200 feet of River Road, shall not
exceed a height above grade of 15 feet.
E. Lot development.
§ 240-123 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-123
1:422
(1) A minimum lot area of 1.5 acres shall be required for individual lots
within the MCRD Zone. This regulation is designed solely to enable
subdivision of the overall tract following approval of a site plan
identifying a comprehensive development plan for the entire tract.
(2) Building setbacks to internal roads and property lines. Buildings
shall be set back a minimum distance of 10 feet from all internal
roadways and driveways.
(3) A minimum building setback of 25 feet between buildings shall be
provided.
(4) Building height. (All of the following heights shall be measured
from the roof of the parking deck.)
(a) Retail and service commercial uses. Retail and service
commercial uses shall be permitted to be located in the first
two stories above grade in the building they are located in,
provided that in no event shall such use exceed a height of 30
feet.
(b) Offices. Office buildings shall be permitted a maximum
building height of six stories and 70 feet.
(c) Banks and restaurants. Freestanding banks and restaurants
shall be permitted a maximum building height of two stories
and 35 feet.
(d) Hotels. Hotels shall be permitted a maximum building height of
eight stories and 90 feet.
(e) Residential. Residential uses shall be permitted a maximum
building height of five stories and 55 feet.
(5) Ancillary rooftop appurtenances. Ancillary rooftop appurtenances
including decorative features, may exceed the height limitations
set forth herein, provided that in no event shall such appurtenances
exceed 15 feet in height, nor cover more than 20% of the area of
the roof of such building.
(6) Multiple retail buildings shall be permitted on site, provided that
no single retail use occupant shall be permitted to have a maximum
building footprint exceeding 50,000 square feet of gross floor area.
F. Supplemental regulations governing specific uses.
(1) Multiple buildings on a lot. Multiple buildings on a lot shall be
permitted.
(2) Office use. Offices constructed in the MCRD Zone shall be limited
to a maximum of 150,000 square feet of gross floor area. Permitted
types of office uses shall include general business, medical and
professional offices. Ancillary uses within office buildings may
§ 240-123 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-123
1:423
include such activities as coffee shops, snack bars, news stands,
convenience stores, child care facilities, health clubs, parking lots
and decks and other accessory uses as are customarily part of an
office development.
(3) Hotels. A hotel constructed in the MCRD Zone shall contain a
maximum floor area of 130,000 square feet of gross floor space.
Such facility may include such facilities as restaurants, dining room
areas, bars, conference rooms, convenience stores and other
accessory uses as are customarily part of a hotel development.
(4) Residential. Multifamily dwellings shall only be permitted above
the first story of any structure, with the first floor devoted to retail
and/or service commercial use.
G. Signage. See Article XVIII.
H. Parking. The following parking standards shall apply.
(1) Retail/service commercial: one space per 325 square feet of gross
floor area.
(2) Office uses: one space per 250 square feet of gross floor area.
(3) Hotel uses: one space per room.
(4) Restaurants: one space per 3.5 seats.
(5) Banks: one space per 300 square feet of gross floor area.
(6) Residential: two spaces per dwelling unit.
I. General design standards.
(1) Building form and mass. All buildings should relate harmoniously to
the site's natural features and other on-site buildings, as well as
other structures in the vicinity that have a visual relationship and
orientation to the proposed buildings. Such features should be
incorporated into the design of building form and mass and assist
in the determination of building orientation in order to preserve
visual access to natural or man-made community focal points.
(2) Large horizontal buildings, i.e., buildings with a linear dimension of
more than 250 feet, should be broken into segments having vertical
orientation. A visual and/or physical break should be provided
minimally every 100 linear feet. Offsets consisting of a break in the
linear plan of the building of a minimum 2 1/2 feet shall be
required. Related architectural elements which preclude a
continuous uninterrupted facade building length may also be
utilized to achieve a break in the linear dimension of the building
walls in place of an offset if determined by the approving authority
to achieve the same purpose. All building foundations shall be
appropriately landscaped.
§ 240-123 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-123
1:424
(3) Buildings with expansive blank walls are prohibited. Appropriate
facade treatments should be imposed to ensure that such buildings
are integrated with the rest of the development.
(4) New buildings are encouraged to incorporate such building
elements as entrances, corners, graphic panels, display windows,
etc., as a means to provide a visually attractive environment.
(5) Cornices, awnings, canopies, flagpoles, signage and other
ornamental features should be encouraged as a means to enhance
the visual environment. Such features may be permitted to project
over pedestrian sidewalks, with a minimum vertical clearance of
8.5 feet, to within three feet of a curb.
J. Facade treatment.
(1) A human scale of development should be achieved at grade and
along street frontages through the use of such elements as
windows, doors, columns, awnings and canopies.
(2) Multitenant buildings shall provide varied storefronts and such
elements as noted above for all ground-floor tenants. Upper floors
shall be coordinated with ground floors through common materials
and colors.
(3) Design emphasis should be placed on primary building entrances.
They should be vertical in character, particularly when there is the
need to provide contrast with a long linear building footprint, and
such details as piers, columns and framing should be utilized to
reinforce verticality.
(4) Side and rear elevations should receive architectural treatments
comparable to front facades when public access or public parking
is provided next to the buildings.
(5) Rhythms which carry through a block, such as storefront patterns,
window spacing, entrances, canopies or awnings, etc., should be
incorporated into facades.
(6) The facade elevations of the parking deck shall receive
architectural treatment which complements the buildings located
on the deck's rooftop. For example, window cut-outs, framing and
other architectural vernacular detailing should be used to reinforce
the complementary appearance of the parking deck, integrating its
design into the overall project.
K. Material and texture.
(1) A variety of materials may be appropriate. Masonry, which works
well at the base of a building, can vary in size, color and texture and
enables the provision of a decorative pattern or band. Above 12
feet, it can be substituted with other suitable materials.
§ 240-123 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-123
1:425
(2) The use of fabric or metal canopies is to be encouraged, especially
over storefronts, at entrances or over display windows.
(3) Integration of large-scale graphics, where appropriate, into the
facade is encouraged.
L. Lighting.
(1) The use of creative lighting schemes to highlight building facades
and related areas of a site shall be encouraged. The use of
traditional-style lanterns and similar fixtures also shall be
encouraged. Exterior neon lights and lighting generating glare and
unnecessary nightglow impacts shall be prohibited.
(2) Whenever possible, light poles should be integrated into
landscaped islands.
M. Streetscape design.
(1) The use of street furniture (benches, tables, trash receptacles, etc.)
shall be encouraged throughout the development, provided that the
materials used are consistent with the overall concept of the
building design.
(2) Sidewalks should have a width of at least 10 feet along main
pedestrian streets where active pedestrian corridors are located
and active pedestrian movements are encouraged and located
along building frontages so as to tie the various buildings together.
Wider sidewalks may be designed for special places such as plazas
or courts.
N. Landscape.
(1) A hierarchy of landscape features should be established for the
site. The main entrance road should include street trees on each
side of the roadway, and such trees should be different than the
trees used in parking areas. Spacing between trees shall be a
maximum 40 feet unless another vertical element, such as a
decorative light fixture or blade sign, is used between the trees, in
which case a maximum of 60 feet shall be permitted. Trees along
primary streets should be in a formal arrangement, while informal
planting may be provided along access roads.
(2) Street trees and other plant material should be provided at the
ends of parking bays. Landscaped islands should be at least six feet
in width. This section does not apply to parking spaces in parking
garages.
(3) Trees should be a two-and-five-tenths- to three-inch caliper.
(4) Parking rows longer than 20 parking spaces should have a six-footwide
landscaped island to break the pavement. This section does
not apply to parking spaces in parking garages.
§ 240-123 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-123
1:426
§ 240-124. Community residences.
Community residences for the developmentally disabled and community
shelters for victim of domestic violence shall be a permitted use in all
residential districts, subject to the following:
(5) Foundation plantings, including trees and shrubs, should be
planted along the parking deck walls to break up the extended
building wall. Particular focus should be on the River Road corridor,
consistent with the Borough Master Plan recommendations.
O. Submittal requirements.
(1) An applicant for development in the Mixed-Use Commercial/
Residential Development Zone must submit a site plan indicating
the manner in which the entire fifteen-acre (plus or minus) tract is
to be developed. Said plan shall include all the data required for
site plan review and clearly indicate the distribution of use and
intensity of use of land within the tract. This zone-wide approach to
development in the MCRD Zone is mandated to ensure that the
zone tract is developed within the framework of a comprehensive,
integrated design and not in a piecemeal fashion.
(2) The submittal shall contain, in addition to the site plan submittal
provisions, a report detailing the following:
(a) An indication of the total number of dwellings units, by
bedroom count, and amount of nonresidential floor area and
the land area to be devoted to residential and each
nonresidential use, by use. The density and intensity of use of
the entire planned development shall be noted.
(b) A traffic and circulation plan, regarding vehicular and
pedestrian movements, addressing the goals and policy
statements set forth in the Borough Master Plan, shall be
provided. Such report shall address existing and projected
vehicular peak-hour movements, turning movements, and the
need for improvements to enhance traffic safety and
convenience in the area.
(c) A socioeconomic impact study shall be required pursuant to
the applicable goal (Goal No. 15) and associated policy
statement as set forth in the Borough Master Plan.
(d) A proposed timing schedule in the case where construction is
contemplated over a period of years, including any terms or
conditions which are intended to protect the interests of the
public and of the residents who occupy any section of the
development prior to the completion of the development in its
entirety.
§ 240-123 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-124
1:427
§ 240-125. Child-care facilities.
Applications for freestanding child-care centers as a permitted principal use
shall comply with the following.
A. A community residence or shelter shall comply fully with all zoning and
health regulations applicable to single-family residences in the zone
district in which it is located.
B. A community residence or shelter may not be occupied by more than six
residents, excluding resident staff.
A. Area and bulk regulations: [Amended 12-17-2012 by Ord. No.
1485-2012; 9-15-2014 by Ord. No. 1512-2014]
Regulation
District MCRD, CBD, B-1,
B-2, B-3,
B-4, MXD-1, MXD-2, MXD-3
and OR-1
Minimum lot area (square feet) 25,000
Minimum lot width (feet) 100
Minimum lot depth (feet) 150
Minimum front yard (feet) 20
Minimum side yards (feet) 10
Minimum rear yards (feet) 40
Maximum building coverage 40%
Maximum impervious coverage 75%
Maximum building height (stories/
feet)
2/30
B. A minimum of 150 square feet of outdoor play area shall be provided for
the first five children, plus an additional 30 square feet of play area per
child at peak usage. Play areas shall be permitted in the rear and side
yards only and shall be enclosed by a fence at least four feet in height
and landscaped and screened from adjoining properties.
C. One off-street parking space shall be provided for every six children,
plus an additional space shall be provided for each staff member on site
at peak hour.
D. Such facility shall comply with all applicable governmental
requirements and shall be licensed by the New Jersey Department of
Human Services.
E. A child-care facility may be permitted to occupy an entire building or a
portion of an existing building which is partially occupied by other uses,
irrespective of any other ordinance limitations on the number of
principal permitted uses allowed on a lot.
§ 240-124 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-125
1:428
§ 240-126. Multifamily developments.
F. The floor area occupied by a child-care center in any building for which
the child-care center is an accessory use shall be excluded in
calculating any parking requirement otherwise applicable to that
amount of floor space and shall be excluded from the permitted floor
area ratio allowable for that building.
A. Each development shall have a compatible architectural and
landscaping theme. Each project shall specify how each of the following
considerations has been incorporated in the overall plans: landscaping
techniques; building orientation to the site and other structures;
topography; natural features, such as wooded areas, drainagecourses,
soil conditions and topographic relief; and building design features,
such as varying unit widths, staggering unit setbacks, providing
different exterior materials, changing rooflines and roof designs,
altering building heights and changing types of windows, shutters,
doors, porches, colors and vertical or horizontal orientation of the
facades, singularly or in combination.
B. The configuration of structures may be any alignment that meets the
yard requirements and does not exceed the following overall or
component building lengths: 200 feet on one plane; provided that an
angled building's hypotenuse shall not exceed 340 feet. (See Appendix
for illustration.111)
C. Townhouse structures shall have not less than three nor more than
eight units in one townhouse building group.
D. The location of recreational facilities shall consider the proximity of
structures, type of recreational facility, noise level and evening
illumination which may create nuisances for residents and neighboring
property owners and pedestrian and bicycle traffic across major
interior roads or driveways. The periphery of any recreation area shall
be no closer to a residential structure than the minimum yard for that
structure. For any apartment development or building in excess of 12
dwelling units, at least 15% of the total land area shall be set aside and
developed for usable recreation space. In no case shall such space be
smaller than 1/4 acre.
E. All buildings and structures shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from
internal driveways.
F. The minimum setback distance between townhouse and other similar
low-rise residential buildings shall be as follows:
(1) Front-to-front or back-to-back units: 50 feet.
(2) Front-to-side units: 40 feet.
111. Editor's Note: Said illustrations are on file in the Borough offices.
§ 240-125 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-126
1:429
§ 240-127. Places of worship.
Churches, temples and other places of worship shall be governed by the
following regulations.
§ 240-128. Single-family cluster residential.
Cluster development may be approved in the R-1 Zone in accordance with
the following standards, provided that the tract size is at least five acres and
the approving authority finds that:
(3) Side-to-back units: 30 feet.
(4) Side-to-side units: 25 feet.
A. Area, bulk and yard requirements.
(1) Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
(4) Minimum front yard: 35 feet.
(5) Minimum side yards: 25 feet.
(6) Minimum rear yard: 35 feet.
(7) Maximum building height: 2 1/2 stories/35 feet.
(8) Maximum building coverage: 30%.
(9) Maximum impervious coverage: 65%.
(10) Minimum buffer width: 25 feet.
B. Where two or more buildings are located on a site, they shall be
separated by a yard area at least twice the average height of the two
buildings or 40 feet, whichever is greater.
A. The maximum number of dwelling units shall not exceed six dwellings
per acre.
B. Land area equal to a minimum of 20% of the entire tract shall be set
aside for open space. Lands to be set aside shall be dedicated to either
the Borough of Edgewater or a homeowners' association.
C. There shall be a minimum building setback from any internal street
right-of-way of 20 feet and a minimum building setback from the River
Road right-of-way of 50 feet.
D. There shall be a minimum distance of 20 feet between the side walls of
any two buildings and a minimum distance of 40 feet between the rear
wall of opposite-facing dwellings.
§ 240-126 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-128
1:430
§ 240-129. Marina facilities.
Marina facilities shall conform to the following requirements:
§ 240-130. Shadyside Mixed-Use District (B-2 Zone).
E. No building or structure shall exceed 2 1/2 stories and 35 feet in height.
A. Marinas permitted in residential zones. Marinas permitted in
residential zones shall comply with the following:
(1) Parking shall be provided to accommodate one parking space for
every two boat slips.
(2) No boat repair work shall be permitted on site except for routine
repairs and maintenance work for those boats that are a registered
member of the marina.
B. Marinas permitted in nonresidential zones. Marinas permitted in
nonresidential zones shall comply with the following:
(1) Parking shall be provided to accommodate one parking space for
every boat slip, plus one parking space per two employees.
(2) The outdoor storage of boats and equipment shall be conducted
within a fenced and secured area which shall incorporate
screening, either through the use of fencing, landscape materials
or a combination of both.
(3) The storage of petroleum, gasoline or other highly flammable oils
and their volatile products above ground in total quantities greater
than 3,000 gallons or underground in total quantities greater than
20,000 gallons for use in connection with a marina is prohibited.
A. Purpose. The B-2 Shadyside Mixed Use District is designed to
acknowledge the area's unique characteristics which is typified by
small lot sizes, side-line-to-side-line building arrangements, and
compatible building heights, and to promote a comprehensive design
which will provide a theme identifying the district. The zoning should
allow for development involving a mixture of compatible commercial,
attached residential land uses, and related activities. This area shall be
planned on the basis of an integrated, comprehensive design with
respect to the location and relationship of buildings, parking, landscape
amenity, architectural elements, environmental features, roads,
pedestrian walkways, access to the surrounding road network, and
utilities.
B. Permitted uses. In the B-2 Shadyside Mixed-Use District no buildings or
structures shall be erected nor shall any land or building be designed,
used or intended to be used for any purpose other than the following:
(1) Principal permitted uses. Art galleries and studios, banks, business
and professional offices, child-care centers, financial institutions,
§ 240-128 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-130
1:431
multifamily residential above the first story of any structure in
which the first floor is devoted to retail and/or service commercial
use, retail and service commercial uses, and restaurants (eating
and drinking establishments).
(2) Accessory uses. Off-street parking and loading facilities, including
parking decks, provided that the decks shall be limited to one level
above an at-grade parking level; signs; accessory storage within a
fully enclosed permanent structure for materials, goods and
supplies intended for sale or consumption on the premises;
recreation facilities; fences and walls; and other customary
accessory uses and buildings which are clearly incidental to the
principal uses and buildings permitted in this zone.
(3) Conditional uses: essential services, as defined and regulated by
the chapter.
C. Architectural facade treatment and design. A consistent, compatible
facade and massing is essential to relate on-site development with the
Old River Road area and affirm the character of the Shadyside area.
New buildings are encouraged to incorporate such building elements as
entrances, corners, graphic panels, display windows, etc., in the
manner described in the Borough's Master Plan as a means to provide a
visually attractive environment which affirms the established character
of the area. There shall be an established architectural theme for the
mixed-use buildings within the B-2 Zone, which includes facade
treatments, signage, light poles, benches and other design elements.
The following standards shall apply:
(1) The use of materials, roofing, trim, siding, signs, window and door
elements shall be consistent with the traditional architectural
styles represented in the Shadyside area. All facades must be
treated with the same architectural facade treatment, which shall
consist of brick, finished masonry, stone, wood or a combination
thereof. Additionally, facade treatments facing both Old and New
River Roads shall have a "front" appearance in order to maintain a
visual relationship with the two roadways.
(2) Multitenant buildings shall provide varied facade treatments on
storefronts and such elements as noted below for all ground floor
tenants. Upper floors shall be coordinated with ground floors
through complementary materials and colors.
(3) A human scale of development should be achieved at grade and
along street frontages through the use of such elements as
windows, doors, columns, awnings and canopies. Design emphasis
should be placed on primary building entrances. They should be
vertical in character, particularly when there is the need to provide
contrast with a long linear building footprint, and such details as
pillars, columns and framing should be utilized to reinforce
verticality.
§ 240-130 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-130
1:432
(4) Cornices, awnings, canopies, flagpoles, signage and other
ornamental features should be encouraged as a means to enhance
the visual environment. Such features may be permitted to project
over pedestrian sidewalks, with a minimum vertical clearance of
8.5 feet, to within three feet of a curb.
(5) A variety of building materials may be appropriate. Masonry, which
works well at the base of a building, can vary in size, color and
texture and enables the provision of a decorative pattern or band.
Above 12 feet, it can be substituted with other complementary
materials.
(6) The use of fabric or metal canopies is to be encouraged, especially
over storefronts, at entrances or over display windows.
(7) Integration of graphic detailing into the facade is permitted.
(8) Lighting.
(a) The use of creative lighting schemes to highlight building
facades and related areas of a site shall be encouraged.
(b) The use of traditional-style lanterns and similar fixtures shall
be required.
(c) Exterior neon lights and lighting generating glare and
unnecessary nightglow impacts shall be prohibited.
(d) Whenever possible, light poles should be integrated into
landscaped islands.
(9) The use of street furniture (benches, tables, trash receptacles, etc.)
shall be encouraged throughout a development, provided that the
materials used are consistent with the overall concept of the
building design. Sidewalks should have a width of at least 10 feet
where active pedestrian corridors are located, and active
pedestrian movements are encouraged and located along building
frontages so as to tie buildings in the area together. Wider
sidewalks may be designed for special places such as plazas or
courts.
(10) Signs. See Article XVIII.
D. Area and bulk regulations.
(1) Minimum of 2,500 square feet of lot area shall be required.
(2) Minimum lot width of 25 feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth of 100 feet.
(4) Minimum front yard of five feet. A maximum front yard of 10 feet.
§ 240-130 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-130
1:433
§ 240-131. Supplemental regulations for R-5 Zone parcels.
[Amended 12-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1485-2012; 9-15-2014 by Ord.
No. 1512-2014; 10-2-2017 by Ord. No. 1553-2017]
(5) Minimum side yard of zero feet. Where provided, a minimum of five
feet.
(6) Minimum rear yard of 10 feet.
(7) Maximum permitted residential density is 35 units per acre.
Residential uses are only permitted above the first floor level.
(8) Maximum building height: four stories/45 feet.
A. All parcels zoned R-5 adjacent to the B-2 Shadyside District and River
Road, defined as Block 91.01, Lot 1.01, and Block 92.01, Lot 1.01, are
and shall be subject to the following requirements:
(1) Distribution of uses.
(a) Public open space. The area extending southward from
Thompson Lane, for a distance of minimally 125 feet measured
along Old River Road, and minimally 150 feet along River
Road, shall be retained as an open space element. Such area
shall be designed as a public gathering area or gazebo,
incorporating landscaping and water amenities.
(b) The area south of the public open space shall be devoted to
parking. This, in conjunction with the aforementioned open
space feature, will serve to ensure the retention of a viewshed
to the Hudson River and New York City skyline. The parking
area may consist of deck parking, provided that the maximum
height of a parking deck shall be four feet above the finished
grade along Old River Road.
(c) A minimum setback of 350 feet from the southerly right-of-way
line of Thompson Lane to the proposed mixed-use building.
(d) Mixed commercial and residential use buildings shall be
permitted, provided that multifamily residential units be
located above the first story of any structure in which the first
floor is devoted to retail and/or service commercial use.
(e) Building setbacks to property lines and internal driveways.
[1] All buildings shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from
Old River Road.
[2] All buildings shall be set back a minimum of 35 feet from
River Road.
[3] The minimum setback distance between the senior citizen
residence and all other buildings shall be 200 feet.
§ 240-130 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-131
1:434
[4] Buildings shall be set back a minimum distance of 10 feet
from all internal driveways.
(2) Maximum building length and orientation.
(a) Buildings shall have an east/west orientation, with the longest
dimension perpendicular to Old River Road and New River
Road. The maximum length shall be 210 feet. All buildings
exceeding a linear dimension of 100 feet shall be required to
have building offsets every 50 feet, with each offset consisting
in a break in the linear plan of the building of a minimum of
2 1/2 feet.
(b) Related architectural elements which preclude a continuous
uninterrupted facade building length may also be utilized to
achieve a break in the linear dimension of the building walls.
All building foundations shall be appropriately landscaped.
B. Definitions applicable to all R-5 zoned properties. The following
definitions will be applicable to all R-5 zoned properties:
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR) — The gross floor area of buildings or
structures on a lot divided by the gross total lot area.
GROSS FLOOR AREA —
GROSS TOTAL LOT — The total land area of tax lot(s), including water
bodies.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has a coefficient of runoff of
0.75 or greater. No more than 50% of graveled areas shall be permitted
to be applied as a pervious surface.
LOT COVERAGE — The portion of a lot that is covered by impervious
surface. A green roof on any building or garage structure that provides
The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all enclosed floors of
a building, including cellars, basements, mezzanines, penthouses,
corridors, and lobbies, from the exterior face of the exterior walls
or from the center line of a common wall separating two buildings,
but excluding any space with a floor-to-ceiling height of less than
six feet six inches. This does not include balconies, terraces or
roofs.
(1)
In determining the gross floor area, any floor space that is
constructed or intended to be used solely for parking motor
vehicles, loading or unloading of motor vehicles, or for refuse
storage chambers, refuse storage and material recovery rooms,
refuse chutes, other types of facilities provided for the separation
of refuse, or for access facilities for telecommunications and
broadcasting services, or occupied solely by machinery or
equipment for any lift, air-conditioning or heating system or any
similar service, shall be excluded from the gross floor area of a
building.
(2)
§ 240-131 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-131
1:435
adequate vegetation and passive recreation use for the occupants may
be counted as pervious coverage at 75% (i.e., 100 square feet of a
"green" roof would count as 75 square feet of pervious ground surface).
NET ACREAGE — The total land area of a tax lot, excluding water
bodies.
PERVIOUS COVERAGE — The percentage of a lot covered by pervious
surface(s).
PERVIOUS SURFACE — Any surface that does not meet the definition
of an "impervious surface."
C. Parking and loading for all R-5 zoned properties.
(1) Parking and loading shall be subject to the requirements of Article
XIX of this chapter.
(2) Structured parking is permitted. The number of parking stories
shall not be counted towards the number of stories permitted.
D. Affordable housing component for certain R-5 zoned properties. To
advance the goals and objectives for providing affordable housing in the
State of New Jersey, the following subsection provides for affordable
housing units within the R-5 Zone within the Borough of Edgewater.
(1) The following parcels, identified by block and lot, shall be zoned as
indicated, and the Borough of Edgewater Zoning Map authorized
by § 240-93 shall be amended as necessary in accordance
therewith:
Address Block Lot
115 River Road 96 3.01
145 River Road 95 1
225 River Road 91 1**
Notes:
** Southern portion of property known as "Development Unit B,"
having an area of 135,959 square feet or 3.12 acres.
(2) Consistent with N.J.A.C. 5:9, a 15% set-aside for affordable housing
units is mandatory for the residential component of any multifamily
rental building, and a 20% set-aside for affordable housing units is
mandatory for the residential component of any multifamily
building with for-sale units.
(3) Permitted density:
(a) Mid-rise: 35 dwelling units per acre.
(b) High-rise: 105 dwelling units per acre.
(c) Senior: 115 dwelling units per acre.
§ 240-131 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-131
1:436
§ 240-131.1. Affordable Housing Overlay Zone (AHO). [Added
11-14-2016 by Ord. No. 1537-2016]
(4) General provisions for constructing affordable units.
(a) Affordable housing units being constructed on site shall be in
conformance with COAH's third-round rules at N.J.A.C. 5:94-1
et seq., and the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls at
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., including, but not limited to,
requirements regarding phasing schedule, controls on
affordability, low-/moderate-income split, heating source,
maximum rent and/or sales price, affordability average,
bedroom distribution and affirmative marketing.
(b) To the greatest extent possible, affordable housing units being
provided within inclusionary developments shall be disbursed
throughout inclusionary developments and shall be located
within buildings designed to be architecturally
indistinguishable from the market-rate units otherwise being
constructed within the development. To that end, the scale,
massing, roof pitch and architectural detailing (such as the
selection of exterior materials, doors, windows, etc.) of the
buildings containing the affordable housing units shall be
similar to and compatible with that of the market-rate units.
(5) Other provisions superseded. In the event of any inconsistency
between the provisions of this section and any other section of
Chapter 240, the provisions of this section shall prevail.
A. R-3 Zone residential uses.
(1) Objective: to provide a realistic opportunity for affordable housing
development.
(2) Applicability.
(a) Multi-Family R-3 Zone residential uses are only permitted
where a 15% affordable residential component set-aside is
provided.
(b) The affordable component shall be compliant with § 240-154.
(3) Uses.
(a) Permitted uses.
[1] All uses permitted in the underlying zones.
[2] Multifamily residential subject to the provisions of the R-3
Zone is permitted only where a minimum of 15% of the
units are set aside for affordable housing.
§ 240-131 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-131.1
1:437
[3] Age-restricted multifamily residential subject to the
provisions of the R-3 Zone is permitted only where a
minimum of 15% of the units are set aside for affordable
housing.
(b) Conditional uses.
[1] All conditional uses permitted in the underlying zones.
(c) Accessory uses.
[1] All accessory uses permitted in the underlying zones.
(4) Bulk regulations.
(a) The minimum lot area required shall be 10,000 square feet.
There shall be no minimum lot width or minimum lot depth
requirement.
(b) The remainder of the bulk regulations for multifamily
residential shall follow the regulations of the R-3 zone for
apartments and townhouses as follows:
[1] Minimum front yard: 25 feet.
[2] Minimum side yard: 20 feet.
[3] Minimum rear yard: 25 feet.
[4] Maximum building coverage: 40%.
[5] Maximum impervious coverage: 75%.
[6] Maximum building height: three residential stories/35
feet.
[7] Density: 12 du/ac.
(5) Signs. Signage shall be subject to the requirements of Article XVIII
of this chapter.
(6) Parking and loading.
(a) Parking and loading shall be subject to the requirements of
Article XIX of this chapter.
(b) Structured parking is permitted. The number of parking stories
shall not be counted towards the number of stories permitted.
B. MXD-2 Zone residential uses. [Added 10-2-2017 by Ord. No.
1554-2017]
(1) Objectives.
§ 240-131.1 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-131.1
1:438
(a) To provide for the proper and realistic development of parcels
of land toward the south end of town and to provide an
opportunity for affordable housing development.
(2) Applicability.
(a) Multifamily MXD-2 Zone residential uses are only permitted
where a 15% affordable residential component set-aside is
provided.
(b) The affordable component shall be compliant with § 240-154.
(3) Uses.
(a) Permitted uses.
[1] All uses permitted in the underlying zones.
[2] Multifamily residential subject to the provisions of the
MXD-2 Zone is permitted only where a minimum of
affordable 15% of the units are set-aside for affordable
housing.
[3] Age-restricted multifamily residential subject to the
provisions of the MXD-2 Zone is permitted only where a
minimum of affordable 15% of the units are set aside for
affordable housing.
(b) Conditional uses.
[1] All conditional uses permitted in the underlying zones.
(c) Accessory uses.
[1] All accessory uses permitted in the underlying zones.
(4) Bulk regulations.
(a) All bulk regulations for MXD-2 Zone contained within
§ 240-117.2
(5) Signs.
(a) Signage shall be subject to the requirements of Article XVIII of
this chapter.
(6) Parking and loading.
(a) Parking and loading shall be subject to the requirements of
Article XIX of this chapter.
(b) Structured parking is permitted. The number of parking stories
shall not be counted towards the number of stories permitted.
§ 240-131.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-131.1
1:439
(7) The following parcels, identified by block and lot, shall be zoned as
indicated, and the Borough of Edgewater Zoning Map shall be
amended as necessary in accordance therewith:
Block 89, Lot 4
180 Old River Road
(8) Other provisions superseded.
(a) In the event of any inconsistency between the provisions of this
section and any other section of Chapter 240, the provisions of
this section shall prevail.
§ 240-131.1 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-131.1
1:440
ARTICLE XIV
Regulations Governing Certain Accessory Structures and Use
§ 240-132. Accessory structures and uses in residential districts.
No accessory building or structure shall be built on any lot on which there
is not a principal building or structure.
A. Accessory structures or uses shall not be located in the required front
yard or within the front half of the side yard of any residential zone and
may be erected anywhere within the required rear yard, except as
provided herein:
(1) In the R-1 and R-2 Zone Districts, patios may be located in any
required rear or side yard. Decks must meet the yard requirement
of the principal building to which they are attached. All other
accessory structures or uses shall be set back minimally five feet
from a side or rear property line. Accessory structures, other than
patios and decks, which are greater than 150 square feet in area
but no more than 325 square feet in area, shall be set back
minimally 10 feet from side and rear property lines, and accessory
structures which are greater than 325 square feet in area shall be
set back minimally 15 feet from side and rear property lines.
(2) Accessory structures not attached to the principal structure, such
as sheds and detached garages, shall be set back minimally 10 feet
from the principal building.
(3) Light posts, mailboxes, fences, signs and retaining walls shall be
permitted within the required front yard of any residential use. Offstreet
parking is also permitted in a front yard, restricted to the
driveway area.
B. No accessory structure or use in a residential zone shall exceed a
height of 15 feet and 1 1/2 stories, except as provided in § 240-99, and
as further provided for in the R-3, R-4 and R-5 Zones where parking
decks shall not exceed 20 feet in height above grade.
C. Accessory structures or uses in the R-1 and R-2 Zones shall not occupy
an area greater than 10% of the area of the rear yard.
D. Accessory parking structures or uses in the R-3, R-4 and R-5 Zones shall
not occupy an area greater than 60% of the site. All other accessory
features shall not occupy an area greater than 15% of the site.
E. When an accessory structure or use is attached to the principal
building, it shall comply in all respects with the requirements of this
chapter applicable to the principal building or use.
F. In the case of a through lot, no accessory structure or use shall
encroach upon that 1/4 of the lot depth nearest each street upon which
the lot has frontage.
§ 240-132 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-132
1:441
§ 240-133. Accessory structures and uses in nonresidential
districts.
No accessory building or structure shall be built on any lot on which there
is not a principal building or structure.
§ 240-134. Private garages in the R-1 and R-2 Zones.
Private garages shall be permitted as accessory uses in all residential zones,
either as detached structures or as part of the main building, for the storage
of no more than three automobiles, which shall be owned by the occupants
of the main building. Not more than one commercial vehicle, owned by the
occupants of the main building, which shall not exceed 6,000 pounds in
gross weight, shall be stored in said garage.
G. No accessory structure shall be used for human habitation.
H. Accessory commercial uses in the R-4 and R-5 Zones shall be limited to
laundry and dry-cleaning facilities, valet services and convenience store
facilities which are designed for the exclusive use of the residents
therein. Medical and dental offices shall be permitted but are limited to
the lobby floor of the building. Parking to accommodate this office use
shall be as prescribed by ordinance and shall be identified on site for
said use.
A. Accessory structures or uses shall not be located in the required front
yard of a nonresidential zone, except that off-street parking spaces and/
or parking garages shall be permitted, but in no case shall said parking
lot or portion thereof be permitted closer than 15 feet from the street
line.
B. Accessory structures or uses shall not be located within eight feet of a
side or rear lot line. Accessory structures shall be minimally 15 feet
from the principal building.
C. No off-street loading area or loading facility shall be permitted in a front
yard.
D. No accessory structure or use in a nonresidential zone shall exceed a
height of 15 feet and 1 1/2 stories, except as provided in § 240-99.
E. In any nonresidential zone, when an accessory structure or use is
attached to the principal building, it shall comply in all respects with
the requirements of this chapter applicable to the principal building or
use.
F. Accessory structures or uses shall not occupy an area greater than 15%
of the area of the rear yard.
§ 240-132 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-135
1:442
§ 240-135. Trailers, boats and recreational vehicles.
The outdoor storage or parking of trailers, boats or recreational vehicles is
prohibited in all districts, except that, on detached single-family and twofamily
lots in residential districts, not more than one trailer or recreational
vehicle and not more than one boat can be stored or parked in the side yard
or rear yard of the premises upon which the owner of said vehicle resides,
provided that storage or parking is not within five feet from any lot line and
the vehicle is properly licensed, registered and in good repair, and further
provided that no trailer shall exceed a length of 25 feet.
§ 240-136. Swimming pools and tennis courts.
§ 240-137. Fences and walls.
A. Swimming pools and tennis courts in the R-1 and R-2 Zones shall not be
located within 10 feet of a property line nor closer to a street line than
the rear wall of the dwelling to which they are accessory uses.
B. Swimming pools and tennis courts shall be suitably fenced in
accordance with the Borough requirements as set forth in § 240-137
below and the following: The edge of the pool in the R-1 and R-2 Zones
shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from all property lines, and no
part of the pool shall be nearer to any street line than the rear wall of
the main building which is located nearest to the street, nor closer to
the rear or side wall than the maximum depth of the pool.
C. Swimming pools and tennis courts in the R-3, R-4 and R-5 Zones shall
not be located within 25 feet of a property line nor closer to a street line
than the rear wall of the dwelling to which they are accessory uses.
Swimming pools and tennis courts shall be suitably fenced in
accordance with the Borough requirements as set forth in § 240-137
below.
A. No fence or wall shall be erected, altered or constructed in any
residential zone which shall exceed six feet in height above ground
level, except that no fence exceeding four feet in height shall be
permitted in the front yard.
B. No fence or wall shall be erected, altered or constructed in any
nonresidential zone which shall exceed eight feet in height above
ground level, except fences or walls facing River Road which are limited
to a maximum of four feet in height.
C. Retaining walls shall be terraced in four-foot increments to enable
suitable plantings to be installed along the retaining wall.
D. Notwithstanding the above provisions, no fence or wall shall be erected,
altered or constructed in any zone which shall violate the provisions set
forth in § 240-113C regarding sight triangles.
§ 240-135 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-137
1:443
§ 240-138. Telecommunications-based office use.
§ 240-139. Home occupation.
E. Fences surrounding the perimeter of tennis courts shall be exempt from
the above requirements. Said fence shall not exceed 12 feet in height
above ground level and shall not be closer than 15 feet to any side or
rear property line nor be located in any required front yard.
F. The finished side of a fence shall face the adjoining properties.
A. A telecommunications-based office use shall be incidental to the use of
a dwelling unit for residential purposes. The area set aside for a
telecommunications-based office use shall not exceed 30% of the total
floor area of such residence, provided that in no event shall more than
500 square feet of the floor area of the dwelling unit be used in
connection with a telecommunications-based office use.
B. The use shall require no visitors.
C. Only members of the immediate family permanently residing on the
premises shall be employed in the telecommunications-based office use.
A. A home occupation shall be incidental to the use of a dwelling unit for
residential purposes. The area set aside for home occupations shall not
exceed 30% of the total floor area of such residence, provided that in no
event shall more than 500 square feet of the floor area of the dwelling
unit be used in connection with a home occupation or for storage
purposes in connection with a home occupation.
B. Only members of the immediate family permanently residing on the
premises shall be employed in the home occupation.
C. A home occupation may be open to the public between 9:00 a.m. and
5:00 p.m. but shall not be open on Sundays or legal holidays.
D. No more than one home occupation shall be permitted within any single
dwelling unit.
E. A home occupation shall be carried on wholly within the principal
building. No home occupation nor any storage of goods, materials or
products connected with a home occupation shall be allowed in
accessory buildings or attached or detached garages, driveways,
walkways or yards.
F. Merchandise shall not be displayed or offered for sale either within or
outside of the residence.
G. There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the dwelling or
premises or any visible evidence of the conduct of a home occupation.
No advertising display signs shall be permitted.
§ 240-137 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-139
1:444
§ 240-140. Child-care center facilities.
Application for a child-care center as a permitted accessory use shall
comply with the following: A child-care center shall be permitted to occupy
as an accessory use a portion of a building which is occupied as a principal
permitted use in all nonresidential zones. This use shall be available to the
occupants of the building and may also be available to others, provided that:
§ 240-141. Outdoor dining.
Outdoor dining/outdoor cafe shall be permitted as an accessory use in
all zones wherein restaurants/eating establishments are permitted as a
permitted or conditional use.
H. No equipment or process shall be used in a home occupation which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes or odor detectable to the normal
senses off the property. No equipment or process shall be used which
creates visual or audible electrical interference in any radio or
television receiver off the premises or causes fluctuations in line
voltage off the premises.
I. The use shall not generate additional pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
Visitors, customers or deliveries shall not exceed those normally and
reasonably occurring for a residence, including not more than two
business visitors an hour and eight a day and not more than two
deliveries of products or materials a week.
J. The home occupation shall not involve the use of commercial vehicles
for delivery of materials to or from the premises, other than one vehicle
not to exceed 3/4 ton owned by the resident of the dwelling, which shall
be parked in an adequate off-street parking area.
K. The use shall not require additional off-street parking spaces for clients
or customers of the home occupation.
A. The facility is licensed by the New Jersey Department of Human
Services.
B. A minimum of 150 square feet of outdoor play area shall be provided for
the first five children, plus an additional 30 square feet of play area per
child at peak usage. Play areas shall be permitted in the rear and side
yards only and shall be enclosed by a fence at least four feet in height
and landscaped and screened from adjoining properties.
C. The area and bulk requirements applicable to the zone in which the site
is located shall be complied with.
D. No more than 15% of a building shall be occupied as a day-care center.
E. No additional parking shall be required.
A. Terms defined. As used in this subsection, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
§ 240-139 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-141
1:445
OUTDOOR CAFE — Any eating establishment associated with a
restaurant where food and other refreshments are served within the
public right-of-way, namely the sidewalks immediately in front of any
restaurant, cafe or place of business where food and/or other
refreshments are served or where permitted on private property
pursuant to the Zoning Ordinance of the Borough of Edgewater.
SIDEWALK — That area of the public right-of-way reserved for
pedestrian traffic between the curb and the front line of a building.
B. Permit required. No person shall operate an outdoor dining area/
sidewalk cafe in the Borough of Edgewater without first obtaining an
outdoor cafe permit and satisfying all of the requirements of this
chapter.
C. Application. Each applicant shall submit and file an application with the
Borough Zoning Officer, together with three copies of a development
plan (as described below) and a fee of $100. The application shall set
forth: [Amended 4-18-2016 by Ord. No. 1533-2016]
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and
property owner and written authorization of the owner of the
property in question, and the street address and block and lot
number of the property in question.
(2) A sketch containing a scale drawing clearly illustrating the number,
type of materials, location of all tables, chairs, umbrellas, planters,
awnings, lighting, electrical outlets (if any) or other furnishings or
fixtures intended to be located in the outdoor café. The perimeter
of an outdoor dining area adjoining parking spaces which are
perpendicular to an outdoor café shall be defined and set off by a
portable-type enclosure, which may include live plantings. Any
such enclosure that defines the perimeter of the outdoor café area
shall be open at all times to the air from a height of not more than
three feet. The scale drawing shall also illustrate the following:
(a) The location of any doors leading from the restaurant to the
outdoor dining area. No such door may be obstructed in any
manner.
(b) The dimension and location of the unobstructed space
permitting passage of pedestrian traffic around or through the
outdoor café.
(c) An illustration of the enclosure or protective barrier separating
the outdoor dining area from pedestrian or vehicular
movement.
(d) The location of all fire hydrants, utility poles or other fixtures
permanently located in the outdoor dining area, or on the
sidewalk or other area within 50 feet of the outdoor dining
area.
§ 240-141 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-141
1:446
(e) The type and location of any proposed outdoor lighting.
D. Application review procedure.
(1) The Zoning Officer will review the application for completeness and
compliance with the terms of this chapter. If the application is
complete, the Zoning Officer will act upon the same within 10
business days of the submittal of the application or within 10
business days after the application is declared complete. If the
application is not complete, the Zoning Officer will notify the
applicant in writing, within 10 business days of the submittal, of the
specific deficiencies of the application. The Zoning Officer may
refer the application to the Construction Official, Chiefs of the
Bureaus of Police and Fire, the Health Officer, the Municipal
Engineer and Planner for their review and recommendation,
whereupon the time for all of the aforementioned actions shall be
increased to 15 business days.
(2) If the application complies with this chapter, the Zoning Officer
shall issue a permit, which shall be valid for one year from the date
of issuance.
(3) Acceptance of the permit by the applicant shall represent consent
to allow the Departments of Health, Fire, Police and Building of the
Borough to inspect the outdoor cafe for continued compliance with
the terms, conditions and regulations of this chapter.
E. Regulations.
(1) No license shall be issued hereunder unless the applicant shall
demonstrate that a minimum three-foot-wide area of unobstructed
paved surface will be available for pedestrian movement, including
the unimpeded passage of handicapped individuals, around or
through the outdoor cafe.
(2) No food or drink, including alcoholic beverages, shall be prepared
or stored other than in the interior of the eating establishment.
(3) Permits for outdoor cafes shall be valid for one year from the date
of issuance of the permit.
(4) No tables, chairs or other equipment shall be attached, chained or
in any manner affixed to any tree, post, sign, curb or sidewalk, or
property of the Borough.
(5) The applicant shall not direct or permit to be directed to or from
the outdoor cafe any bell, siren, whistle, loudspeaker, public
address system, radio or similar device.
(6) No outdoor cafe shall be open for business prior to 11:00 a.m. nor
remain open for business after 11:00 p.m. All persons occupying
the outdoor cafe shall vacate the same no later than 11:30 p.m.
§ 240-141 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-141
1:447
(7) The applicant shall remove all chairs and other equipment from the
sidewalk within 30 minutes of the time in which the outdoor cafe is
vacated at the end of each business day.
(8) The Borough shall not require additional parking for outdoor cafe
seating, provided that the number of seats in the outdoor cafe does
not exceed 30% of the total number of seats in the eating
establishment, and further provided that any restaurant may install
up to three outside tables without it affecting the parking standard.
The Borough parking standard shall be applied to any seating
which exceeds this calculation.
(9) The applicant is responsible for keeping the area of the outdoor
cafe and the adjacent walks and streets free and clear of any debris
or litter occasioned by the cafe. Areas must be cleaned as needed
and at the time that business is closed for the evening.
(10)No signs shall be permitted in the area of the outdoor cafe except
for signs on the awnings complying with the Sign Ordinance of the
Borough of Edgewater.112
(11) No refuse containers shall be permitted on the sidewalk.
(12) Alcoholic beverages may be served outdoors in accordance with
the alcoholic beverage control licensing requirements of the State
of New Jersey. No alcoholic beverages shall be stored or prepared
outdoors.
F. Insurance required.
(1) No permit required by this chapter shall be issued until the
applicant shall have first filed with the Zoning Officer a
comprehensive general liability policy issued to the applicant by a
public liability insurance company authorized to do business in the
State of New Jersey in the amounts specified. Such insurance policy
shall name the Borough of Edgewater as additional insured with
respect to the operation and maintenance of the outdoor cafe in the
following amounts: bodily injury, each person $300,000 and each
accident $1,000,000; property damage, each person $300,000 and
each accident $1,000,000.
(2) The insurance coverage required by this section shall at all times
be maintained for the full amount and shall contain a clause
obligating the company issuing same to give not less than 30 days'
written notice to the Borough Clerk before cancellation or
amendment of any of the terms thereof. The cancellation of any
such policy shall have the immediate effect of suspending the
permit to operate the outdoor cafe until a new policy complying
with the provisions of this section is filed with the Zoning Officer
112. Editor's Note: See Art. XVIII, Signs, of this chapter.
§ 240-141 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-141
1:448
and a letter confirming the new effective date of the permit is
issued by the Zoning Officer.
G. Indemnification required. No permit shall be issued until a statement is
filed with the Zoning Officer agreeing to indemnify and hold harmless
the Borough of Edgewater from any and all claims, damages, judgment
costs or expenses, including attorneys' fees, which may be incurred or
required to be paid because of any personal injury, including death or
property damage, suffered by any person or persons as a result of or
related in any way to the operation and maintenance of the outdoor cafe
for which the permit is issued.
H. Revocation or suspension of permit. Any permit issued hereunder is
issued solely as a revocable permit and is subject to revocation or
suspension by the Zoning Officer for failure to comply with this chapter
or for violation of any other applicable federal, state, county or
municipal law, regulation or ordinance. It shall be unlawful for any
person to operate an outdoor cafe after the suspension or termination
of the applicable permit.
I. Alcoholic beverage license. An applicant holding an alcoholic beverage
control license pursuant to the laws of the State of New Jersey shall
have the responsibility to cause such license to be amended to include
the outdoor cafe for the purpose of serving alcoholic beverages therein.
J. Removal of material. No permit shall be issued unless the applicant
agrees at the end of the license period, or in the event that the license is
temporarily or permanently suspended or revoked, to vacate at his own
cost and expense the sidewalk space and remove any property placed
thereon. Failure to do so on five days' written notice shall grant the
Borough the right to remove any property on the sidewalk. The
applicant shall be required to reimburse the Borough for the cost of
removing and storing the same.
§ 240-141 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-141
1:449

ARTICLE XV
Regulations Governing Certain Conditional Uses
§ 240-142. Essential services.
§ 240-143. Private or parochial school.
A. Enclosed structures. Such public utility services as and including
electric substations, transformers, switches and auxiliary apparatus
serving a distribution area, water well sites and pumping stations in all
zones shall be subject to the following regulations:
(1) The location, design and operation of such facility may not
adversely affect the character of the surrounding residential area.
Adequate fences, barriers and other safety devices shall be
provided. Such facilities shall be adequately landscaped and
screened.
(2) The location of the structures regulated in this section shall comply
with the setback requirements of the zone in which they are
located; provided, however, that telephone cabinets and electric
relay stations may be located at property lines. Such facilities shall
be landscaped and screened in order to minimize their visual
impact.
B. Open structures and facilities.
(1) Such uses shall be limited to the erection, construction, alteration
or maintenance, by public utilities or municipal or other
governmental agencies, of electric, gas, water transmission or
distribution/collection systems, telephone and cable television
lines, communication, water supply or sewage treatment and
collection systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers,
pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic
signals, light stanchions, telephone lines, hydrants and other
similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith
reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate services by
public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies for the
public health, safety or general welfare, but not including
buildings.
(2) Adequate landscaping or screening shall be provided where
applicable.
A. All nonpublic schools, where permitted, shall be subject to the
following:
(1) Said school or instruction shall be a nonprofit organization within
the meaning of the Internal Revenue Act and registered effectively
as such thereunder.
§ 240-142 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-143
1:451
§ 240-144. Community residences.
§ 240-145. Automobile service stations.
The following conditions apply:
(2) Such school shall have as its prime purpose the general education
of students in the arts and sciences and shall be licensed by the
State Department of Education as required by law.
(3) Any school permitted under this section shall be permitted on the
principal roadways as identified in the Borough Land Use Plan.
B. All schools permitted herein shall comply with all applicable regulations
of the State Board of Education and to the following.
(1) Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
(3) Minimum front yard: 40 feet.
(4) Minimum side yards: 25 feet.
(5) Minimum rear yard: 40 feet.
(6) Minimum recreation area: 100 square feet per pupil.
(7) Maximum building coverage: 25%.
(8) Maximum building height: one story/20 feet.
(9) Minimum buffer: 20 feet.
A. Community residences housing more than six persons for the
developmentally disabled and community shelters for victims of
domestic violence shall be permitted as a conditional use in all
residential districts, subject to the provisions of this section.
B. A community residence or shelter shall comply fully with all zoning and
health regulations applicable to single-family residences in the zoning
district in which it is located.
C. A community residence or shelter shall not be occupied by more than
15 developmentally disabled persons or victims of domestic violence, as
defined herein.
D. A minimum of two parking spaces shall be required for the first six
occupants of a community residence or shelter, plus one additional
space for each additional three occupants.
A. No gasoline, service station, garage or automobile repair facility shall
be located within 200 feet of a school, place of worship, hospital,
funeral home, theater, library or any place of public assembly nor within
§ 240-143 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-145
1:452
§ 240-146. Veterans, civic and community clubs.
All buildings shall be a minimum of 25 feet from any property line.
800 feet of another auto service station or garage or other services
similar to the proposed use.
B. Vehicular access to or exit from a service station shall not be closer to
the intersection of any two streets than 50 feet, nor shall any such drive
be located within 30 feet of any boundary line of any residential district
or residential use.
C. Fuel pumps shall be permitted within the required front yard but in no
event closer than 15 feet from the front property line.
D. A five-foot landscaped strip shall be provided along the front property
line.
E. A canopy shall be set back minimally 10 feet from any property line.
F. No outdoor hydraulic or mechanical lifts shall be permitted. All
automobile repair work, exclusive of incidental repair, shall be done
inside the building.
G. Automobile service stations shall require a minimum lot area of 20,000
square feet with at least 200 feet of street frontage. The yard and bulk
requirements of the B-4 Zone shall be applicable to automobile service
stations, provided that a canopy be set back 10 feet from any property
line.
§ 240-145 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-146
1:453

ARTICLE XVI
Fair Share and Marketing Regulations
§ 240-147. Fair share regulations.
This section of the Edgewater Code sets forth regulations regarding lowand
moderate-income housing units in Edgewater that are consistent with
the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:93 et seq., as effective on June 6, 1994. These
rules are pursuant to the Fair Housing Act of 1985 and Edgewater's
constitutional obligation to provide for its fair share of low- and moderateincome
housing.
A. Edgewater's new construction or inclusionary component will be
divided equally between low- and moderate-income households as per
N.J.A.C. 5:93-2.20.
B. Except for inclusionary developments constructed pursuant to lowincome
tax credit regulations, at least:
(1) Half of all units within inclusionary development will be affordable
to low-income households;
(2) Half of all rental units will be affordable to low-income households;
and
(3) One-third of all units in each bedroom distribution pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.3 will be affordable to low-income households.
C. Inclusionary developments that are not restricted to senior citizens will
be structured in conjunction with realistic market demands so that:
(1) The combination of efficiency and one-bedroom units is at least
10% and no greater than 20% of the total low- and moderateincome
units;
(2) At least 30% of all low- and moderate-income units are twobedroom
units;
(3) At least 20% of all low- and moderate-income units are threebedroom
units; and
(4) Low- and moderate-income units restricted to senior citizens may
utilize a modified bedroom distribution. At a minimum, the number
of bedrooms will equal the number of senior citizen low- and
moderate-income units within the inclusionary development.
D. In conjunction with realistic market information, the following criteria
will be used in determining maximum rents and sale prices:
(1) Efficiency units will be affordable to one-person households;
(2) One-half of all one-bedroom units will be affordable to one-person
households and 1/2 of all one-bedroom units will be affordable to
two-person households;
§ 240-147 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-147
1:455
(3) One-half of all two-bedroom units will be affordable to two-person
households and 1/2 of all two-bedroom units will be affordable to
three-person households;
(4) One-half of all three-bedroom units will be affordable to fourperson
households and 1/2 of all three-bedroom units will be
affordable to five-person households;
(5) Median income by household size will be established by a regional
weighted average of the uncapped Section 8 income limits
published by HUD, as per N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4(b); and
(6) The maximum average rent and price of low- and moderate-income
units within each inclusionary development will be affordable to
households earning 57.5% of median income;
(7) Moderate-income sales units will be available for at least three
different prices, and low-income units will be available for at least
two different prices;
(8) For both owner-occupied and rental units, the low- and moderateincome
units will utilize the same heating source as market units
within an inclusionary development;
(9) Low-income units will be reserved for households with a gross
household income less than or equal to 50% of the median income
approved by COAH; moderate-income units will be reserved for
households with a gross household income less than 80% of the
median income approved by COAH, as per N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.16; and
(10) The regulations outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.15 and 5:93-9.16 will be
applicable for purchased and rental units.
E. For rental units, developers and/or municipal sponsors may:
(1) Establish one rent for a low-income unit and one for a moderateincome
unit for each bedroom distribution; and
(2) Gross rents, including an allowance for utilities, will be established
so as not to exceed 30% of the gross monthly income of the
appropriate household size, as per N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4(a). The tenantpaid
utility allowance will be consistent with the utility allowance
approved by HUD for use in New Jersey.
F. For sale units:
(1) The initial price of a low- and moderate-income owner-occupied
single-family housing unit will be established so that, after a down
payment of 5%, the monthly principal, interest, homeowner's
insurance, property taxes (based on the restricted value of the lowand
moderate-income unit) and condominium or homeowner fee do
not exceed 28% of the eligible gross monthly income;
§ 240-147 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-147
1:456
(2) Master deeds of inclusionary developments will regulate
condominium or homeowner association fees or special
assessments of low- and moderate-income purchasers at 1/3 of that
paid by market purchasers. This 1/3 is consistent with the
requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4(e). Once established within the
master deed, the percentage will not be amended without prior
approval from COAH;
(3) The Borough of Edgewater will follow the general provisions
concerning uniform deed restriction liens and enforcement through
certificates of occupancy or reoccupancy on sale units, as per
N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.3;
(4) Edgewater will require a certificate of reoccupancy for any
occupancy of a low- or moderate-income sales unit resulting from a
resale, as per N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.3(c);
(5) Municipal, state, nonprofit and seller options regarding sale units
will be consistent with N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.5 through 5:93-9.8.
Municipal rejection of repayment options for sale units will be
consistent with N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.9;
(6) The continued application of options to create, rehabilitate or
maintain low- and moderate-income sale units will be consistent
with N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.10;
(7) Eligible capital improvements prior to the expiration of controls on
sale units will be consistent with N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.11; and
(8) The regulations detailed in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.12 through 5:93-9.14
will be applicable to low- and moderate-income units that are forsale
units.
G. In zoning for inclusionary developments, the following is required:
(1) Low- and moderate-income units will be built in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.6(d):
Minimum Percentage of Low-
/Moderate-Income Units
Completed
Percentage of Market
Housing Units Completed
0% 25%
10% 25% plus 1 unit
50% 50%
75% 75%
90% 100%
(2) A design of inclusionary developments that integrates low- and
moderate-income units with market units is encouraged, as per
N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.6(e).
§ 240-147 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-147
1:457
H. To provide assurances that low- and moderate-income units are created
with controls on affordability over time and that low- and moderateincome
households occupy these units, Edgewater will designate an
administrative agency or municipal authority with the responsibility of
ensuring affordability of sales and rental units over time. The
administrative agency or municipal authority will be responsible for
those activities detailed in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.1(a).
(1) In addition, the administrative or municipal authority will be
responsible for utilizing the verification and certification
procedures outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.1(b) in placing households in
low- and moderate-income units;
(2) Newly constructed low- and moderate-income sales units will
remain affordable to low- and moderate-income households for at
least 30 years. The administrative or municipal authority will
require all conveyances of newly constructed units to contain the
deed restriction and mortgage lien adopted by COAH and referred
to as "Appendix E," as found in N.J.A.C. 5:93; and
(3) Housing units created through the conversion of a nonresidential
structure will be considered a new housing unit and will be subject
to thirty-year controls on affordability. The administrative agency
or municipal authority will require an appropriate deed restriction
and mortgage lien subject to COAH's approval.
I. Regarding rehabilitated units:
(1) Rehabilitated owner-occupied single-family housing units that are
improved to code standard will be subject to affordability controls
for at least six years; and
(2) Rehabilitated renter-occupied housing units that are improved to
code standard will be subject to affordability controls for at least 10
years.
J. Regarding rental units:
(1) Newly constructed low- and moderate-income rental units will
remain affordable to low- and moderate-income households for at
least 30 years. The administrative agency or municipal authority
will require an appropriate deed restriction and mortgage lien
subject to COAH's approval;
(2) Affordability controls in accessory apartments will be for a period
of at least 10 years, except if the apartment is to receive a rental
bonus credit pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.13, then the controls on
affordability will extend for 30 years; and
(3) Alternative living arrangements will be controlled in a manner
suitable to COAH that provides assurance that such a facility will
house low- and moderate-income households for at least 10 years,
§ 240-147 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-147
1:458
§ 240-148. Affirmative marketing of inclusionary developments.
The affirmative marketing plan is a regional marketing strategy designed to
attract buyers and/or renters of all majority and minority groups, regardless
of sex, age or number of children, to housing units which are being
marketed by a developer/sponsor, municipality and/or designated
administrative agency of affordable housing. The plan will address the
requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:93-11. In addition, the plan prohibits
discrimination in the sale, rental, financing or other services related to
housing on the basis of race, color, sex, religion, handicap, age, familial
status/size or national origin. The Borough of Edgewater is in the housing
region consisting of Bergen, Passaic, Hudson and Sussex Counties. The
affirmative marketing program is a continuing program and will meet the
following requirements:
except if the alternative living arrangement is to receive a rental
bonus credit pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.13, then the controls on
affordability will extend for 30 years.
K. Section 14(b) of the Fair Housing Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.,
incorporates the need to eliminate unnecessary cost-generating
features from Edgewater's land use ordinances. Accordingly,
Edgewater will eliminate development standards that are not essential
to protect the public welfare and to expedite or fast track municipal
approvals/denials on inclusionary development applications. The
Borough of Edgewater will adhere to the components of N.J.A.C.
5:93-10.1 through 5:93-10.3.
L. Fees associated with the marketing and qualification of inclusionary
units shall be assigned to the developer of each inclusionary
development.
A. All newspaper articles, announcements and requests for applications
for low- and moderate-income units will appear in the following
newspapers/publications: The Record.
B. The primary marketing will take the form of at least one press release
sent to the above publications and a paid display advertisement in each
of the above newspapers. Additional advertising and publicity will be on
an as-needed basis.
C. The advertisement will include a description of the street address of
units, direction to housing units, number of bedrooms per unit, range of
prices/rents, size of units, income information, and location of
applications, including business hours and where/how applications may
be obtained.
D. All newspaper articles, announcements and requests for applications
for low- and moderate-income housing will appear in publications such
as neighborhood-oriented weekly newspapers, religious publications
§ 240-147 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-148
1:459
and organizational newsletters within the region. Regional radio and/or
cable television station(s) will also be used.
E. The following are the locations of applications, brochure(s), sign(s) and/
or poster(s) used as part of the affirmative marketing program,
including specific employment centers within the region: posting of
notices in the Borough Hall and delivery of notices to the municipal
clerks of all municipalities in the region.
F. The following is a listing of community contact persons and/or
organizations in Edgewater that will administer the program and will
aid in the affirmative marketing program with particular emphasis on
contacts that will reach out to groups that are least likely to apply for
housing within the region: Zoning Officer, County Housing Office and
houses of worship.
G. Quarterly flyers and applications will be sent to each of the following
agencies for publication in their journals and for circulation among
their members: Board of Realtors in Bergen, Hudson, Passaic and
Sussex Counties.
H. Applications will be mailed to prospective applicants upon request.
I. Additionally, quarterly informational circulars and applications will be
sent to the chief administrative employees of each of the following
agencies in the counties within Edgewater's region: welfare or social
service board, rental assistance office (local office of DCA), office on
aging, libraries and housing agency or authority in each of the counties
within Edgewater's housing region.
J. A random-selection method will be used to select occupants of low- and
moderate-income housing.
K. The Borough has retained Affordable Housing Management Services
(AHMS) to administer the affirmative marketing program. AHMS has
the responsibility to income-qualify low- and moderate-income
households; to place income-eligible households in low- and moderateincome
units upon initial occupancy; to provide for the initial occupancy
of low- and moderate-income units with income-qualified households; to
continue to qualify households for reoccupancy of units as they become
vacant during the period of affordability controls; to assist with
advertising and outreach to low- and moderate-income households; and
to enforce the terms of the deed restriction and mortgage loan as per
N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.1.
L. Households with residents who live or work in the COAH-established
housing region may be given preference for sales and rental units
constructed within that housing region. Applicants living outside the
housing region will have an equal opportunity for units after regional
applicants have been initially serviced. The Borough of Edgewater
intends to comply with N.J.A.C. 5:93-11.7.
§ 240-148 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-148
1:460
M. All developers of low- and moderate-income housing units will be
required to assist in the marketing of the affordable units in their
respective developments.
N. The marketing program will commence at least 120 days before the
issuance of either temporary or permanent certificates of occupancy.
The marketing program will continue until all low- and moderateincome
housing units are initially occupied and for as long as affordable
units are deed restricted and occupancy or reoccupancy of units
continues to be necessary.
O. AHMS (Affordable Housing Management Services) will comply with
monitoring and reporting requirements as per N.J.A.C. 5:93-11.6 and
5:93-12.1.
§ 240-148 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-148
1:461

ARTICLE XVII
Growth Share
[Added 11-13-2006 by Ord. No. 1348-2006]
§ 240-149. Applicability.
This article of the land use regulations of the Borough of Edgewater sets
forth the mechanisms by which developers shall provide for a fair share
of affordable housing based on growth that is associated with development
taking place within the Borough of Edgewater.
§ 240-150. Exemptions.
The following exemptions are permitted under this article: all developments
that received preliminary or final approval from the Planning Board and/or
Board of Adjustment prior to the effective date of this article.
§ 240-151. Residential growth share provisions.
A. Residential development. Except as exempted in § 240-150, all
residential development in all zones that results in the construction of
new market-rate dwelling units in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:94-1 et
seq., shall be subject to the growth share provisions of this article.
B. Nonresidential development. Except as exempted in § 240-150, all
nonresidential development in all zones that results in an increase in
gross floor area of any existing nonresidential structure or the
construction of a new nonresidential structure in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:94-1 et seq., shall be subject to the growth share provisions of
this article.
(1) This article applies to nonresidential development resulting in a net
increase in square footage. To calculate the net increase, any
square footage that is demolished is subtracted from new square
footage that is proposed for development, by use group.
(2) Nonresidential development resulting in the generation of fewer
than 25 jobs is subject to development fees rather than this article.
A. All residential development which results in the construction of new
market-rate dwelling units in the Borough of Edgewater, exclusive of
those exempted in § 240-150, shall provide one affordable unit for every
eight market-rate units constructed.
B. For residential developments that result in a number of market-rate
units not evenly divisible by eight, the developer may construct the
additional affordable unit on site, off site or make a payment in lieu of
constructing the additional affordable unit. If the developer seeks
payment in lieu, the amount of said payment will be established by
subtracting any whole multiples of eight from the total number of
market-rate residential units being created, dividing any remaining
§ 240-149 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-151
1:463
§ 240-152. Nonresidential growth share provisions.
number of units by eight and multiplying the resulting fraction by
$200,000.
C. All residential development consisting of less than eight residential
units may provide one affordable unit on site or make a payment in lieu
of constructing the proportionate fraction of the affordable housing
required. If the developer selects the latter option, the amount of said
payment shall be established by dividing the number of market-rate
units by eight and multiplying the resulting fraction by $200,000.
D. As an alternative to fulfilling the affordable housing requirements set
forth in § 240-151C above, developers of residential units in the
Borough of Edgewater may elect to construct an affordable housing
unit elsewhere in the Borough of Edgewater or purchase an existing
residential unit in the Borough of Edgewater, provided the unit is
identified at the time of site plan submission and the applicant sets
forth the manner in which the unit shall be acquired, the timing of the
acquisition, and the manner in which, and the timing of the conversion
of the units to an affordable unit, all pursuant to the applicable COAH
rules at N.J.A.C. 5:94-1 et seq.
A. All nonresidential development that results in an increase in gross floor
area of any existing nonresidential building or the construction of a new
nonresidential building in the Borough of Edgewater shall provide one
affordable unit for every 25 jobs that results from the application of
standards adopted by COAH (presently found in Appendix E of N.J.A.C.
5:94-1 et seq.) and based on use groups, as defined by the International
Building Code (IBC), which has been incorporated by reference into the
Uniform Construction Code (UCC).113
B. All nonresidential development shall provide one unit of affordable
housing for every 25 jobs created by new or expanded development.
Determinations of the number of jobs created shall be based on the new
or expanded floor area in the development and the conversion factors,
by use group, published by COAH in Appendix E in N.J.A.C. 5: 94-1 et
seq.
C. As an alternative to fulfilling the affordable housing requirements set
forth in § 240-152B above, the nonresidential developer may make a
payment in lieu of constructing the affordable units. The amount of said
payment shall be determined by establishing the number of jobs to be
created in a development by using the conversion factors published by
COAH in Appendix E in N.J.A.C. 5:94-1 et seq., dividing by 25 to
determine the number of affordable housing units required and
multiplying the resulting figure by $200,000.
113. Editor's Note: See Ch. 166, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 240-151 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-152
1:464
§ 240-153. Mixed-use (residential and nonresidential) development
standards.
All new mixed-use development or development that results in net increases
in existing or approved development shall be required to provide affordable
housing constructed at the sum of the calculation of applying the separate
ratios for the residential and nonresidential components of the development
as set forth above.
§ 240-154. General provisions for constructing affordable units.
D. For developments resulting in a number of jobs not evenly divisible by
25, the developer may make a payment in lieu of constructing the unit.
If a payment is made, said payment shall be established by subtracting
any whole multiples of 25 from the total number of jobs being created,
dividing any remaining number of jobs by 25 and multiplying the
resulting fraction by $200,000.
A. Affordable housing units being constructed on site shall meet the
requirements of Edgewater's Affordable Housing Ordinance and shall
be in conformance with COAH's third round rules at N.J.A.C. 5:94-1 et
seq., and the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls at N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1 et seq., including, but not limited to requirements regarding
phasing schedule, controls on affordability, low-/moderate-income split,
heating source, maximum rent and/or sales price, affordability average,
bedroom distribution and affirmative marketing.
B. To the greatest extent possible, affordable housing units being provided
within inclusionary developments shall be disbursed throughout
inclusionary developments and shall be located within buildings
designed to be architecturally indistinguishable from the market-rate
units otherwise being constructed within the development. To that end,
the scale, massing, roof pitch and architectural detailing (such as the
selection of exterior materials, doors, windows, etc.) of the buildings
containing the affordable housing units shall be similar to and
compatible with that of the market-rate units.
C. The priority for providing affordable housing shall be as follows:
(1) The provision of the required number of affordable units shall be
met and required first through on-site construction, and on-site
construction shall be treated as the highest and best preference for
provision of affordable units. If on-site construction cannot be
accomplished, then the obligation shall be met through the
creation of affordable units elsewhere within the Borough of
Edgewater.
(2) A payment in lieu of construction to the Borough of Edgewater shall
only be allowed for satisfaction of a fractional obligation of less
than one unit. With approval by the Borough, a builder or developer
§ 240-152 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-154
1:465
may round up a fractional obligation to provide construction in
accordance with the above.
D. Specific regulations for affordable units within a nonresidential
development and/or mixed-use development are as follows:
(1) Affordable housing units may be constructed within or converted
from space above the first floor level in nonresidential mixed-use
buildings or may be constructed as new space above the first floor
level on the same site as a permitted nonresidential use or
development, subject to site plan review by the Board having
jurisdiction. This shall only be allowable where residential
dwellings situated above the first floor level are permitted pursuant
to the district regulations as set forth in this chapter of the
Borough.
(2) All affordable units shall comply with COAH's rules pertaining to
the phasing of construction, integration, split between low- and
moderate-income units, controls on affordability, bedroom
distribution, affirmative marketing, heating source, and
administration of the affordable units, as set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:94
et seq., as amended, and elsewhere in the rules.
E. Payments in lieu of the construction of affordable housing shall be
allowable only to satisfy a fractional obligation of less than one unit. The
cost of construction of one affordable unit is deemed to be $200,000 per
unit. The payment in lieu of construction for satisfaction of a fractional
obligation shall be pro rata in accordance with that cost.
F. Regulations with respect to prior approvals or agreements are as
follows:
(1) Development that has received preliminary or final approval before
the effective date of this article shall not be required to provide
affordable housing as set forth herein, unless it was part of the
previous approval, or a substantial change in the development is
sought. If a substantial change to a prior preliminary or final
approval is sought, then the developer shall be required to comply
with this article.
(a) For the purpose of preliminary or final approvals existing
before the effective date of this article, a "substantial change"
to such an approval is defined as follows:
[1] Five feet of improvements into any yard setback;
[2] Seven feet in building height;
[3] One percent in floor area ratio;
[4] One percent in impervious coverage;
[5] Five feet in building spacing or location;
§ 240-154 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-154
1:466
[6] Three parking spaces;
[7] Five feet in driveway locations;
[8] One percent in site disturbances;
[9] Five feet in lot line locations;
[10] Any change in residential density;
[11] Any change in use that encompasses more than 1% of the
approved building floor area; and
[12] Any new variances pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40-55D-7(c) or (d).
(b) Any such change enumerated above shall not alter the
percentage of low- or moderate-income housing in an approved
project, if applicable.
(2) When a prior approval exists, this article shall be applicable as a
condition of approval under the following additional circumstances:
(a) In any application that seeks to extend or modify the expiration
date of a development approval; and
(b) In any application that seeks to extend or modify the statutory
period of protection as applicable to the particular
classification of approval granted.
(3) This article shall not change any existing and approved developer's
agreement between a developer and the Borough of Edgewater so
long as the agreement contains a negotiated and approved
requirement for meeting COAH obligations generated by the
development.
G. Other regulations are as follows:
(1) Every development applicant shall be required to submit a
proposed Affordable Housing Production Plan (AHPP) at the time
the application is made. The AHPP shall be a condition of the
completeness determination. Each AHPP shall be the subject of
review for consistency with COAH's rules, the Fair Housing Act,
this article, and the Borough's Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan, as proposed to and/or approved by COAH, and such other
rules and regulations as may be applicable. This review shall be
conducted by the Borough Planner or by such other person or
entity as shall be designated to administer the Borough's COAH
matters.
(2) The AHPP shall be approved by the board hearing the development
application. The board shall consider the impacts of the proposal
relative to its consistency with Borough's Housing Element and
Fair Share Plan, this article, and the applicable COAH regulations.
§ 240-154 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-154
1:467
§ 240-155. Payment in lieu provisions.
§ 240-156. Supplemental regulations.
(3) Compliance with COAH's rules and with the approved AHPP shall
be a condition of the board's resolution of approval and may be
covered by appropriate performance and maintenance guarantees
as with any other required improvement.
(4) It shall be the developer's responsibility, at its sole cost and
expense, to contract with a COAH-approved and Boroughdesignated
experienced entity for the initial and ongoing
administration of the controls on affordability so as to ensure full
COAH compliance. The designated administrative entity shall, by
February 1 of each year, and as otherwise required by COAH
throughout the year, file with the Borough Clerk of the Borough of
Edgewater such certifications, reports and/or monitoring forms as
may be required by COAH to verify the continuing compliance of
each affordable unit with COAH's rules.
(5) Developments covered by this article shall be exempt from the
payment of development fees pursuant to any development fee
ordinance adopted by the Borough.
A. Any payment in lieu amount of $200,000 shall be derived from the
analysis of the subsidy required to create an affordable housing in
Edgewater, which analysis shall be on file in the office of Borough
Administrator.
B. All payments in lieu of constructing affordable housing shall be
deposited by Edgewater into an affordable housing trust fund to be
established by Edgewater in conformance with the regulations
established by COAH and shall at all times be identifiable from
development fees. These funds shall be used by Edgewater in
accordance with regulations established by COAH to create new
affordable housing opportunities within the physical boundaries of
Edgewater.
A. The calculation of affordable housing obligation shall be a completeness
item during administrative review of the application. The calculation
shall be reviewed by the Borough Planner or other municipal official
designated by the municipality.
B. Compliance with COAH's rules shall be a condition of any approval by
the approving authority. The approving authority shall require that the
applicant or successor in interest comply with this article, when
applicable. The method of compliance shall be enumerated in the
approving authority resolution.
§ 240-154 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-156
1:468
ARTICLE XVIII
Signs
§ 240-157. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AREA OF SIGN — The area included within the frame or edge of a sign,
including the frame. Where the sign has no such frame or edge, the area
shall be computed as specified by § 240-159 herein.
AWNING — Any structure made of cloth or metal with a metal frame
attached to a building, projecting over a thoroughfare and so erected as to
permit its being raised to a position flat against the building when not in
use.
BANNER — Any temporary sign applied to paper, plastic or fabric of any
kind, which shall be permitted by the Mayor and Council by permit, above a
public right-of-way.
BILLBOARD — Any sign erected or maintained for the purpose of displaying
outdoor advertising for products or services provided off premises.
CANOPY — Any structure, other than an awning, made of cloth or metal
with metal frames attached to a building, projecting over a thoroughfare
and carried by a frame supported by the ground or sidewalk.
ERECT — To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix; also
includes the painting of wall signs.
FACING or SURFACE — The surface of the sign upon, against or through
which the message is displayed or illuminated on the sign.
FLAG SIGN — A sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole or other
support, made of cloth, canvas, fabric or like material, designed or intended
to advertise, identify or attract attention to a business, organization, service
or event. National flags are not considered flag signs and are not prohibited
by this chapter.
FREESTANDING SIGN — Any sign supported by structures or supports that
are placed on, or anchored in, the ground and that are independent from
any building or other structure.
ILLUMINATED SIGN — Any sign which has characters, letters, figures,
designs or outline illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes as a part
of the sign proper.
MAINTENANCE — Includes replacement, without substantial change, of
any parts or support of any sign, and the painting, without change of text,
design or size, of any sign, without removal of the sign from the wall or
structure supporting it.
MARQUEE — Any hood or awning of permanent construction, projecting
from the wall of a building above an entrance and extending over a
§ 240-157 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-157
1:469
thoroughfare, including signs attached thereto, the supports of which are
an integral part of the original structure, and which is not retractable.
PENNANT — Any lightweight plastic, fabric or other material, whether or
not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire or string,
usually in series, designed to move in the wind.
PORTABLE SIGN — Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or
other permanent structure or a sign designed to be transported, including
but not limited to signs designed to be transported by means of wheels;
signs converted to A- or T-frames; menu and sandwich board signs; balloons
used as signs; umbrellas used for advertising; and signs attached to or
painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless
said vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day operations of the business for
transport.
PROJECTING SIGN — Any sign affixed to a building or wall in such a
manner that its leading edge extends more than six inches beyond the
surface of such building or wall.
ROOF SIGN — Any sign erected, constructed and maintained wholly upon
or over the roof of any building, with the principal support on the roof
structure.
SIGN — Includes any device, either freestanding or attached to a building
or structure or erected, painted, represented or reproduced upon or in
(to the extent provided herein) any building or structure, which displays,
reproduces or includes any letter, word, name, number, model, insignia,
emblem, design, device or representation used for one or more of the
following purposes: to identify the premises or occupant or owner of the
premises; to advertise any trade, business, profession, industry, service or
other activity; to advertise any product or item; to advertise the sale or
rental or use of all or part of the premises, including that upon which
it is displayed; to direct vehicular or pedestrian traffic, other than state,
county or municipal highway and roadway markers; and shall include any
announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, illustration, insignia or
any representation used to advertise or intended to advertise or promote
the interests of any person. In no event shall the word "sign" be construed
to mean any sign in the interior of any structure except as specifically set
forth in this chapter.
TEMPORARY SIGN — Any sign that is not permanently mounted as
specifically permitted by this article.
WALL SIGN — All flat signs of solid-face construction which are placed
against a building or other structure and attached to the exterior front, rear
or side wall of any building or other structure so that the display surface is
parallel with the plane of the wall. Signs painted on an exterior or a wall
shall be deemed to be "wall signs" subject to this chapter.
WINDOW — Includes any opening in the exterior wall or roof of any
structure for the purpose of admitting air or light, whether or not covered
with glass, plastic or other covering.
§ 240-157 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-157
1:470
WINDOW DISPLAY SIGN — Includes all signs defined herein which are
situated within 12 inches of the window surface, and such signs shall be as
regulated in § 240-161B(6).
WINDOW SPACE — Includes the aggregate square footage of all windows
on any given side and any given story of any structure, regardless of the
angle or angles at which they are set. In computing window space, there
shall be included all portions of any door which contains a window.
§ 240-158. Permit required; issuance of permit; fees.
A. Application.
(1) No sign shall be erected, altered, located or relocated within the
municipality except upon application and the issuance of a permit
as hereinafter provided:
(a) Application for a permit for residential signs. Application for a
permit for a sign for premises used for residential purposes
shall be made, in writing, to the Zoning Officer and presented
together with the appropriate filing fee. Such application shall
be sufficient to describe the premises and the location at which
the sign is to be affixed, together with a rendering of the sign,
inclusive of its dimensions, design and color. There shall also
be provided a statement as to the means by which said sign
shall be constructed on the premises. The Zoning Officer shall
act upon such application within 15 days of the receipt thereof.
(b) Application for a permit for nonresidential signs. Any sign
associated with a change in occupancy or ownership
necessitates an application for a sign permit. Application for a
permit for a permitted nonresidential sign conforming to the
regulations set forth herein shall be made, in writing, to the
Zoning Officer. Such application shall be sufficient to describe
the premises and location at which the sign is to be affixed and
shall include, at minimum, the following items:
[1] The name and address of the applicant.
[2] The name and address of the owner of the premises.
[3] A statement as to whether the owner has consented to the
application, if the applicant is other than the owner.
[4] A rendering to scale of the sign, reflecting its composition,
colors, dimensions, elevation from grade level and
lighting; the address of the premises; specification and
location of all existing signs; the sight distances, in the
case of freestanding signs, with relation to accessways to
the premises on which such sign is to be located and
adjacent premises; the information to be stated on the
sign; and the method by which said sign shall be secured.
§ 240-157 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-158
1:471
(c) Application for a permit for a sign which does not comply with
the provisions of this article shall be submitted to the
appropriate approving authority, including any sign associated
with a change in occupancy or ownership which does not
comply with the provisions set forth herein. Such application
shall be in writing and, upon notice and a public hearing where
the same is required by law, submitted at least 10 days before
the next meeting preceding the succeeding public meeting
date of the appropriate authority, together with a filing fee as
hereinafter set forth. Such application shall be in triplicate and
accompanied by no less than 15 sketch plats in the case of an
application for a freestanding sign, and 15 building elevations
where the application is for other than a freestanding sign,
each of which shall be drawn to scale and reflect the sign
location and designation. In addition, on such drawing or
separate sheet, the information set forth in § 240-158A(1)(b)
shall be provided.
B. Issuance of permit.
(1) A permit shall be issued by the Zoning Officer upon the favorable
action of the approving authority, subject to any other applicable
governmental regulations, or as otherwise provided herein.
(2) A permit for the replacement of an existing sign may be issued by
the Zoning Officer without the necessity of Board approval only
upon satisfaction of all of the following conditions:
(a) There is no physical alteration or expansion to the existing sign
beyond the limits permitted herein.
(b) The sign conforms in all respects to the ordinance provisions
specified herein.
(c) No other signage is proposed to be added to the premises
beyond that which is permitted herein.
C. Exceptions. The provisions and regulations of this section shall not
apply to the following signs:
(1) Real estate signs not exceeding 12 square feet in area which
advertise the sale, rental or lease of the premises upon which said
signs are located only.
(2) Residential nameplates identifying a single-family residence and/or
street address, not to exceed one square foot in area.
(3) Professional nameplates not exceeding two square feet in area for
lawful occupants of the premises under the Zoning Ordinance.
(4) Bulletin boards or signs not over 16 square feet in area for public,
charitable or religious institutions when same are located on the
premises of said institutions.
§ 240-158 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-158
1:472
§ 240-159. Computation of sign area and sign height.
The following principles shall control the computation of sign area and
height:
(5) A sign identifying the architect, engineer or contractor, when
placed upon a work site under construction, not to exceed 16
square feet in area, provided that the sign is set back at least 15
feet from the curb, and further provided that same are removed
within 24 hours after the final certificate of occupancy is issued.
(6) Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of erection,
when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze
or other incombustible materials.
(7) Traffic or other municipal signs, legal notices, railroad crossing
signs, danger signs and such temporary, emergency or
nonadvertising signs or signs of any governmental agency deemed
necessary to the public welfare.
(8) Flags of the United States, State of New Jersey or other
governmental or quasi-public agencies.
(9) Holiday decorations and lights on residential premises.
(10) Signs erected to control the movement of traffic on a premises,
provided that these signs shall provide traffic directions only and
shall not be used for any advertising purpose. These signs shall not
exceed four square feet in area and shall have been approved by
the appropriate approving agency.
(11) Election or political signs, provided that said signs are placed
entirely on private property and do not exceed 12 square feet in
area.
D. Fees.
(1) At the time of the filing for a permanent sign permit, the applicant
shall pay to the Borough of Edgewater the following: $2 per square
foot of surface area of sign, computed by one side only for doublefaced
signs. The minimum fee shall be $25.
(2) At the time of the filing for a temporary sign permit, the applicant
shall pay to the Borough of Edgewater $25. Temporary signs for
and in connection with special events in the community will be
issued permits without a fee.
A. Computation of area of individual signs. The area of a sign face shall be
computed by drawing a square or rectangle that will encompass the
extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem or other display,
together with the sign frame and any material or color forming an
integral part of the background of the display or used to differentiate
the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed or by
§ 240-158 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-159
1:473
§ 240-160. Regulations governing signs for particular uses.
delineating the area established by reason of distinctive variation in
background color or by borders, whichever is greater.
B. Computation of area of multifaced signs. The sign area for a sign with
more than one face shall be computed by adding together the area of all
sign faces visible from any one point. When two identical sign faces are
placed back to back, so that both faces cannot be viewed from any point
at the same time, and when such sign faces are part of the same sign
structure and are not more than 42 inches apart at any point, the sign
area shall be computed by the measurement of one of the faces.
C. Computation of height. The height of a sign shall be computed as the
distance from the base of the sign at grade to the top of the highest
attached component of the sign.
A. Automobile service stations. Signs for automobile service stations shall
be permitted to display only the following signs, which are customary
and necessary to their business:
(1) One freestanding identification sign which may include the
company or brand name, insignia or emblem and unit prices,
provided that the sign not exceed 32 square feet in area on each
side. The freestanding sign shall be located a minimum of 10 feet
from all property lines and shall not exceed 20 feet in height. The
sign shall have an open area of not less than 10 feet between the
baseline of the sign and the ground level.
(2) The gasoline pump structure may include signage which is limited
to an emblem or insignia, brand name of gasoline, lead warning
sign, price indicator and any other sign required by law. This
signage shall be limited to two square feet per pump.
(3) One wall identification sign shall be permitted, except that, where a
building has street frontage on more than one street, one additional
sign (facing the second street) shall be permitted. The wall sign
shall not project more than six inches from the building, nor be
attached to a wall at a height less than eight feet above the
sidewalk. The wall sign shall be limited to 12 square feet in size.
(4) In the event that there is a canopy that is located over the pump
island, one sign, limited to the brand name, insignia or emblem of
the station, shall be permitted per canopy side, provided that each
sign does not exceed an area of 10% of the canopy face.
B. Shopping centers and other multitenant developments. In addition to
the signage requirements for each zone district, shopping centers and
other multitenant developments shall be governed by the following
regulations:
§ 240-159 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-160
1:474
(1) A sign plan shall be submitted to the approving authority for
approval and shall include the following: letter style and size,
illumination details, color, construction materials, locations and
height above grade; location relative to lot lines, landscaping and
on-site lighting fixtures; an indication of the location of site
identification signs and, for shopping malls, internal directional
signs (as determined to be necessary).
(2) A unified design theme shall be provided which integrates the
architectural design, materials and colors of the primary structure,
facade signs, freestanding signs, landscaping and lighting fixtures.
C. Institutional signs. Signs associated with houses of worship, hospitals,
nursing homes, continuing care facilities, schools or other similar
public or semipublic uses, as permitted by this chapter, may be erected
with the following provisions:
(1) One freestanding sign for each public street frontage shall be
permitted.
(2) Freestanding signs shall be a maximum 12 square feet, with a
maximum height of eight feet.
(3) The minimum setback required is 1/2 of the minimum required
building setback for the zone in which the use is located.
D. Residential signs. Signs for residential land uses shall comply with the
following regulations:
(1) The following signs shall be permitted: residential signs, including
name and address plates, professional nameplates, real estate
signs, temporary campaign signs and contractor signs as provided
herein are permitted in accordance with the size limitations as set
forth herein.
(2) Residential nameplates identifying a single-family residence and/or
street address, not to exceed two square feet in area. Street
addresses larger than one square foot shall be construed to be
advertising signs for the purposes of this chapter.
(3) Professional nameplates not exceeding two square feet in area for
lawful occupants of the premises under the Zoning Ordinance.
(4) Residential signs for multifamily developments shall be permitted if
they comply with the following:
(a) One freestanding or monument sign, not exceeding eight
square feet, is permitted for each vehicular entrance to the
development.
(b) The height of the sign shall not exceed six feet.
§ 240-160 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-160
1:475
§ 240-161. Regulations governing nonresidential zone districts.
The following supplemental regulations shall apply, as noted:
(c) All such signs shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from any
street right-of-way. Monument signs shall be placed
perpendicular to the River Road property frontage to ensure
visibility.
(d) The sign shall be an identification sign only, limited to the name
of the development or project on site.
A. Signs in the B-1, B-2, MXD-1, MXD-2, MXD-3 and B4 Zone Districts.
Signs in these districts shall comply with the following requirements:
[Amended 12-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1485-2012; 9-15-2014 by Ord.
No. 1512-2014]
(1) Each commercial use shall be entitled to one wall-mounted sign,
canopy or awning, except that where a building has street frontage
on more than one street, one additional sign may be permitted.
(2) The lettering or graphic panel shall not exceed 75% of the linear
width of the storefront on which it is located. Letters shall not be
more than two feet in height.
(3) Wall signs shall advertise only the permitted use, products or
service on the premises on which they are displayed.
(4) Canopies, perpendicular signage and awnings shall be permitted to
overhang the pedestrian right-of-way, with a minimum vertical
clearance of 8.5 feet, a maximum overall height of five feet and a
minimum setback of three feet from the curbline. Lettering on a
canopy or awning shall be limited to the valance area and shall not
exceed 75% of the linear width of the valance. The valance shall be
no more than one foot in height, and lettering on the valance shall
be limited to six inches in height.
(5) Window signs. In addition to any sign or signs permitted pursuant
to this section, window display signs, as well as affixed window
signs, limited to indicate membership in a retail or professional
organization or credit card or credit association, to show
manufacturers' or required licenses, or advertisements referable to
sales within, shall be permitted to be attached to windows on the
interior of the business use, provided that the aggregate area
employed for such purpose shall not exceed 30% of the total
window area on which it is located.
B. Signs in the B-3, CBD and MCRD Zone Districts. Signs in these districts
shall comply with the following requirements. See § 240-160B for
additional requirements:
§ 240-160 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-161
1:476
(1) Only one freestanding sign identifying the development shall be
permitted along the River Road property frontage for a building or
buildings with more than one tenant and a floor area of at least
25,000 square feet. This sign shall identify the development only.
Tenants within the development shall not attach their sign to any
part of the permitted sign.
(2) The height of the sign shall be limited to 20 feet in height, with the
exception of freestanding monument signs, which shall be limited
to six feet in height, inclusive of the base of the sign. Freestanding
signs shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from any property line.
The sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in size. Freestanding signs
shall have an open area not less than three feet between the base
line of said sign and the ground level, with the exception of
monument signs which provide a solid base. This open space may
be filled in with a platform or decorative latticework which does not
close off more than 1/2 of any square footage of such open space.
(3) Monument signs shall be placed perpendicular to the River Road
property line to ensure visibility.
(4) Within the development, two freestanding directory signs shall be
permitted to provide a listing of, and directions to, the occupants.
Each sign shall not exceed 12 square feet in area and six feet in
height. All directory signs shall be located a minimum of 200 feet
from any public street.
(5) Each commercial use shall be entitled to a wall sign, but in no event
shall the total square footage of all wall signs exceed 10% of the
square footage of the front facade.
(a) Wall signs shall not exceed two square feet of signage for every
linear foot of the front facade of the portion of the building
occupied by the use being advertised. No wall sign shall
exceed a vertical dimension (height) of greater than two feet.
(b) The maximum letter size of any wall-mounted sign shall be two
feet.
(c) Wall signs which are placed parallel to the building wall shall
be permitted to project forward no more than six inches from
the building nor be attached to a wall at a height of less than
eight feet above the sidewalk or ground.
(d) Canopies, perpendicular signage and awnings shall be
permitted to overhang the pedestrian right-of-way, with a
minimum vertical clearance of 8.5 feet, a maximum overall
height of five feet and a minimum setback of three feet from
the curbline. Lettering on a canopy or awning shall be limited
to the valance area and shall not exceed 75% of the linear
width of the valance. The valance shall be no more than one
§ 240-161 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-161
1:477
§ 240-162. Temporary signs.
Temporary signs shall comply to the following:
foot in height, and lettering on the valance shall be limited to
six inches in height.
(6) Window signs. In addition to any sign or signs permitted pursuant
to this section, window display signs, as well as affixed window
signs limited to indicate membership in a retail or professional
organization or credit card or credit association, to show
manufacturers' or required licenses, or advertisements referable to
sales within, shall be permitted to be attached to windows on the
interior of the business use, provided that the aggregate area
employed for such purpose shall not exceed 30% of the total
window area on which it is located.
C. Signs in the OR-1 District. Signs in this district shall comply with the
following requirements. Those uses that are associated with
multitenant developments shall also be regulated by § 240-160B.
(1) One freestanding or monument sign identifying the development
shall be permitted.
(a) The sign shall be limited to 24 square feet and shall not exceed
a height of eight feet above the grade.
(b) The freestanding sign shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet
from any property line. Monument signs shall be placed
perpendicular to the River Road property line to ensure
visibility.
(2) One wall-mounted building identification sign is permitted, subject
to the following requirements:
(a) The area of the sign shall not exceed 20 square feet.
(b) The maximum letter size shall be a maximum two feet in
height.
A. All temporary signage, except as specifically exempted under this
article, shall require a permit. Said permit shall be valid for a period not
to exceed 30 days from the issuance thereof and may be renewed for a
period not to exceed 60 days.
B. No temporary sign shall exceed an area of 12 square feet, provided that
temporary signs, such as banners which are permitted by permit by the
Mayor and Council within the public right-of-way, may exceed 12
square feet in size.
C. Insurance for temporary signs may be required by the Mayor and
Council. Any person obtaining a permit for the erection of a temporary
sign, where the Mayor and Council requires insurance, shall provide
§ 240-161 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-162
1:478
§ 240-163. Illumination.
§ 240-164. General regulations for signs.
proof to the satisfaction of the Construction Official that the person,
firm or corporation actually doing the erection shall have in force a
public liability insurance policy with limits of no less than $100,000 for
property damage and $300,000 for bodily injury, per occurrence.
D. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to permit the erection or
installation of any political signs upon any pole or tree located on public
property or within the public right-of-way within the Borough of
Edgewater, and their erection or installation is hereby specifically
prohibited. This section shall not be deemed to prohibit temporary lawn
signs or street banners as set forth elsewhere in this chapter.
E. Streamers of flags or pennants and banners shall be permitted as
temporary signs in accordance with the permit requirements and time
restrictions set forth in § 240-162A.
A. No sign shall be an illuminated sign except as provided herein.
B. No sign shall be illuminated externally by more than one floodlight per
surface of said sign. Such lighting shall be at grade and properly
directed and shielded so as not to produce glare or offensive light off
the property.
C. Flashing signs, highly reflective glass or fluorescent paint (red or
green) and illuminated tubing outlining roofs, doors windows or wall
edges of a building are prohibited.
D. No sign shall be artificially illuminated after 11:00 p.m. or before 7:00
a.m. unless said premises are occupied and attended.
A. No billboard or billboard signs shall be permitted. No sign otherwise
lawful under this chapter shall be prohibited because of this section.
B. No sign shall be placed, located or displayed upon any sidewalk or area
between sidewalk and curb.
C. No roof sign, often known also as a "sky sign," shall be permitted.
D. No signs shall be erected or painted or composed of fluorescent or
phosphorescent or similar material.
E. No sign shall be, in whole or part, moving, mobile or revolving.
F. No sign shall have more than two colors, inclusive of its background,
frame and decorative parts. However, varying tones or gradients of the
two main colors may be utilized on a sign and shall not constitute
additional colors. For the purposes of this chapter, black and white shall
be considered colors. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary,
in such instance where black or white shall be used in the formation of a
§ 240-162 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-164
1:479
§ 240-165. Nonconforming signs.
sign as aforesaid, then in such instance either of such may be used as a
third color.
G. Canopies, awnings and marquees with signage embossed upon them
shall be considered to be business signs.
H. No sign shall be erected, relocated or maintained so as to prevent free
ingress to or egress from any door, window or fire escape. No sign of
any kind shall be attached to a standpipe or fire escape.
I. No sign or other advertising structure, as regulated by this chapter,
shall be erected at the intersection of any streets in such a manner as to
obstruct free and clear vision or at any location where, by reason of the
position, shape or color, it may interfere with, obstruct the view of,
cause an optical illusion or be confused with any authorized traffic sign,
signal or device, or which makes use of words, phrases, symbols or
characters in such manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse
traffic.
J. In order to preserve the basically residential character of this
community and to facilitate the improvement of its commercial and
industrial areas in a safe and orderly manner, no commercial outdoor
advertising signs, billboards or other signs which are not expressly and
directly related to the business being conducted on the premises and
which do not conform to the applicable requirements and standards set
forth in other sections of this chapter shall be permitted, and all other
such commercial outdoor advertising signs, billboards and other
nonconforming signs are specifically prohibited. It shall be unlawful for
any person to display upon any sign or other advertising structure any
obscene, indecent or immoral matter.
K. All signs shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of
the Uniform Construction Code. If the Zoning Officer shall find that any
sign is unsafe or insecure, the Zoning Officer shall give written notice to
the owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the premises
upon which such sign may be erected. If such owner, agent or person
fails to remove or alter the sign so as to comply with the standards
herein set forth within 10 days after such notice, such sign or other
advertising structure may be removed or altered to comply, by the
Zoning Officer, at the expense of the owner, agent or person having the
beneficial use of the premises upon which such sign may be erected.
The Zoning Officer may cause any sign or other advertising structure
which is an immediate peril to persons or property to be removed
summarily and without notice.
A. Any signs existing at the time of the passage of this chapter and which
violate any provisions thereof shall be deemed a nonconforming use
and may be continued, maintained and repaired upon the present
premises or location; provided, however, that such sign was lawful
§ 240-164 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-165
1:480
under any prior ordinance. Any nonconforming sign which is associated
with a change in occupancy or ownership shall necessitate an
application to the approving authority. Any sign unlawful under any
prior ordinance shall remain unlawful unless it complies with the
provisions of this chapter and there is issued by the Zoning Officer a
sign-erection permit therefor.
B. Any sign which has been damaged to the extent that the cost of repairs
shall exceed 50% of the current value of said sign shall be deemed as
destroyed, and the owner thereof shall not be permitted to erect or
restore said sign except in accordance with this chapter.
§ 240-165 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-165
1:481

ARTICLE XIX
Parking and Loading Requirements
§ 240-166. Off-street parking requirements.
A. Number of parking spaces required. The number of off-street parking
spaces required shall be as set forth in Table 1. If determination of the
number of required parking spaces results in a fractional space, a
fraction of 0.5 or higher shall require one additional parking space.
B. Location of parking spaces.
(1) The approving authority shall approve the location of all proposed
parking spaces on the site and shall take into consideration the size
and topography of the site, visibility from the site to the adjoining
street as well as within the parking area, conditions of safety
relating to the movement of people and vehicles and the
elimination of nuisance factors, including glare, noise, dust and
other similar considerations. Off-street parking shall not be located
closer than 15 feet from any front yard lot line, nor closer than five
feet from any side or rear lot line, nor within a required buffer area.
These conditions shall apply to all surface, below-grade and abovegrade
parking facilities. All parking facilities shall not be located
closer than 25 feet from any two intersecting streets or within the
sight triangle of any driveway and the street right-of-way.
(2) Parking spaces located to serve residential uses shall be within 150
feet of the entrance of the building and within 300 feet of
commercial/industrial uses subject to site plan approval.
(3) The required number of off-street parking spaces as set forth in
Table 1 below for multifamily, including garden apartment, mid-rise
and high-rise and townhouse uses, shall be required to be allocated
to each unit in the complex by deed, lease or other document and
shall be made available to the occupants of the unit at no additional
cost, fee or charge. [Added 7-15-2002 by Ord. No. 1242-2002]
Table 1
Off-Street Parking Requirements
Land Uses
Required Off-Street Parking
Spaces
Auto service stations 3 per bay or 1 per gas pump
and 1 per bay, whichever is
greater
Banks and savings institutions 1 per 300 square feet of GFA
Child-care centers 1 per 6 children
Eating and drinking
establishments
1 space for each 3 seats
§ 240-166 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-166
1:483
Table 1
Off-Street Parking Requirements
Land Uses
Required Off-Street Parking
Spaces
Funeral home 1 per 150 square feet GFA
House of worship 1 per 3 seats. For benches, 1
seat equals 3 feet of linear
space
Industrial, including research and
development
1 per 400 square feet of GFA
Manufacturing and assembly
operations, including welding,
carpentry, etc.
1 per 800 square feet of GFA
and 1 per 250 square feet of
GFA of related offices
Medical or dental offices 1 per 150 square feet of GFA
Office
Under 49,999 square feet of
GFA
1 per 225 square feet of GFA
50,000 and over square feet of
GFA
1 per 250 square feet of GFA
Residential
Single-family and two-family
detached
2 per dwelling unit
Multifamily, including garden
apartment, mid-rise and highrise
2 per dwelling unit, plus 1
visitor space for each 6
dwelling units
Townhouse 2 per dwelling unit, plus 1
visitor space for each 6
dwelling units
Senior citizen housing 0.75 space per dwelling unit,
plus 1 visitor space for each 10
units
Assisted living 0.75 space per dwelling unit,
plus 1 visitor space for each 12
units
Nursing home 0.5 space per bed, plus 1
visitor space for each 12 beds
Retail store and personal service
establishments
1 per 200 square feet of GFA
Schools, elementary (K through
8)
2 per classroom, but not less
than 1.5 per teacher and staff
§ 240-166 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-166
1:484
Table 1
Off-Street Parking Requirements
Land Uses
Required Off-Street Parking
Spaces
Storage areas (primary use) 1 per 5,000 square feet of GFA
of storage area and 1 per 250
square feet of GFA of related
offices
Theater 1 per 3 seats
Warehouse 1 per 1,000 square feet of GFA
and 1 per 250 square feet of
GFA of related offices
Other uses not provided herein
shall be determined by the
approving authority
NOTES RELATING TO PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
GFA = Gross Floor Area
1. Whenever there is more than one use conducted on any one
premises, parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with
the combined requirements of each use as shown in the above
schedule or as approved by the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment or as otherwise indicated in this chapter.
2. Drive-through lanes and windows for banks and other uses,
where permitted, shall be provided with room for queuing of
10 automobiles for each drive-through lane and/or window.
3. The inclusion of any use in this table is not meant to imply it is
a permitted use in the Borough. See the applicable sections of
this chapter for the enumeration of permitted uses.
C. Parking spaces for the disabled.
(1) In any parking lot, designated parking spaces for disabled persons
shall be required as follows:
Table 2
Required Parking for the Disabled
Total Parking Spaces
Required Number of Parking in Lot
Spaces for the Disabled
Up to 25 1
26 to 100 2
Over 100 2% of total spaces in lot
§ 240-166 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-166
1:485
(2) Parking spaces for the disabled shall be located in one area and
designated as parking for the handicapped. They shall be located
so that access does not require wheeling or walking behind parked
cars. Parking spaces for the disabled shall be at least eight feet
wide with a five-foot access area located adjacent to the driver's
side.
D. Parking area design standards.
(1) Aisle width. Provisions shall be made for the safe and adequate
circulation of vehicles and pedestrians within and adjoining the
subject property. Aisle widths providing direct access to individual
parking stalls shall be in accordance with the standards in Table 3.
Only one-way traffic shall be permitted in aisles of less than 24 feet
in width.
Table 3
Minimum Aisle Width
Parking Angle
Minimum Aisle Width
(feet)
0° (parallel parking) 12
30° 12
45° 13
60° 18
90° (perpendicular parking) 24
(2) Parking stalls shall be nine feet by 18 feet in dimension, provided
that parking stalls serving lots which contain retail uses utilizing
shopping carts shall be 10 feet by 20 feet. Hairpin striping of
parking spaces is required.
(3) Circulation within parking area.
(a) All parking spaces shall be designed free and clear of any
obstruction to individual parking stalls.
(b) Parking spaces shall be located in such a fashion as to permit
all vehicles to exit in a safe and orderly manner. Under no
condition shall vehicles be permitted to back out of a parking
lot driveway or otherwise block the free movement of traffic
within the parking area or specific points of safety control,
such as fire hydrants, doorways, elevators or other similar
locations.
(c) Aisle widths and circulation patterns shall be designed to
permit emergency and service vehicles such as delivery trucks,
solid waste collection vehicles and the like, to have reasonable
access to and space for their intended functions.
§ 240-166 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-166
1:486
(d) Pedestrian circulation within a parking area shall be, to as
great an extent as possible, separated from vehicular traffic.
Safety zones, crossing points and sidewalk areas, where
warranted, shall be provided.
(4) Driveway design criteria.
(a) Location of driveways. All entrance and exit driveways to a
public or private street shall be located so as to afford
maximum safety to said roadway, to provide for safe and
convenient ingress and egress and to minimize conflict with
the free flow of traffic. In no case shall unrestricted access
along the length of the street or streets upon which the parking
area abuts be permitted.
(b) Sight distances.
[1] The minimum sight distances established in Table 4 shall
be adhered to between a driveway and the adjoining street
in accordance with the sight triangle definition. Said
driveway shall be designed in profile, and grading shall be
reviewed by the Borough Engineer.
[2] For the purpose of this chapter, sight distance
measurement shall be measured from the driver's seat of a
standing vehicle, located on that portion of the exit
driveway that is immediately contiguous to the travelled
way, with the front of the vehicle 10 feet behind the rightof-
way line of the road, with the height of the eye (3.75
feet) to the top of the object (4.5 feet) above the pavement.
Table 4
Minimum Sight Distance from a Driveway and
Adjoining Street
Maximum Allowable
Speed on Roadway
(miles per hour)
Minimum Sight Distance
(feet)
25 175
30 250
35 325
40 400
45 450
50 or more 500
(c) Where a site is located at the intersection of two streets, no
driveway entrance or exit shall be located within 50 feet of the
point where the curb return of the street intersection and the
curbline meet.
§ 240-166 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-166
1:487
(d) No part of any driveway shall be located closer than 20 feet
from any other driveway on the adjoining parcel nor shall more
than one driveway be located closer than 40 feet to another
driveway on the same site, as measured from the closest edge
of any two driveways along the same right-of-way line.
(e) No entrance or exit driveway shall be located on a traffic circle
or on a ramp of an interchange or within 50 feet of the
beginning of any ramp or other portion of an interchange.
(f) Geometric design. The geometric design of a driveway
connection to a public or private street shall be governed by
sound traffic engineering principles. The following guidelines
are utilized in preparing a geometric design, but some
deviation may be necessitated from time to time due to the
many variables encountered in the course of preparing a
design. The applicant should be aware, therefore, that,
although the driveway layout may conform to these guidelines,
conditions may dictate deviation from them and that the
requirements of the Borough Engineer shall be final.
[1] Two-way operation. Driveways used for two-way operation
will intersect a public or private street at an angle to as
near 90° as site conditions will permit and in no case will
be less than 60°.
[2] One-way operation. Driveways used for vehicles in one
direction of travel (right turn only) shall not form an angle
smaller than 45° with a public street.
[3] The dimensions of driveways shall be designed to
adequately accommodate the volume and character of
vehicles anticipated to be attracted daily onto the land
development for which a site plan is prepared. The
required maximum and minimum dimensions for
driveways connecting to a public or private street at 90°
are indicated in Table 5. Driveways serving large volumes
of daily traffic, or traffic over 25% of which is truck traffic,
shall be required to utilize high to maximum dimensions.
Driveways serving low daily traffic volumes, or traffic less
than 25% of which is truck traffic, shall be permitted to use
low to minimum dimensions.
§ 240-166 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-166
1:488
Table 5
Driveway Widths, Depressed Curbs and Curb
Return Radius Standards
One-Way Operation Two-Way Operation
Use
Driveway
Width
(feet)
Depressed
Curb
(feet)
Curb
Return
Radius
(feet)
Driveway
Width
(feet)
Depressed
Curb
(feet)
Curb
Return
Radius
(feet)
3- to 10-
family
residence
12 to
15
15 to
20
20
min./30
max.
22 to
24
24 to
30
20
min./30
max.
Over 10-
family
residence
15 to
20
20 to
30
20
min./30
max.
24 to
40
26 to
50
25
min./35
max.
Commercial
and
industrial
18 to
25
25 to
35
35
min./45
max.
24 to
40
26 to
50
35
min./45
max.
Service
stations
18 to
25
25 to
35
20
min./35
max.
24 to
40
26 to
50
20
min./35
max.
[4] Any vertical curve on a driveway shall be flat enough to
prevent the dragging of any vehicle undercarriage.
[5] Should the sidewalk be so close to the curb or a depressed
curb driveway as to cause the ramp to be too steep and be
likely to cause undercarriage drag, the sidewalk shall be
appropriately lowered to provide a suitable ramp gradient.
[6] The surface of any driveway shall be constructed with a
permanent pavement of a type specified by standards set
by the Borough Engineer. Such pavement shall extend to
the paved portion of the public or private sidewalk.
(g) Guide rail breakaway cable terminals (BCT), wheel stops and
parking lot striping.
[1] Guide rail breakaway cable terminals (BCT) shall be
provided in appropriate locations where required for
safety purposes.
[2] Wheel stops, permanently anchored to the ground, may be
required in appropriate locations. Parked vehicles shall
not overhang or extend over sidewalk area, unless an
additional sidewalk width of 21/2 feet is provided to
accommodate such overhang.
§ 240-166 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-166
1:489
[3] Parking stalls, driveways and aisles shall be clearly
marked and delineated. The approving authority may
require that certain areas be maintained for fire-fighting
purposes or other emergency purposes. These areas, as
well as other pavement signage, shall be appropriately
designated.
(h) Minimum and maximum grades in parking area. The minimum
and maximum parking grades shall be in accordance with the
following requirements:
Table 6
Minimum and Maximum Grades of Parking Areas
Use
Maximum
Grade
Minimum
Grade
Parking stalls and service
aisles
6% 1/2%
Main approach walkways
to buildings
4% 1/2%
Swales 10% 2%
Principal circulation
aisles
8% 1/2%
Driveways: entrances and
exits
6%* 1/2%*
NOTE:
* For a distance of 100 feet from the street right-of-way line.
(i) Maintenance of off-street parking and loading area. Every
parcel of land used as a public or private off-street parking or
loading area shall be maintained in good condition, free of
hazards and deterioration. All pavement areas, sidewalks,
curbs, drainage facilities, lighting, bumpers, guardrails,
markings, signs, landscaping and other improvements shall be
maintained in workable, safe and good condition.
(j) Other off-street parking requirements:
[1] Limitation as to use. All off-street parking areas shall be
used solely for the parking of passenger automobiles, and
no commercial repair work or service of any kind shall be
conducted within the parking lot.
[2] Nonavailability. At any time that the required off-street
parking facilities cease to be available, as required, the
certificate of occupancy for the building or buildings built
in conjunction with such parking areas shall be canceled
and become null and void.
§ 240-166 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-166
1:490
[3] Charges. There shall be no charge made for the use of offstreet
parking facilities, and no cars other than selfpropelled
passenger vehicles shall be permitted to use any
of the off-street parking facilities herein required, and no
service of any kind shall be extended to the vehicle
occupying such off-street parking facilities except for
emergency purposes.
[4] Commuter parking prohibited. Off-street parking facilities
shall not be used for commuter parking, and appropriate
signage shall be placed throughout the off-street parking
facilities and at such locations as shall be determined by
the approving authority. [Added 12-13-2004 by Ord. No.
1310-2004]
(5) Off-street parking construction.
(a) All off-street parking areas shall be graded and drained so as to
dispose of all surface water in a manner so as not to
unreasonably impair the surroundings.
(b) All off-street parking areas, aisles and driveways shall be
surfaced with asphalt, bituminous or cement binder pavement
according to specifications established for this purpose by the
Borough Engineer.
(c) All parking areas and access drives shall be edged by a
concrete or Belgian block not exceeding six inches above the
paved surface or ground level.
E. Landscaping in parking and loading areas shall be provided as follows:
(1) Loading areas shall be screened with landscaping and/or berms.
The screening shall be sufficient to obscure the view of parked
vehicles, loading platforms and loading activities from any lot line
or street line throughout the year. Fences and walls shall be
permitted to be used in combination with the landscaping and
berms if a site constraint exists which would limit the amount of
space for a sufficient buffer to fully screen said loading area. The
minimum height of the fence and/or wall shall be six feet.
(2) Parking areas with 20 or greater parking spaces shall be screened
from the street with landscaping, fencing or a wall, and interior
parking lot landscaping shall be required. Landscaped areas should
be located in protected areas such as along walkways, in center
islands or at the end of parking bays and shall be distributed
throughout the parking area to mitigate the view of the parked
vehicles without interfering with adequate sight distance for
vehicles or pedestrians. The landscaping shall consist of hardy, lowmaintenance
varieties of trees and shrub plantings no higher than
three feet.
§ 240-166 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-166
1:491
§ 240-167. Off-street loading.
(3) Parking areas with less than 20 spaces shall be screened from the
street with landscaping, fencing or a wall, but no interior parking
lot landscaping is required;
(4) One shade tree, with a minimum diameter of 2 1/2 inches measured
three feet above the ground, shall be provided for every 10 parking
spaces, with a maximum linear distance of 100 feet between trees
in the same parking row. Trees shall be staggered and/or spaced so
as not to interfere with driver vision and shall have branches no
lower than six feet.
(5) Any plantings which do not live shall be replaced within one year or
the next growing season. Notwithstanding this provision, all
applicants must continually meet the provisions of site plan
approval with respect to landscape plans.
(6) Landscaping shall not cast excessive shade on adjacent properties,
interfere with existing vegetation, interfere with light fixtures or
interfere with adequate sight distance for vehicles or pedestrians.
(7) Landscaped areas located within 50 feet of a street right-of-way
shall consist of a mix of shade trees, vegetative ground covers,
including both perennials and annuals, shrubs and turf. Installed
landscape ground cover materials such as stones, pebbles and
other nonorganic materials shall not be permitted. These
requirements apply to all properties with 100 feet or more of street
frontage. Irrigation systems for the landscaped areas are required
to be installed to ensure the continued viability of the plantings.
[Added 10-1-2001 by Ord. No. 1219-2001]
A. In any district, in connection with every building or buildings, group or
part thereof hereinafter erected which is to be utilized by industrial and
commercial uses or requires the distribution by vehicles of materials or
merchandise and for any residential development containing 30 or
more dwelling units and for large-scale public and quasi-public uses,
there shall be provided and maintained, on the same zone lot with such
building, off-street loading spaces in accordance with the requirements
of Table 7.
B. Each such loading space shall not be less than 12 feet in width and 35
feet or more in length, depending upon the functions to be performed.
The overall floor-to-ceiling height or clear height distance shall not be
less than 12 feet, which may be increased where required.
§ 240-166 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-167
1:492
Table 7
Off-Street Loading Requirements
Land Use**
Floor Area at
Which First Berth
is Required
(square feet)
Floor Area at
Which Second
Berth is Required
(square feet)
Industrial, manufacturing 5,000 40,000
Laboratory, research or
commercial
5,000 40,000
Retail 5,000 20,000
Service establishments 5,000 40,000
Commercial recreation 5,000 100,000
Restaurant 2,000 25,000
Office buildings 5,000 100,000
Funeral home 10,000 100,000
Residential apartment
building, including senior
housing complexes
10,000 100,000
Institutional, public
schools
10,000 100,000
Hospitals, nursing homes,
congregate care facilities
10,000 100,000
Auditoriums, arenas 10,000 100,000
NOTES:
* An additional berth shall be required for each additional amount of
square feet as indicated and as required between the need for oneand
two-berth intervals.
** In the case of a multiple-use building, the amount of off-street
loading required shall be equal to the sum of the parts, unless
same can be demonstrated to be in excess, and shall be subject to
determination by the approving authority.
C. Except for required buffer areas, each such loading space may occupy
any required side or rear yard but shall not be located in any required
front yard. When adjoining a residential use, institutional use or place
of general assembly, a suitably screened or landscaped buffer shall be
provided.
D. Off-street loading spaces shall not be located within any fire prevention
zone, within 25 feet of any fire hydrant or within 10 feet of any stairway,
doorway, elevator or other general means of entry to and from a
building for the general public, nor shall it block or in any way interfere
§ 240-167 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-167
1:493
with the free flow of pedestrians from any means of ingress or egress
nor shall it interfere with the free flow of pedestrians or vehicles. All
such loading spaces shall be appropriately indicated by a sign or other
visual communication as to said location.
E. All loading and unloading shall be conducted entirely within the
boundaries of the lot concerned, and no vehicle or conveyance shall, in
any manner, use public streets, sidewalks or rights-of-way for loading or
unloading operations other than ingress or egress to the lot.
§ 240-167 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-167
1:494
ARTICLE XX
Wireless Telecommunications Towers and Antennas
[Added 3-20-2006 by Ord. No. 1329-2006; amended 10-20-2008 by
Ord. No. 1391-2008]
§ 240-168. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE — Shall include but not be limited to
man-made trees, clock towers, bell steeples and similar alternative-design
mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas
or towers.
ANTENNA — Any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on
a tower, building or structure and used in communications that radiate
or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio
frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals
or other communication signals.
BACKHAUL NETWORK — The lines that connect a provider's towers/cell
sites to one or more cellular telephone switching offices, and/or longdistance
providers, or the public switched telephone network.
CO-LOCATION — When two or more receiving and/or transmitting facilities
are placed together on the same tower or monopole.
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
GOVERNING AUTHORITY — The Mayor and Council of the Borough of
Edgewater and/or its designated agents, employees and representatives.
HEIGHT — When referring to a tower or other structure, the distance
measured from the finished grade of the parcel to the highest point on the
tower or other structure, including any rooftop appurtenance on an existing
structure, and including the base pad and any antenna, even if said highest
point is an antenna.
MUNICIPAL LAND USE LAW — The Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
PLANNING BOARD — The Edgewater Planning Board, whose statutory
authority is defined by the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq.
PREEXISTING TOWERS AND ANTENNAS — Shall have the meaning set
forth in § 240-169C of this article.
PUBLIC OFFICER — The zoning official of the Borough of Edgewater.
TOWER — Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the
purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including but not limited to
self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers or monopole towers. The term
§ 240-168 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-168
1:495
includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers,
common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower
structures and the like. The term includes the structure and any supports
thereto.
§ 240-169. Applicability.
§ 240-170. General guidelines and requirements.
A. New towers and antennas. All new towers or antennas to be sited in the
Borough of Edgewater shall be subject to these regulations.
B. District height limitations. The requirements set forth in this article
shall govern the heights of all towers and antennas to be constructed in
each zoning district. The height limitations applicable to buildings and
structures shall not apply to towers and antennas facilities.
C. Preexisting towers and antennas. Any wireless communication tower or
antenna on which a permit has been properly issued prior to the
effective date of this article shall not be required to meet the
requirements of this article, other than the requirements of § 240-170E
and F. This includes permitted towers or antennas that have not yet
been constructed, so long as such approval is current and not expired.
Any such towers or antennas shall be referred to in this article as
"preexisting antennas."
D. Public property. Antennas or towers located on property owned, leased
or otherwise controlled by the Borough of Edgewater shall be exempt
from the requirements of this article, provided a license or lease
authorizing such antenna or tower has been approved by resolution by
the governing body. Said approved municipal sites utilized for the
purposes of construction or locating towers and/or antennas shall be
treated as engaging in a permitted use under this article. [Added
8-16-2010 by Ord. No. 1434-2010]
A. Purpose; goals. The purpose of this article is to establish general
guidelines for the siting of wireless communication towers and
antennas.
(1) The goals of this article are to:
(a) Protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse
impacts of towers and antennas;
(b) Encourage the location of towers in nonresidential areas;
(c) Minimize the total number of towers throughout the
community;
(d) Strongly encourage the joint use of new and existing tower
sites as a primary option rather than construction of additional
single-use towers;
§ 240-168 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-170
1:496
(e) Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the
extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the
community is minimal;
(f) Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a
way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and
antennas through careful design, siting, landscape screening,
and innovative camouflaging techniques;
(g) Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications
services to provide such services to the community quickly,
effectively and efficiently;
(h) Require that such towers are properly constructed, maintained
and dismantled, and that appropriate security is posted to
ensure same and the safety of Borough residents;
(i) Consider the public health and safety of communication
towers; and
(j) Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower
failure through engineering and careful siting of tower
structures.
(2) In furtherance of these goals, the Planning Board shall give due
consideration to the Borough of Edgewater's Master Plan, Zoning
Map, existing land uses and environmentally sensitive areas in
approving sites for the location of towers and antennas.
B. Principal or accessory use. Antennas may be considered either
principal or accessory uses, and towers shall be considered a principal
use only. A different existing use of an existing structure on the same lot
shall not preclude the installation of an antenna on such lot but shall
preclude the construction of a tower. For the purpose of determining
whether the installation of a tower or antenna complies with zoning
regulations, including but not limited to setback requirements, lot
coverage requirements and other such requirements, the dimensions of
the entire lot shall control, even though the antennas or towers may be
located on leased parcels within such lots.
C. Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for an antenna and/or tower
shall provide to the Planning Board an inventory of all existing towers,
antennas or sites approved for towers or antennas that are both within
the jurisdiction of the governing authority and within 1/4 mile of the
border thereof, including specific information about the location, height
and design of each tower.
D. Aesthetics; lighting. The guidelines set forth in this Subsection D shall
govern the aesthetic appearance of all towers and the installation of all
antennas governed by this article; provided, however, that the Planning
Board may grant variances to these requirements if it determines that
§ 240-170 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-170
1:497
the goals of this article are better served thereby and in accordance
with the Municipal Land Use Law (MLUL).
(1) Towers shall maintain a galvanized steel finish, subject to any
applicable standards of the FAA, and shall be painted a neutral
color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. Colors, textures,
screening, camouflage and landscaping shall be used to blend the
tower facilities to the natural setting and surrounding environment.
(2) If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the
antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment shall
be camouflaged so as to make the antenna and related equipment
as visually unobtrusive as possible.
(3) Towers shall not be artificially lighted unless required by the FAA
or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the Planning
Board may review the available lighting alternatives and approve
the design that would cause the least disturbance to the
surrounding views and residential areas.
E. Federal requirements. All towers must meet or exceed current
standards and regulations of the FAA, FCC and any other agency of the
federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas.
If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the
towers and antennas governed by this article shall bring such towers
and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and
regulations within six months of the effective date of such standards
and regulations, unless a more stringent compliance schedule is
mandated by the controlling federal agency. Failure to bring towers and
antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations
shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the
owner's expense. Any such removal shall be ordered by the Planning
Board, as all approvals granted herein shall be unequivocally deemed
conditional approvals subject to this provision, or by order of the
Edgewater Construction Official.
F. Building codes; safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of
all wireless communication towers within the Borough of Edgewater,
the owner of each tower shall ensure that the tower is maintained in
compliance with standards contained in the Uniform Construction Code
and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the
Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time. If
upon inspection the governing authority concludes that a tower fails to
comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to
persons or property, then, upon notice being provided to the owner of
the tower, the owner shall have 10 days to bring such tower into
compliance with such standards. If the owner fails to bring such tower
into compliance within said 10 days, then the Mayor and Council, in
conjunction with the Borough of Edgewater's Construction Official, may
order the removal of such tower at the owner's expense, and lien the
property for all costs incurred, including professional fees expended.
§ 240-170 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-170
1:498
§ 240-171. Permitted uses.
G. Signs. No signs or other nonessential accoutrements shall be allowed
on any antenna or tower, with the exception of warning signs or other
signs required by federal, state or local law.
H. Buildings and support equipment associated with the antennas or
towers shall comply with the requirements of § 240-174.
I. Access road. All access roads leading to the tower and antenna area
shall be paved with asphalt. The access road shall include an area for
sufficient parking and turnaround radius for at least one vehicle.
J. Not essential services. Towers and antennas shall be regulated and
permitted pursuant to this article and shall not be regulated or
permitted as essential services, public utilities, or private utilities.
K. Franchises. Owners and/or operators of towers or antennas shall certify
that all franchises required by law for the construction and/or operation
of a wireless communication system in the Borough of Edgewater have
been obtained, and shall file a copy of all required franchises with the
Clerk of the Borough of Edgewater, who shall distribute copies of same
to the Borough Construction Official and Edgewater Building
Department.
L. Maximum tower height. The maximum height of any tower shall not
exceed 70 feet. For purposes of measurement, the maximum tower
height shall include any structures supported by the tower and any
antenna.
A. General. The uses listed in this § 240-171 are deemed to be permitted
uses and shall require minor site plan approval. Nevertheless, all such
uses shall comply with the requirements set forth under § 240-170D, E,
F, G, H, I, J, K and L of this article and all other applicable ordinances.
B. Specific permitted uses. The following uses are specifically permitted:
(1) Locating a tower, including the placement of supporting equipment
used in connection with said tower, in the R-3, R-4, R-5, SRH,
MCRD, CBD, B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, MXD-1, MXD-2, MXD-3 and OR-1
Zoning Districts; provided, however, that such tower shall be set
back from any existing off-site residence a distance equal to the
height of the tower; [Amended 12-17-2012 by Ord. No.
1485-2012; 9-15-2014 by Ord. No. 1512-2014]
(2) Installing an antenna on an existing structure other than a tower
(such as a building, sign, light pole, water tower or other
freestanding structure) that is no less than 60 feet in height, so
long as said antenna adds no more than 10 feet to the height of said
existing structure; provided, however, that the aforesaid height
restrictions shall not apply to any structures owned by the Borough
of Edgewater; and
§ 240-170 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-171
1:499
§ 240-172. Administrative approvals.
§ 240-173. Nonpermitted towers and antennas; use variances.
(3) Installing an antenna on any existing tower of any height, so long as
the addition of said antenna adds no more than 10 feet to the height
of said existing tower.
A. The Edgewater Planning Board has exclusive jurisdiction pursuant to
the MLUL and this article, unless it is determined that the Edgewater
Board of Adjustment has jurisdiction pursuant to the provisions of the
Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., at which point the
provisions of this article shall apply to the Edgewater Board of
Adjustment.
B. Each applicant for administrative approval shall apply to the Planning
Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment as indicated supra, providing
the information required in this article, together with a nonrefundable
fee as established by resolution of the Borough Council to reimburse
the Borough of Edgewater for the costs of reviewing the application.
C. The Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment, as indicated
supra, shall review the application and determine if the proposed use
complies with the provisions of this article.
A. Applicability. If the tower or antenna is not a permitted use under
§ 240-171 of this article, then the applicant shall be required to submit
its application to the Edgewater Zoning Board of Adjustment for a use
variance, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., which shall have
jurisdiction over the application.
(1) In granting a use variance, the Zoning Board of Adjustment may
impose conditions to the extent the Board concludes that such
conditions are necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the
proposed tower or antenna facility on adjoining properties.
(2) Upon either filing, i.e., use permits or site plan approval, all proofs
of an engineering nature that the applicant submits, whether civil,
mechanical or electrical, shall be certified by a licensed
professional engineer. Reports submitted by radio frequency (RF)
experts shall be exempt from this requirement.
(3) An applicant seeking a use variance shall submit the information
described in this section, together with an amount to be deposited
into escrow to reimburse the Borough of Edgewater for the costs of
reviewing the application.
B. Information required. Each applicant requesting a use variance under
this article shall submit the following information:
(1) A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and height of
the proposed tower or antennas, on-site land uses and zoning,
§ 240-171 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-173
1:500
adjacent land uses and zoning (including, when adjacent to other
municipalities, Master Plan classification of the site), adjacent
roadways, proposed means of access, setbacks from property lines,
elevation drawings of the proposed tower or antennas and any
other structures, topography, parking and other information
deemed by the Board of Adjustment to be necessary to assess
compliance with this article.
(2) Legal description of the parent tract and leased parcel (if
applicable).
(3) The setback distance between the proposed tower or antenna and
the nearest residential unit, platted residentially zoned properties,
and unplatted residentially zoned properties.
(4) The separation distance from other towers and antennas described
in the inventory of existing sites submitted pursuant to § 240-170C
shall be shown on an updated site plan or map. The applicant shall
also identify the type of construction of the existing tower(s) and
antennas and the owner/operator of the existing tower(s) and
antennas.
(5) A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials.
(6) Method of fencing, finished color, camouflage and illumination.
(7) A description of compliance with § 240-170 and all applicable
federal, state or local laws.
(8) A notarized statement supported by appropriate engineering and
supporting data demonstrating how the construction of the tower
or antenna facility will accommodate co-location of additional
antennas for future reference.
(9) Identification of the entities providing the backhaul network for the
tower(s) or antennas described in the application and other cellular
sites owned or operated by the applicant in the municipality.
(10) A description of the suitability of the use of existing towers,
antenna sites or other structures or alternative technology not
requiring the use of towers or structures to provide the services to
be provided through the use of the proposed new tower or
antennas.
(11) Line-of-sight analysis detailing the view of the proposed tower or
antennas from various directions and angles from adjacent
residential areas. The analysis shall be utilized to determine buffer
requirements.
(12) Any other information deemed by the Zoning Board of Adjustment
to be necessary to assess compliance with the MLUL and this
article.
§ 240-173 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-173
1:501
C. Factors considered in granting use variances. The Edgewater Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall consider the following factors in determining
whether to issue a use variance:
(1) Height of the proposed tower;
(2) Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential
district boundaries;
(3) Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties;
(4) Surrounding topography;
(5) Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;
(6) Design of the tower, with particular reference to design
characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating
visual obtrusiveness;
(7) Proposed ingress and egress; and
(8) Availability of suitable existing towers and other structures as
discussed in Subsection D of this section.
D. Availability of suitable existing towers or other structures. No new
tower or antenna shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates
to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board of Adjustment that no
existing tower, antenna site, structure or alternative technology that
does not require the use of towers or structures can accommodate the
applicant's proposed tower or antenna. Evidence submitted to
demonstrate that no existing tower, antenna site, or structure can
accommodate the applicant's proposed tower or antenna may consist of
any of the following:
(1) No existing towers, antenna site or structures are located within
the geographic area required to meet the applicant's engineering
requirements.
(2) Existing towers, antenna sites or structures are not of sufficient
height to meet the applicant's engineering requirements.
(3) Existing towers, antenna sites or structures do not have sufficient
structural strength to support the applicant's proposed tower or
antennas and related equipment.
(4) The applicant's proposed tower or antenna would cause
electromagnetic interference with the antennas on the existing
towers, antenna sites or structures, or the antennas on the existing
towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant's
proposed tower or antenna.
(5) The fees, costs or contractual provisions required by the owner in
order to share an existing tower, antenna site or structure, or to
adapt an existing tower, antenna site or structure for sharing, are
§ 240-173 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-173
1:502
unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower or antenna development
are presumed to be unreasonable, and a cost comparison shall be
admissible evidence of same.
(6) The applicant demonstrates that there are significant other limiting
factors that render existing towers, antenna sites and structures
unsuitable.
(7) Applicant shall have the affirmative obligation of proving that it has
attempted to enter into a contract with the owners of the existing
towers, antenna sites and structures:
(a) This obligation shall include copies of all correspondence as to
rates, cost of contributions, etc.
(b) Copies of rejection of the offers propounded on the applicant
by the owners of the existing structures, antenna sites and/or
towers.
(c) Written cost proposals indicating actual quoted figures
required by the owner of the existing structures, antenna sites
and/or towers.
(d) A detailed cost analysis indicating the cost to the applicant to
construct new tower, antennas and/or structure.
(8) The applicant shall further demonstrate that an alternative
technology that does not require the use of towers, antennas or
structures, such as a cable microcell network using multiple lowpowered
transmitters/receivers attached to a wireline system, is
unsuitable. Costs of alternative technology that exceed new tower
or antenna development shall not be presumed to render the
technology unsuitable.
E. Setbacks. The following setback requirements shall apply to all new
towers for which a use variance is required; provided, however, that the
Edgewater Zoning Board of Adjustment may reduce the standard
setback requirements in any industrial or commercial zoning district if
the goals of this article would be better served thereby:
(1) Towers must be set back a distance equal to the height of the tower
from any adjoining lot line.
(2) Towers, guys and accessory facilities must satisfy the minimum
zoning district setback requirements.
F. Security fencing. Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not less
than eight feet in height and shall be slatted and equipped with an
appropriate anticlimbing device; provided, however, that the Zoning
Board of Adjustment may grant a variance of such requirements as it
deems appropriate.
§ 240-173 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-173
1:503
§ 240-174. Bulk standards for buildings and other equipment
storage.
G. Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern the landscaping
surrounding the towers for which a use variance is required; provided,
however, that the Zoning Board of Adjustment may grant variance of
such requirements if the goals of this article would be better served
thereby.
(1) Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials
that effectively screens the view of the tower compound from
adjacent property. The standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped
strip at least four feet wide and 12 feet high outside the perimeter
of the compound.
(2) Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site
shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible.
A. Antennas mounted on structures or rooftops. The equipment cabinet or
structure used in association with an antenna facility shall comply with
the following:
(1) The cabinet or structure shall not contain more than 200 square
feet of gross floor area or be more than 15 feet in height. In
addition, for buildings and structures which are less than 60 feet in
height, the related unmanned equipment structure, if over 150
square feet of gross floor area or 12 feet in height, shall be located
on the ground and shall not be located on the roof of the structure.
(2) If the equipment structure is located on the roof of the building,
then the area of the equipment structure and other equipment and
structures shall not occupy more than 15% of the roof area.
(3) Equipment storage buildings or cabinets shall comply with all
applicable building codes.
(4) Equipment storage buildings or cabinets shall be sufficiently
insulated so that any noise generated from the equipment shall not
exceed 50 decibels at the property line.
B. Antennas located on towers. The related unmanned equipment
structure shall not contain more than 200 square feet of gross floor area
or be more than 15 feet in height and shall be located in accordance
with the minimum yard requirements of the zoning district in which
located.
C. Modification of building size requirements. The requirements of
Subsections A and B may be modified by the Planning Board when
doing so would encourage co-location by multiple users.
§ 240-173 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-175
1:504
§ 240-175. Letter of intent.
A letter of intent shall be provided by all applicants seeking approval to
construct a wireless communication tower, committing the tower owner and
its successors to allow the shared use of the tower if additional users agree
in writing to meet reasonable terms and conditions for shared use, and
that the tower owner acknowledges and agrees that its successors and/or
individual users shall be bound and will conform to the requirements of this
article, as applicable.
§ 240-176. Removal of abandoned antennas and towers.
Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of 12
months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna
or tower shall remove same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the
Edgewater Building Department notifying the owner of such abandonment.
If such antenna or tower is not removed within said ninety-day period, the
Mayor and Council may order the removal of such antenna or tower at the
owner's expense, and lien the property for the costs associated therewith,
inclusive of professional fees. If there are two or more users of a single
tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease
using the tower.
§ 240-177. Nonconforming uses.
§ 240-178. Approvals; compliance with laws.
The applicant's use of the premises is contingent upon its obtaining all
certificates, permits, zoning and other approvals that may be required by
any federal, state or local authority. The applicant shall erect, maintain and
operate its antenna facilities in accordance with site standards, statutes,
ordinances, rules and regulations now in effect or that may be issued
hereafter by the Federal Communications Commission or any other
A. Preexisting towers. Preexisting towers shall be allowed to continue
their usage as they presently exist. Routine maintenance (including
replacement with a new tower of like construction and height) shall be
permitted on such preexisting towers. New construction other than
routine maintenance on a preexisting tower shall be performed in
compliance with the requirements of this article.
B. Rebuilding damaged or destroyed nonconforming towers or antennas.
Nonconforming towers or antennas that are damaged or destroyed may
be rebuilt without having to first obtain administrative approval or a
conditional use permit. The type, height and location of the tower on
site shall be of the identical type and intensity as the original facility.
Building permits to rebuild the facility shall comply with the then
applicable building codes and shall be obtained within 180 days from
the date the facility is damaged or destroyed. If no permit is obtained or
if said permit expires, the tower or antenna shall be deemed abandoned
as specified in § 240-176.
§ 240-175 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-178
1:505
governing bodies. Should any conflict arise between local zoning ordinances
and rules or regulations promulgated by the FCC, the FCC rules and
regulations shall govern.
§ 240-179. Fees.
§ 240-180. Applicable laws.
The applicant shall, at its expense, comply with all present and future
federal, state and local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations (including
laws and ordinances relating to health, radio-frequency emissions, other
radiation and safety) in connection with the use, operation, maintenance,
construction and/or installation of the antenna facilities and/or the
premises. The municipality agrees to reasonably cooperate with the
applicant in obtaining, at the applicant's expense (including the
municipality's reasonable attorney and administrative fees), any federal
licenses and permits required for or substantially required by the
applicant's use of the premises.
§ 240-181. Enforcement; hold harmless; violations and penalties.
A. All wireless telecommunications towers and antenna facilities within
the Borough of Edgewater which are used to provide any
telecommunications services for a fee are required to be registered by
the owner of the tower or antenna facility with the Borough. The
registration forms shall be provided by the Edgewater Building
Department. A fee of $250, plus $1 for each foot of tower or antenna
height of the tallest antenna, shall be charged for the registration.
B. Each owner shall inform the Borough within 60 days of any changes to
the information set forth in the registration form.
C. The registration of all wireless telecommunications towers and
antennas facilities must be renewed on an annual basis and no later
than January 31 of each year. The registration form must be
accompanied by the fee to be accepted. The tower/antenna owner shall
submit the registration form and fee to the Borough Building
Department for review and processing.
D. A late fee of $25 shall be charged for each month that the registration
and accompanying fee is not received by the Borough.
E. An applicant who co-locates on an existing tower or antenna facility
shall pay a reduced renewal registration fee of $100. The registration
fee of the owner of the tower or antennas facility on which another
provider co-locates shall be reduced to $150, said reduction shall
commence in the year following the co-location.
A. The provisions of this article will be enforced by the Borough Zoning
Officer and Borough Construction Official, as appropriate.
§ 240-178 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-181
1:506
B. The owner of any tower or antenna facility shall indemnify and hold the
Borough harmless against any and all claims, suits, cause of action or
judgments arising from any injury, including death or damage, caused
by the construction and operation of the tower or antenna facility.
C. Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any of the provisions of
this article, or any amendment or supplement thereof, shall be deemed
guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof in a court of competent
jurisdiction, shall be fined not more than $250. Each and every day
during which such violation, illegal location, erection, construction,
reconstruction, enlargement, change, maintenance or use continues
shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 240-181 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-181
1:507

ARTICLE XXI
Temporary Sale of Seasonal Items and Holiday Decorations
[Added 4-20-2009 by Ord. No. 1406-2009]
§ 240-182. Intent.
The intent of this article is to establish regulations and procedures for the
outdoor sale of seasonal items and holiday decorations in the Borough of
Edgewater.
§ 240-183. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SEASONAL ITEMS and/or HOLIDAY DECORATIONS — Displays erected
on a seasonal basis in observance of religious, national or state holidays
throughout the year, including, but not limited to, Christmas trees, wreaths,
poinsettias, garland, etc.
TEMPORARY MERCHANT — A merchant or vendor who chooses a specific
location within the Borough upon which to erect or park a cart, tent, wagon,
truck or stand from which to engage in merchandising, with the intent to
return to the same location each day. A temporary merchant must not have
a vested interested in the location, must have the written permission from
the owner(s) of the location to conduct the sale of the intended products,
and must obtain a temporary business license pursuant to this article.
§ 240-184. License required.
§ 240-185. Application; approval.
A. It shall be a violation of this article for any person to either sell or store
for sale seasonal items and holiday decorations in the Borough of
Edgewater without having a license therefor.
B. It shall be a violation of this article for any owner to allow his property
to be used to either sell or store for sale seasonal items and holiday
decorations by any person who does not have a license therefor.
C. The foregoing notwithstanding, no license shall be required for the
storage or sale of seasonal items and holiday decorations when
conducted indoors in the normal course of business of any
establishment for which a site plan has been approved and a certificate
of occupancy has been granted or indoors or outdoors in the normal
course of business of any garden shop or nursery for which a site plan
has been approved and a certificate of occupancy has been granted.
A. All applications for a license that allows the outdoor storage and sale of
seasonal items and holiday decorations shall be made to the Borough
Clerk on a form prescribed by the Clerk.
§ 240-182 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-185
1:509
§ 240-186. Fees; deposit.
§ 240-187. Permissible locations. [Amended 12-17-2012 by Ord. No.
1485-2012; 9-15-2014 by Ord. No. 1512-2014]
The outdoor sale as permitted in this article may be conducted on any
vacant lot or on such other land which, in the discretion of the Borough
Clerk or his or her designee, shall be deemed sufficient, suitable or
compatible within the B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, MXD-1, MXD-2, MXD-3, OR-1
and PD Zoning Districts of the Borough of Edgewater. Seasonal items and
holiday decorations for sale, or storage for sale, shall be stored in a manner
which is safe and not a fire hazard.
§ 240-188. Conditions for issuance of license; revocation.
B. The application shall include:
(1) Name, address and telephone number of the temporary merchant,
whether an individual or organization, seeking such license;
(2) A plan, drawn to scale, showing the general location of the lot
where such storage and sales are to take place;
(3) Provisions for site access and parking;
(4) Written consent of the owner of the lot; and
(5) Certificate of insurance for the business, naming the Borough of
Edgewater as the certificate holder and as an "additional insured"
under the general liability policy description.
C. Within 10 days after the application has been fully submitted, the Clerk
shall approve, with conditions, said application and issue a temporary
license or deny the application. If the application is denied, the Clerk
shall state his or her reasons for denial in writing.
A. The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable processing
fee of $50.
B. A site restoration deposit of $500, determined to be an amount
sufficient to cover cleanup costs, shall be collected in order to assure
removal of unsold trees and any remaining decorations after storage or
sale.
C. The site restoration deposit shall be refunded in full, within 30 days
after the termination of the license, if the lot on which the trees were
sold has been cleaned up and restored to the condition that existed
prior to the temporary sale, as determined by the Borough Clerk or his
or her designee, or refunded in full if the application is denied.
A. The Borough Clerk shall approve an application and issue a license to a
temporary merchant if the lot is suitable for the sale in terms of
vehicular access, parking and pedestrian safety. For build-up lots, the
§ 240-185 EDGEWATER CODE § 240-188
1:510
§ 240-189. Term of license.
All licenses shall commence no more than 45 days prior to the date of
observance of the religious, national or state holiday(s) for which the
temporary license is sought and shall expire five days after said date of
observation.
§ 240-190. Violations and penalties.
Any person determined to have violated any provision of this article shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $500 nor less than $100.
Borough Clerk or his or her designee shall also make certain that other
uses on the lot will permit vehicular access and parking, if such sales
are also permitted on the lot.
B. The license may be revoked at any time if the licensee deviates from the
plan as submitted and/or if the sale is deemed to create a public health
or safety hazard. If the license is revoked, all sales shall be terminated
immediately and shall not be permitted until the licensee complies with
the plan and the Borough Clerk or his or her designee is satisfied that
all safety and health hazards are eliminated.
§ 240-188 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-190
1:511
Chapter 244
LIBRARY
§ 244-1. Board of Trustees established; membership; alternates.
§ 244-2. Powers and duties of Board of Trustees.
The Board of Trustees of the Edgewater Free Public Library shall hold
in trust and manage all property of the library. It may rent rooms or,
when proper, construct buildings for the use of the library; purchase books,
pamphlets, documents, papers and other reading matter; hire librarians
and other necessary personnel, and fix their compensation; make proper
rules and regulations for the government of the library; and generally do
all things necessary and proper for the establishment and maintenance
of the Edgewater Free Public Library. The Board of Trustees may also
transfer to and receive from the deposit and exchange library service of the
Bureau of Public and School Library Services of the Division of the State
Library, Archives and History, in the State Department of Education, books,
magazines, prints, maps and other related library materials for the purpose
of augmenting the interlibrary loan service.
§ 244-3. Appropriations.
There shall annually be appropriated and raised by taxation for library
purposes a sum equal to 1/3 of a mill on every dollar of assessable property
within the Borough of Edgewater. Such additional sum as in the judgment
of the Board is necessary for the proper maintenance of a free public library
may be appropriated and raised by taxation, annually.
Chapter 248
A. The Board of Trustees of the Edgewater Free Public Library shall
consist of seven members; one of whom shall be the Mayor or other
chief executive officer of the Borough of Edgewater; one of whom shall
be the local Superintendent of Schools or, in the event that there be no
such official, the principal with power of supervision over the local
school system, or in case such municipality shall have none of the
school officials hereinbefore mentioned, then the President of the Board
of Education; and five citizens to be appointed by the Mayor or chief
executive, at least four of whom shall be residents of the Borough of
Edgewater. The appointments shall be for terms of one, two, three, four
and five years, respectively, as they may be selected by the Mayor or
other chief executive officer.
B. The Mayor or other chief executive officer and the Superintendent of
Schools or principal, respectively, shall be allowed to each appoint an
alternate to act in his place and stead with authority to attend all
meetings of the Board and, in his absence, to vote on all questions
before the Board. [Added 9-3-1975 by Ord. No. 581-75]
§ 240-190 EDGEWATER CODE § 244-3
1:512
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 314.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 368.
Control of waterfront drift and debris — See
Ch. 444, Art. II.
§ 248-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish requirements to control littering
in the Borough of Edgewater so as to protect public health, safety and
welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 248-2. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
LITTER — Any used or unconsumed substance or waste material which
has been discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber,
paper, or other natural or synthetic material, or any combination thereof,
including, but not limited to, any bottle, jar or can, or any top, cap or
detachable tab of any bottle, jar or can, any unlighted cigarette, cigar,
match or any flaming or glowing material or any garbage, trash, refuse,
debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspapers,
magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or other packaging
or construction material, but does not include the waste of the primary
processes of mining or other extraction processes, logging, sawmilling,
farming or manufacturing.
LITTER RECEPTACLE — A container suitable for the depositing of litter.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
§ 248-3. Prohibited acts and regulated activities.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, discard or otherwise
place any litter of any nature upon public or private property other than
in a litter receptacle, or having done so, to allow such litter to remain.
B. Whenever any litter is thrown or discarded or allowed to fall from a
vehicle or boat in violation of this chapter, the operator or owner, or
§ 244-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-3
1:513
§ 248-4. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department and/or other
municipal official(s) of the Borough of Edgewater.
§ 248-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to penalties in accordance with Chapter 1, Article II, of the
Code of the Borough of Edgewater.
Chapter 264
MINIBIKES AND GO-CARTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 432.
§ 264-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GO-CART — Any motor vehicle of a four-wheel type, constructed either
of metal or wood framing, characteristically much smaller and lower to
the ground than a conventional passenger automobile, power-driven by an
engine, whether a part thereof or attached thereto, of the lawnmower or
motorcycle type, but not limited to the same, and typically having seating
space for only a driver.
MINIBIKE — Including motor scooters and motorbikes, any motor vehicle
of the bicycle or tricycle type, constructed either of metal or wood framing,
characteristically much smaller and lower to the ground than a conventional
motorcycle, power-driven by an engine, whether a part thereof or attached
thereto, of the lawnmower or motorcycle type, but not limited to the same,
and having a saddle or seat with driver sitting astride or upon it typically
having seating space for only the driver.
§ 264-2. Operation restrictions.
Except as otherwise provided, it shall be unlawful to operate motor vehicles
of the minibike and go-cart type, as hereinabove defined, but not limited to
the same, under the following circumstances:
both, of the motor vehicle or boat shall also be deemed to have violated
this chapter.
A. On the private property of another without receiving the consent of the
owner of the property or the person who has a contractual right to the
§ 248-3 EDGEWATER CODE § 264-2
1:514
§ 264-3. Violations and penalties.114
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
Chapter 271
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm devices — See Ch. 117.
Animals — See Ch. 129.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 432.
Nuisances — See Ch. 503.
use of such property. No person shall continue to so operate a motor
vehicle of aforesaid class upon the private property of another after
consent has been withdrawn.
B. On or across any public highway, street or sidewalk located within the
boundaries of the Borough of Edgewater.
C. On or across any public lands located within the boundaries of the
Borough of Edgewater, including, but not limited to, parks, recreation
areas and public school premises, without first securing permission to
do so by the proper public authority, and then such operation will be in
accordance with any express provisions promulgated by that authority.
D. In such a manner as to cause a harsh, objectionable or unreasonable
noise, so as to disturb or interfere with the peace and quiet of other
persons. In furtherance of the provisions of this subsection, it shall be
unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle of the aforesaid class
which is not equipped with proper mufflers as supplied by the
manufacturer for the particular model without modifications, or any
other similar muffling device designed to reduce the noise level below
that which would be harsh, objectionable or unreasonable.
114. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 264-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 264-3
1:515

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 271-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL AREA — A group of commercial facilities and the abutting
public rights-of-way and public spaces.
COMMERCIAL FACILITY — Any premises, property or facility involving
traffic in goods or furnishing of services for sale or profit, including but not
limited to:
CONSTRUCTION — Any site preparation, assembly, erection, repair,
alteration or similar action, but excluding demolition of buildings or
structures.
DECIBEL — The practical unit of measurement for sound pressure level; the
number of decibels of a measured sound is equal to 20 times the logarithm
to the base 10 of the ratio of the sound pressure of the measured sound
to the sound pressure of a standard sound (20 micropascals); abbreviated
"dB."
DEMOLITION — Any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of
buildings or structures.
EMERGENCY WORK — Any work or action necessary to deliver essential
services, including but not limited to repairing water, gas, electricity,
telephone or sewer facilities or public transportation facilities, removing
fallen trees on public rights-of-way or abating life-threatening conditions.
GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING (GVWR) — The value specified by the
manufacturer as the recommended maximum loaded weight of a single
motor vehicle. In cases where trailers and tractors are separable, the
gross combination weight rating (GCWR), which is the value specified by
the manufacturer as the recommended maximum loaded weight of the
combination vehicle, shall be used.
A. Banking and other financial institutions.
B. Dining establishments.
C. Establishments for providing retail services.
D. Establishments for providing wholesale services.
E. Establishments for recreation and entertainment.
F. Office buildings.
G. Transportation.
H. Warehouses.
§ 271-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 271-1
1:517
INDUSTRIAL FACILITY — Any activity and its related premises, property,
facilities or equipment involving the fabrication, manufacture or production
of durable or nondurable goods.
MOTORCYCLE — An unenclosed motor vehicle having a saddle for the
use of the operator and two or three wheels in contact with the ground,
including but not limited to motor scooters, mopeds and minibikes.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle that is propelled or drawn on land by an
engine or motor, such as but not limited to passenger cars, trucks, truck
trailers, semitrailers, campers, go-carts, snowmobiles, amphibious craft on
land, dune buggies or racing vehicles, but not including motorcycles.
MOTOR VEHICLE ENGAGED IN INTERSTATE COMMERCE — Any vehicle
for which regulations apply pursuant to Section 18 of the Federal Noise
Control Act of 1972 (P.L. 92-574), as amended, pertaining to motor carriers
engaged in interstate commerce.
MUFFLER — A sound-dissipative device or system for abating the sound of
escaping gases of an internal-combustion engine.
MULTI-DWELLING-UNIT BUILDING — Any building wherein there are two
or more dwelling units.
NOISE — Any sounds of such level and duration as to be or tend to
be injurious to human health or welfare or which would unreasonably
interfere with the enjoyment of life or property throughout the state or
in any portions thereof but excludes all aspects of the employer-employee
relationship concerning health and safety hazards within the confines of a
place of employment.
NOISE CONTROL ADMINISTRATOR — The Chief of Police and/or Police
Director of the Borough of Edgewater.[Amended 3-20-2017 by Ord. No.
1541-2017]
NOISE CONTROL OFFICER — Any officer or member of the Police
Department of the Borough of Edgewater or the duly designated Noise
Control Officer of the Borough.[Amended 9-8-1987 by Ord. No. 878-87]
NOISE DISTURBANCE — Any sound that endangers the safety or health
of any person or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities or
endangers personal or real property.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, association, society, firm,
partnership, joint-stock company, the state or any political subdivision,
agency or instrumentality of the state.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
sidewalk or alley that is leased, owned or controlled by a governmental
entity.
PUBLIC SPACE — Any real property or structures thereon that are owned,
leased or controlled by a governmental entity.
REAL PROPERTY LINE — Either the imaginary line, including its vertical
extension, the separates one parcel of real property from another or the
§ 271-1 EDGEWATER CODE § 271-1
1:518
vertical and horizontal boundaries of a dwelling unit that is one in a multidwelling-
unit building.
RECREATIONAL MOTORIZED VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle used off
public roads for recreational purposes.
RESIDENTIAL AREA — A group of residential properties and the abutting
public right-of-way and public spaces.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Any property used for human habitation.
SOUND LEVEL — The sound-pressure level measured in decibels with a
sound-level meter set for A-weighting; "sound level" is expressed in "dBA."
SOUND-LEVEL METER — An instrument used to measure sound levels,
which conforms to Type 1 or Type 2 standards as specified by ANSI
Specification SI.4-1971.
WEEKDAY — Any day, Monday through Friday, that is not a legal holiday.
§ 271-2. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Noise Control
Officers.
§ 271-3. Powers and duties of Noise Control Administrator.
The Noise Control Administrator shall have the power to:
§ 271-4. Noise measurements.
A person shall be qualified to be a Noise Control Officer if the person has
satisfactorily completed any of the following:
A. Coordinate the noise control activities of all municipal departments and
cooperate with all other public bodies and agencies to the extent
practicable.
B. Review the actions of other municipal departments and advise such
departments of the effect, if any, of such actions on noise control.
C. Review public and private projects, subject to mandatory review or
approval by other department or boards, for compliance with this
chapter.
D. Grant permits for variances according to the provisions of § 271-10,
provided that the variances are consistent with regulations concerning
noise control promulgated by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, N.J.A.C. 7:29.
A. Community Noise — A Short Course, offered by the Department of
Environmental Science of Cook College, Rutgers, the State University;
§ 271-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 271-4
1:519
§ 271-5. Noise measurements.
Noise measurements made by noise central officers shall be taken
according to procedures specified by N.J.A.C. 7:29B, except as provided in
§ 271-8 of this chapter.
B. A program of tutoring and one-the-job training offered by the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, Office of Noise
Control, to its employees; or
C. Education or experience or a combination thereof certified by the above
department as equivalent to the provisions of Subsections A and B of
this section.
§ 271-4 EDGEWATER CODE § 271-5
1:520
ARTICLE II
Stationary Sources
§ 271-6. Maximum permissible sound levels.
§ 271-7. Exclusions.
The following shall be excluded from the provisions of this chapter:
A. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the operation of any
source of sound on a particular category of property or any public space
or right-of-way in such a manner as to create a sound level that exceeds
the particular sound level limits set forth in Table I when measured at
or within the real property line of the receiving property, except as
provided in Subsection B of this section.
B. When measuring noise within a dwelling unit of a multi-dwelling-unit
building, all exterior doors and windows shall be closed, and the
measurements shall be taken in the center of the room.
Table I
Maximum Permissible Sound Levels by Receiving Property Category
(dBA)
Receiving Property Category
Sound
Source
Property
Category
Another Dwelling
Within a Multi-
Dwelling Unit
Building Residential Commercial Industrial
7:00 a.m.
- 10:00
p.m.
10:00
p.m. -
7:00
a.m.
7:00 a.m.
- 10:00
p.m.
10:00
p.m. -
7:00
a.m. All Times All Times
Any location
within a
multidwelling-
unit
building
45 40 55 50 65 75
Residential 35 50 65 75
Commercial
or public
spaces or
rights-of-way
65 50 65 75
Industrial 65 50 65 75
A. Noise from domestic power tools, lawn mowers and agricultural
equipment when operated with a muffler between the hours of 8:00
a.m. to 8:00 p.m. on weekdays and 9:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. on weekends
§ 271-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 271-7
1:521
§ 271-8. Prohibited acts; exemptions.
and legal holidays, provided that they produce less than 85 dBA at or
within any real property line of a residential property.
B. Sound from church bells and church chimes when a part of a religious
observance or service.
C. Noise from construction activity, provided that all motorized equipment
used in such activity is equipped with functioning mufflers, except as
provided in § 271-8B(6) of this chapter.
D. Noise from snowblowers, snow throwers and snowplows when operated
with a muffler for the purpose of snow removal.
E. Noise from stationary emergency signaling devices that conform to the
provisions of N.J.A.C. 7:29.
F. Noise from an exterior burglar alarm of any building or motor vehicle,
provided that such burglar alarm shall terminate its operation within 15
minutes after it has been activated.
A. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit to be made verbally or
mechanically any noise disturbance. Noncommercial public speaking
and public assembly activities conducted on any public space or public
right-of-way shall be exempt from the operation of this section.
B. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the following acts:
(1) Sound-reproduction systems. Operating, playing or permitting the
operation or playing of any radio, television, phonograph or similar
device that reproduces or amplifies sound in such a manner as to
create a noise disturbance for any person other than the operator
of the device.
(2) Loudspeakers and public-address systems. Using or operating of
any loudspeaker, public-address system or similar device between
the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. in the following day, such that
the sound therefrom creates a noise disturbance across a
residential real property line.
(3) Animals and birds. Owning, possessing or harboring any pet animal
or pet bird that frequently or for continued duration makes sounds
that create a noise disturbance across a residential real property
line. (For the purpose of this section, a "noise disturbance" from a
barking dog shall be defined as that created by a dog barking
continuously for 10 minutes or intermittently for 30 minutes, unless
provoked.)
(4) Loading and unloading. Loading, unloading, opening, closing or
other handling of boxes, crates, containers, building materials,
liquids, garbage cans, refuse or similar objects; or the pneumatic or
pumped loading or unloading of bulk materials in liquid, gaseous,
§ 271-7 EDGEWATER CODE § 271-8
1:522
§ 271-9. Exceptions.
§ 271-10. Conditions for variances.
powder or pellet form; or the compacting of refuse by persons
engaged in the business of scavenging or garbage collection,
whether private or municipal, between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and
8:00 a.m. the following day, when the latter is a weekday, and
between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. the following day,
when the latter is a legal holiday or a weekend day, except by
permit, when the sound therefrom creates a noise disturbance
across a residential real property line.
(5) Standing motor vehicles. Operating or permitting the operation of
any motor vehicle whose manufacturers gross weight is in excess of
10,000 pounds, or any auxiliary equipment attached to such a
vehicle, for a period of longer than five minutes in any hour while
the vehicle is stationary, for reasons other than traffic congestion or
emergency work, on a public right-of-way or public space within
150 feet (46 meters) of a residential area between the hours of 8:00
p.m. and 8:00 a.m. of the following day.
(6) Construction and demolition. Operating or permitting the
operation of any tools or equipment used in construction, drilling,
earthmoving, excavation or demolition work between the hours of
6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day on weekdays and
Saturdays or at any time on Sundays or legal holidays, provided
that such equipment is equipped with a functioning muffler, except:
[Amended 9-20-1988 by Ord. No. 901-88; 6-2-1997 by Ord.
No. 1095-97; 8-17-2015 by Ord. No. 1523-2015]
(a) Emergency work.
(b) By variance issued pursuant to § 271-10.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
(1) The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the
existence of an emergency, except as provided in § 271-7E or F;
(2) The emission or sound in the performance of emergency work; or
(3) The emission of sound in situations within the jurisdiction of the
federal Occupational Safety and Health Act.
B. Noise from municipally sponsored or approved celebrations or events
shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
A. Any person who owns or operates any stationary noise source may
apply to the Noise Control Administrator for a variance from one or
more of the provisions of this chapter. Applications for a permit of
variance shall supply information, including but not limited to:
§ 271-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 271-10
1:523
(1) The nature and location of the noise source for which such
application is made.
(2) The reason for which the permit of variance is requested, including
the hardship that will result to the applicant, his/her client or the
public if the permit of variance is not granted.
(3) The nature and intensity of noise that occur during the period of
the variance.
(4) The section or sections of this chapter for which the permit of
variance shall apply.
(5) A description of interim noise control measures to be taken by the
applicant to minimize noise and the impact occurring therefrom.
(6) A specific schedule of the noise control measures which shall be
taken to bring the source into compliance with this chapter within a
reasonable time.
B. Failure to supply the information required by the Noise Control
Administrator shall be cause for rejection of the application.
C. A copy of the permit of variance must be kept on file by the Municipal
Clerk for public inspection.
D. The Noise Control Administrator may charge the applicant a fee of $50
to cover expenses resulting from the processing of the permit variance
application.
E. The Noise Control Administrator may, at his/her discretion, limit the
duration of the permit of variance which shall be no longer than one
year. Any person holding a permit of variance and requesting an
extension of time shall apply for a new permit of variance under the
provisions of this section.
F. No variance shall be approved unless the applicant presents adequate
proof that noise levels occurring during the period of the variance will
not constitute a danger to public health and that compliance with this
chapter would impose an arbitrary or unreasonable hardship upon the
applicant without equal or greater benefits to the public.
G. In making the determination on granting a variance, the Noise Control
Administrator shall consider:
(1) The character and degree of injury to, or interference with, the
health and welfare or the reasonable use of property which is
caused or threatened to be caused.
(2) The social and economic value of the activity for which the variance
is sought.
(3) The ability of the applicant to apply the best practical noise control
measures.
§ 271-10 EDGEWATER CODE § 271-11
1:524
§ 271-11. Revocation of permit of variance.
A. The permit of variance may be revoked by the Noise Control
Administrator if the terms of the permit of variance are violated.
B. A variance may be revoked by the Noise Control Administrator if there
is:
(1) Violation of one or more conditions of the variance;
(2) Material misrepresentation of fact in the variance application; or
(3) Material change in any of the circumstances relied upon by the
Noise Control Administrator in granting the variance.
§ 271-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 271-11
1:525

ARTICLE III
Mobile Sources
§ 271-12. Maximum permissible sound levels for motor vehicles.
Motor vehicles and motorcycles on public rights-of-way. No person shall
cause, suffer, allow or permit the operation of a public or private motor
vehicle or motorcycle on a public right-of-way at any time in such a manner
that the sound level emitted by the motor vehicle or motorcycle exceeds the
level set forth in Table II.
Table II
Maximum Permissible Sound Levels from Motor Vehicles and
Motorcycles
Sound level in dBA at 50 feet (15 meters) from center line of
vehicle travel1
Vehicle Class
Speed Limit
35 mph or
Less
Speed Limit
Over 35 mph
Stationary
Run-Up
Motor carrier vehicle
engaged in interstate
commerce of GVWR
or GCWR of 10,000
pounds or more
86 90 88
All other motor
vehicles of GVWR or
GCWR of 10,000
pounds or more
86 90 —
Any motorcycle 82 86 —
Any other motor
vehicle or any
combination of
vehicles towed by any
motor vehicle
76 82 —
Sound level on fast setting in dBA at 15 feet from the edge of the
lane of vehicle travel
Vehicle Class
Speed Limit 35
mph or Less
Any motor vehicle or motorcycle with a GVWR less
than 10,000 pounds
80
§ 271-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 271-12
1:527
NOTES:
1 Measured according to Department of Transportation, Bureau of Motor
Carrier Safety Regulations for enforcement of Motor Carrier Noise
Emission Standards, Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations, Chapter II,
Part 325.
§ 271-13. Recreational motorized vehicles.
No person shall operate or cause to be operated any recreational motorized
vehicle in such a manner that the sound level emitted therefrom exceeds the
limits set forth in Table III at either a distance of 50 feet (15 meters) or more
from the path of the vehicle when operated on a public space or at or across
a real property line when operated on private property. This section shall
apply to all recreational motorized vehicles, whether or not duly licensed or
registered.
Table III
Maximum permissible Sound Level for Recreational Motorized
Vehicles Operated Off Public Rights-of-Way
Vehicle Type
Sound Level
(dBA)
Motorcycle
Unit manufactured before 1975 86
Unit manufactured after 1975 84
Any other vehicle
Unit manufactured before 1975 84
Unit manufactured after 1975 80
§ 271-14. Prohibited acts.
A. Adequate mufflers.
(1) No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the operation of any
motor vehicle or motorcycle not equipped with the original muffler
and other components or equivalent replacement in good working
order and in constant operation regardless of the sound level
produced.
(2) No person shall remove or render inoperative, or cause to be
removed or rendered inoperative, other than for purposes of
maintenance, repair or replacement, any muffler or other exhaust
component on a motor vehicle or motorcycle.
B. Motor vehicle horns and signaling devices. The following acts and the
causing thereof are declared to be in violation of this chapter:
§ 271-12 EDGEWATER CODE § 271-14
1:528
(1) The sounding of any horn or other auditory signaling device in any
motor vehicle or motorcycle on any public right-of-way or public
space, except as a warning of danger.
(2) The sounding of any horn or other auditory signaling device that
produces a sound level in excess of 100 dBA at 25 feet (7.5 meters).
C. Standing motor vehicles. No person shall operate or permit the
operation of any motor vehicle or any auxiliary equipment attached to
such a vehicle for a period longer than three minutes in any hour while
the vehicle is stationary for reasons other than traffic congestion or
emergency work on a public right-of-way or public space within 150
feet (46 meters) of a residential area between the hours of 8:00 p.m.
and 8:00 a.m. the following day.
D. Sound-reproduction device. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or
permit the operating or playing of any radio, tape player or similar
device that reproduces or amplifies sound in such a manner as to create
noise at 50 feet (15 meters) from such device, when operating in or on a
motor vehicle on a public right-of-way or public space.
§ 271-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 271-14
1:529

ARTICLE IV
Penalties and Other Remedies
§ 271-15. Issuance of summons.
A violation of any provision of this chapter shall be cause for a summons to
be issued by a Noise Control Officer of the municipality as established by
law.
§ 271-16. Abatement orders.
§ 271-17. Violations and penalties.115
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
§ 271-18. Other remedies.
No provisions of this chapter shall be construed to impair any common law
or statutory cause of action, or legal remedy therefrom, of any person for
injury or damage arising from any violation of this chapter or from other
law.
A. Except as provided in Subsection B of this section, in lieu of issuing a
summons as provided in § 271-15, the Noise Control Officer may issue
an order requiring abatement of any source of sound alleged to be in
violation of this chapter within a reasonable period of time and
according to such guidelines as the Noise Control Officer may
prescribe.
B. An abatement order shall not be issued if any person willfully or
knowingly violates any provision of this chapter or if the Noise Control
Officer has reason to believe there will not be compliance with the
abatement order.
115. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 271-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 271-18
1:531
Chapter 282
PARKING LOTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking restrictions — See Ch. 287.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 427.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 432.
§ 271-18 EDGEWATER CODE § 271-18
1:532
ARTICLE I
Hilliard Avenue and River Road
[Adopted 12-15-1981 by Ord. No. 709A-81 (Ch. 186A, Art. I, of the
1975 Code)]
§ 282-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of interpretation and enforcement of this article, the
following words have the meanings hereinafter ascribed to them:
OPERATION — Any person who is in actual physical control of a vehicle
or who causes a vehicle to be operated, whether the owner thereof or his
agent, employee, licensee or invitee.
OWNER — A person who holds legal title of a vehicle or in whose name a
vehicle is currently registered or was last registered with the Department
of Motor Vehicles of the State of New Jersey.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
VEHICLE — Passenger automobiles, motorcycles, and trucks weighing less
than 1/2 ton. It shall not include trailers, recreational vehicles, trucks over
1/2 ton, buses, or farm machinery or equipment.[Amended 3-16-2009 by
Ord. No. 1405-2009]
§ 282-2. Municipal parking lots designated.
The following described lots or tracts of land in the Borough of Edgewater
are hereby designated as municipal parking lots:
§ 282-3. Parking in municipal areas. [Added 9-20-2010 by Ord. No.
1439-2010]
A. Lots 10 and 11 in Block 54 on the current Tax Assessment Map of the
Borough of Edgewater, being more commonly known as "21 Hilliard
Avenue."
B. Lot 1 in Block 53 and Lot 2 in Block 46, being more commonly known as
"915 River Road."
A. Except as provided in Subsection C of this section, it shall be unlawful
for any person to park any motor vehicle at the municipal parking
facility opposite Borough Hall on River Road, designated as Block 43,
Lot 1, and Block 46, Lot 2, as depicted on the Tax Assessment Map of
the Borough of Edgewater,116 for a period of more than two consecutive
hours between 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday,
inclusive.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle in the
municipal parking facility on Hilliard Avenue which is designated as
116. Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the Borough Clerk's office.
§ 282-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-3
1:533
§ 282-4. Parking time limited.
The parking of vehicles in all municipal-owned parking lots in the Borough
of Edgewater, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., is hereby
limited to a period of two hours; provided, however, that after 6:00 p.m.,
vehicles may park thereon for a period longer than two hours. No vehicle
may be parked in any municipal parking lot for a period longer than 24
consecutive hours.
§ 282-5. Use limited.
The use of any municipal parking lot in the Borough of Edgewater shall be
expressly limited to parking purposes only, and no auto repairs, ballplaying
or any other type of activity shall be permitted thereon.
§ 282-6. Removal of vehicles. [Amended 3-20-2017 by Ord. No.
1541-2017]
In addition to the penalty that may be imposed for the violation of any
of the provisions of this article, if any vehicle is parked in any municipalowned
parking lot in violation of any of the provisions of this article, the
Police Department may cause such vehicle to be removed to such place as
is designated by the Chief of Police and/or Police Director or other officer
acting in such capacity. The owner or operator of any vehicle so removed
shall pay the reasonable cost and expense of such removal and storage
which may result therefrom, and any person, firm or corporation desiring to
reclaim such vehicle may do so by paying the expenses of such removal and
storage.
§ 282-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-20-2010 by Ord. No.
1439-2010]
Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine in the amount of $50 for
each violation.
Block 54, Lots 10 and 11, as depicted on the Tax Assessment Map of the
Borough of Edgewater, for a period of more than two consecutive hours
between 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, inclusive.
C. The time limitations as set forth in Subsections A and B of this section
shall be inapplicable to any vehicle displaying a resident parking
permit.
D. No person shall park any vehicle in the parking area immediately to the
west of Borough Hall and known as Block 54, Lots 5, 6 and 7, as
depicted on the Tax Assessment Map, except for emergency vehicles
and the vehicles of municipal employees.
§ 282-3 EDGEWATER CODE § 282-7
1:534
ARTICLE II
Shadyside
[Adopted 10-16-1995 by Ord. No. 1061-95 (Ch. 186A, Art. II, of the
1975 Code)]
§ 282-8. Acceptance of land; accessory landscaping.
The Borough is hereby authorized to accept title or interest in and to
certain property in Block 85.01, being portions of Lots 2 or 2.01, and a
portion of Lot 1.01 in Block 91 for use continuously, solely, exclusively and
perpetually as municipal parking facilities, in accordance with and subject
to the provisions of the agreement dated April 21, 1995, the terms of
which are hereby incorporated herein by reference. The Borough is hereby
authorized to accept title or other interest in and to certain property in
Block 91, being portions of Lots 1.01 and 1.02 for use continuously, solely,
exclusively and perpetually as landscaping accessory to the parking use
herein described.
§ 282-9. Obligations of Borough. [Amended 11-10-2014 by Ord. No.
1515-2014]
The Borough shall be obligated to undertake, maintain and keep in good
repair the parking facilities described in § 282-8, and to remove therefrom
snow and ice, to periodically provide stripping, to maintain, repair and
replace when necessary the curbing and macadam, to maintain and replace
when necessary landscaping, to remove trash and debris and to maintain
and replace when necessary the lighting fixtures and light bulbs.
§ 282-10. Purpose of acquisition.
It is the intent of the within article to establish parking facilities for
residents and owners, employees and customers of businesses within the
area of the Borough commonly known as "Shadyside" encompassing certain
property known as Block 88, Lot 11 and all parcels within Block 90 and Lot
9 in Block 88 owned by the Borough, all as depicted on the Tax Assessment
Map. It is the express intent of the within acquisition that the parking
facilities not be utilized for regional commuter parking purposes or a park
and ride parking facility.
§ 282-11. Regulations governing use. [Amended 11-10-2014 by Ord.
No. 1515-2014]
A. Lots defined.
(1) North Lot. Located on Block 85.01, portions of Lots 2 and 2.01;
situated north of Thompson Lane between River Road and Old
River Road (ORR), and includes the angled parking on the east side
of ORR, between the northerly and southerly driveways into the lot.
A portion of the North Lot shall be reserved for "designated
employee parking" as defined and regulated herein.
§ 282-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-11
1:535
(2) South Lot. Located on Block 91, a portion of Lot 1.01; situated
south of Thompson Lane, along the east side of ORR, consisting of
39 perpendicular parking spaces, said spaces divided 28 to the
north of the driveway into the project known as One Hudson Park,
and 11 south of said driveway along the Westerly Wall of One
Hudson Park.
B. Time limits.
(1) North Lot. No vehicle shall be parked in the North Lot for a period
of more than four consecutive hours, except as otherwise permitted
by this article.
(2) South Lot. No vehicle shall be parked in the South Lot for a period
of more than two consecutive hours, except as otherwise permitted
by this article.
C. Special parking stickers.
(1) Residential stickers. Any person residing within Block 90, along the
west side of ORR, beginning on the north with Lots 38 through 42,
street addresses 272 through 276 ORR, and ending on the south
with and including Lot 17, street address 236 ORR, who does not
have access to on-site parking may obtain a special residential
parking sticker from the Borough, which will permit such person to
park the vehicle for which it has been issued without fee and for a
period longer than the time limitations set forth in this section in
either the South Lot or in the North Lot, excluding the area
reserved for designated employee parking.
(2) Employee stickers. Individuals employed by businesses located
along the west side of ORR, beginning on the north with Block 88,
Lot 9, street address 300 ORR and ending on the south with and
including Block 90, Lot 17, street address 236 ORR, may obtain a
special employee parking sticker from the Borough, which will
permit such person to park the vehicle for which the sticker has
been issued for a period longer than the time limitations set forth in
this section in the North Lot designated employee parking area
only. An employee sticker shall not permit parking in either the
North Lot or the South Lot in an area not marked as designated
employee parking without complying with the meter and time
restrictions generally applicable to all vehicles.
(3) Regulations applicable to all stickers. There shall be no fee for
issuance of a parking sticker. A sticker shall be utilized only on the
vehicle for which it was issued and shall contain the registered
license plate number for the vehicle. The sticker shall be
conspicuously displayed on either a window or the rear bumper of
the vehicle. A sticker shall not be transferable to another individual
or vehicle, except as permitted herein. It is the obligation of a
sticker holder to notify the Borough Clerk should the resident
change vehicles or the license plate of said vehicle. Failure to notify
§ 282-11 EDGEWATER CODE § 282-11
1:536
§ 282-11.1. Metered parking. [Added 8-15-2016 by Ord. No.
1536-2016]
the Borough Clerk may result in a ticket being issued for violation
of this section.
D. Designated employee parking. Spaces designated in the northernmost
portion of the North Lot shall be reserved for designated employee
parking for vehicles bearing employee stickers issued pursuant to this
article. The number of spaces designated as set forth above shall be
adjusted from time to time as determined by the authorized municipal
agency, as may be designated by resolution of the Governing Body, after
taking into account demand for employee parking. The spaces so
designated shall be painted and appropriate signage shall be provided.
There shall be a fee of $1 per day to park in the designated employee
parking area.
E. Street parking. Neither a residential sticker nor an employee sticker
shall permit any on-street parking without complying with the meter
and time restrictions generally applicable to all vehicles.
F. Meters. Meters are hereby authorized to be placed in the North Lot and
the South Lot reflecting the time limitations set forth herein.
G. Applicability. The time limitations and other regulations set forth in this
article shall be in effect daily from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
A. Metered parking shall be installed and mandated on the west side of
Old River Road commencing at Block 90, Lot 13, diagonally across from
parking stall No. 160 of the Shadyside South parking lot and
proceeding north to the southwest corner of the main entrance
driveway of the Infinity building, located at 340 Old River Road, known
as Block 88, Lot 10, and ending with parking stall No. 187.
B. Except for employees and resident parking, the maximum parking time
in the area of Shadyside parking lots and metered street parking shall
not exceed four hours.
C. In the Shadyside parking lots, stalls 1 through 30 and 57 through 83
shall have a four-hour maximum time. Stalls 31 through 56 are
designated as employee spaces of Shadyside businesses and have no
maximum time. Shadyside employees shall pay $1 per day to park in
Stalls 31 through 56. Stalls 100 to 187 shall have a two-hour maximum
time.
D. The cost for the metered parking shall be as follows:
Time Cost
30 minutes $0.25
60 minutes $0.50
90 minutes $0.75
§ 282-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-11.1
1:537
§ 282-12. Restrictions on use.
The use of parking facilities in this article shall be expressly limited to
parking purposes only, and no auto repairs, commercial activity or
recreational activity or other type of activity shall be permitted thereon.
§ 282-13. Removal of vehicles; cost of removal. [Amended
3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 1541-2017]
In addition to any penalty that may be imposed for the violation of any
provision of this article, should any vehicle be parked on the parking
facilities referred to herein in violation of any of the provision of this article,
the Police Department may cause such vehicle to be removed to such place
as is designated by the Chief of Police and/or Police Director or other officer
acting in such capacity. The owner or operator of any vehicle so removed
shall pay the reasonable cost and expense of such removal and storage
which may result therefrom, and any person, firm, corporation or other
entity desiring to claim such vehicle shall be obligated to pay the expenses
or such removal and storage.
§ 282-14. Applicability.
This article shall be intended to regulate solely the municipal parking
facilities which are the subject of this article and located in Block 85.01 and
Block 91 as depicted on the Tax Assessment Map. The provisions of Article
I of this chapter of the Edgewater Borough Code shall not be deemed to be
applicable to the parking facilities referred to herein.
§ 282-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-20-2010 by Ord. No.
1439-2010]
Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine in the amount of $50 for
each violation.
Time Cost
Two hours $1
Three hours $2
Four hours $3
E. Subsection D does not apply to cars with Shadyside residential stickers
or employee stickers as defined in Ordinance 1515-2014.117
117. Editor's Note: See Ch. 240, Land Use and Development.
§ 282-11.1 EDGEWATER CODE § 282-15
1:538
ARTICLE III
Metered Parking Areas
[Adopted 6-3-2002 by Ord. No. 1238-2002 (Ch. 186A, Art. III, of the
1975 Code)]
§ 282-16. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OPERATOR — Includes every individual who shall operate a vehicle as the
owner thereof, or as the agent, employee or permittee of the owner, or who
is in actual physical control of the vehicle.
PARKING METER — Includes any mechanical device or meter not
inconsistent with this article placed or erected for the regulation of parking
by authority of this article. Each parking meter installed shall indicate by
proper legend the legal parking time established by the Borough and, when
operated, shall at all times indicate the balance of legal parking time and,
at the expiration of such period, shall indicate illegal or overtime parking.
PARKING METER SPACE — Any space within a parking meter zone or in
a lot designated for parking which is duly designated for the parking of a
single vehicle by lines painted or otherwise durably marked on the curb or
on the surface of the street adjacent to or adjoining the parking meters.
PARKING TICKET MACHINE — An electronic multispace parking
management system designed to control numerous parking spaces in a
prepaid facility.
PARK or PARKING — The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
upon a street otherwise than in obedience to traffic regulations, signs or
signals.
PERSON — Includes any individual, firm, copartnership, association or
corporation.
STREET — Any public street, avenue, road, alley, highway, lane, path or
other public place located in the Borough of Edgewater and established for
the use of vehicles.
VEHICLE — Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported upon a highway, except a device which is operated upon
rails or tracks.
§ 282-17. Meter parking area defined. [Amended 12-2-2002 by Ord.
No. 1259-2002]
A. The parking area owned and maintained by the Borough and
designated as Block 53, Lot 1, and part of Lot 2.02, also known as the
parking lot across from the Municipal Building, as depicted on the Tax
Assessment Map, shall constitute a parking meter area or zone.
§ 282-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-17
1:539
§ 282-18. Unlawful parking; violations and penalties. [Amended
9-20-2010 by Ord. No. 1439-2010]
No person shall park a vehicle in the parking meter area or zone set forth
in § 282-17 unless the vehicle is parked in a parking space in front of which
a parking meter is installed or a numbered spot is marked and unless the
operator of the vehicle deposits in the meter the coins or bills required by
this article and designated on the parking meter. Any person who violates
or fails to comply shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine in the
amount of $50 for each violation.
§ 282-19. Maximum parking time; rates. [Amended 4-21-2003 by
Ord. No. 1271-2003]
§ 282-20. Installation of and maintenance of parking meters or
mechanical devices.
The Borough shall install parking meters or mechanical devices and
designate parking meter spaces or zones as provided in this article and
subject to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-138.
§ 282-21. Placement and installation of parking meters or
mechanical devices.
Parking meters or mechanical devices installed in the parking meter area
or zone established in § 282-17 shall be on the curb immediately adjacent to
individual parking spaces or in a location highly visible to motorists. Each
parking meter shall be placed so as to display a signal indicating whether
the parking space adjacent to the meter is legally in use. Each mechanical
device shall be placed so as to identify which parking spaces are legally in
use.
B. The parking area owned and maintained by the Borough and
designated as Block 34, Lot 1.01, also known as the Route 5 Memorial
Parking Lot, as depicted on the Tax Assessment Map, shall constitute a
parking meter area or zone.
C. The southerly side of Hilliard Avenue, from Edgewater Place to
McCurry Lane shall constitute a parking meter area or zone. [Added
4-21-2003 by Ord. No. 1271-2003]
A. Between 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on each day, except for Sundays and
legal holidays, the maximum time limit for parking in the areas set forth
in § 282-17C shall be two hours.
B. Parking in a designated space in the parking meter area shall be lawful
only for the period of time as set forth in Subsection A of this section
and upon the depositing of $0.25 per half hour or $0.50 for each hour
up to two hours, and $1 for each hour after two hours, up to the
maximum of four hours' parking, as applicable.
§ 282-17 EDGEWATER CODE § 282-22
1:540
§ 282-22. Designations appearing on parking meters or mechanical
devices.
Each parking meter or mechanical device shall indicate the following:
§ 282-23. Parking signs.
Signs shall be placed in proximity to parking meters or zones indicating the
hours and days when meter parking shall be enforced.
§ 282-24. Designation of parking spaces.
The Borough shall designate parking spaces controlled by parking meters
and mechanical devices.
§ 282-25. Parking in parking spaces.
Operators of vehicles parked in the parking meter area or zone set forth
in § 282-17 shall park vehicles in parking spaces designated by meters or
numbered spaces. Operators shall park vehicles in parking spaces so that
the front of the vehicle is nearest to the parking meter, or facing away from
the number side.
§ 282-26. Payment for parking space.
An operator parking a vehicle in a parking space within the parking meter
area or zone shall immediately deposit in the adjacent parking meter or
mechanical device sufficient coin as designed by the meter so that the meter
registers parking time by its dial and pointer. No operator shall permit a
vehicle to remain parked in parking space adjacent to a meter or numbered
space indicating expired or overtime parking, except during days and hours
set forth in § 282-19.
§ 282-27. Owner liable as operator.
The registered owner of a vehicle shall be liable for violations of this article
by the operator of the vehicle.
§ 282-28. Use of slugs.
No person shall deposit any device or substitute for a United States coin in
any parking meter or mechanical device located in any parking meter area
or zone as set forth in § 282-17.
A. The parking time permitted by this article.
B. The amount of coin to be deposited.
C. By its dial and pointer, the period of legal parking and the condition of
illegal or over-parking.
§ 282-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-29
1:541
§ 282-29. Tampering with and defacing of parking meters.
No person shall wilfully deface, destroy or tamper with any parking meter
or mechanical device located in the parking meter area or zone as set forth
in § 282-17.
§ 282-30. Notice of violation.
Police officers or other authorized officers shall place on vehicles parked
in violation of this article a notice informing the owner or operator that
the vehicle has been parked in violation of a provision of this article. Such
notice shall contain the following information:
§ 282-31. Overtime parking; fines and payment to Clerk.
§ 282-32. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-20-2010 by Ord. No.
1439-2010]
Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine in the amount of $50 for
each violation.
§ 282-33. Municipal employee parking.
The Borough is hereby authorized to issue, subject to approval by the
governing body, permits, cards or stickers for use by municipal employees,
whereby vehicles displaying valid permits, cards or stickers may stand or
be parked without limitation by parking time restrictions established by this
A. The number on the parking meter in violation of this article;
B. The state license number of the vehicle parked in violation of this
article;
C. The date and time during which a vehicle is parked in violation of this
article;
D. The notice shall instruct the owner or operator to report at the
Violations Bureau of the Borough of Edgewater in regard to the
violation.
E. Other facts necessary to the understanding of the circumstances
attending a violation of this article.
A. An owner or operator of a motor vehicle may, within 24 hours preceding
the court date appearing on the summons when a notice as set forth in
§ 282-30 was placed on the vehicle, waive hearing and pay to the Clerk
of the Edgewater Municipal Court in satisfaction of a penalty for an
overtime violation the sum of $20.
B. Any person who does not pay the fine or penalty in accordance with this
section shall be subject to penalties imposed pursuant to § 282-32.
§ 282-29 EDGEWATER CODE § 282-33
1:542
article. Vehicles not displaying valid permits, cards or stickers may stand or
be parked only upon complying with the provisions of this article.
§ 282-34. Entitled limitation on size of vehicles. [Added 12-2-2002
by Ord. No. 1259-2002]
No vehicle having a length of more than 18 feet nor a width of more than
nine feet shall be permitted to park within a metered parking area.
§ 282-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-34
1:543

ARTICLE IV
Municipal Building Parking Lot
[Adopted 11-19-2012 by Ord. No. 1481-2012]
§ 282-35. Lot affected.
The restrictions set forth in this article shall apply to the municipal parking
lot that is adjacent to the Borough of Edgewater Municipal Building located
at 55 River Road, Edgewater, New Jersey, hereinafter referred to as the
"Municipal Building Parking Lot."
§ 282-36. Parking permitted for specific purposes only.
Parking is permitted in the Municipal Building Parking Lot only for
employees of the Borough of Edgewater who work at the Municipal Building
and for other individuals conducting business at the Municipal Building.
Parking in this lot for all other purposes is expressly prohibited.
§ 282-37. Violations and penalties.
§ 282-38. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department of the Borough of
Edgewater.
A. The following shall be deemed violations of this article:
(1) The parking of any vehicle in the Municipal Building Parking Lot for
purposes other than those expressly permitted by this article.
(2) Any other noncompliance with the provisions of this article.
B. Every person who is found to violate any of the provisions of this article
shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty,
for each separate offense or violation.
§ 282-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-38
1:545

ARTICLE V
Edgewater Marina Park and Ferry Landing
[Adopted 11-19-2012 by Ord. No. 1481-2012]
§ 282-39. Lot affected.
The restrictions set forth in this article shall apply to the parking lot located
at the Edgewater Marina Park and Ferry Landing located at 989 River Road,
Edgewater, New Jersey, hereinafter referred to as the "Marina Parking Lot."
§ 282-40. Parking permitted for specific purposes only.
The facility at the Edgewater Marina Park and Ferry Landing includes a
fully functioning marina owned and operated by the Borough of Edgewater,
a Marina Park owned by the Borough of Edgewater, and a Ferry Landing
owned by the Borough of Edgewater and operated by a private contractor.
The parking restrictions at the Marina Parking Lot vary depending on an
individual's purpose and intended use of the Marina Park and Ferry Landing
facilities. These parking restrictions are as follows:
§ 282-41. Violations and penalties.
A. Edgewater Marina: Parking is permitted only for individuals possessing
a permit issued by the Borough of Edgewater or for guests at the
marina with an appropriate guest parking permit.
B. Edgewater Marina Park: Parking is permitted for all individuals using
the Marina Park or its facilities up to a maximum of two hours.
C. Ferry Landing: Parking is prohibited for all individuals using the Ferry
Landing facilities or traveling via the ferry.
D. Parking in this lot for all other purposes is expressly prohibited.
A. The following shall be deemed violations of this article:
(1) The parking of any vehicle in the Marina Parking Lot while using
the Edgewater Marina without a Borough-issued permit or guest
permit.
(2) The parking of any vehicle in the Marina Parking Lot while using
the Marina Park for a period longer than two hours.
(3) The parking of any vehicle in the Marina Parking Lot while using
the Ferry Landing facilities or traveling via the ferry.
(4) The parking of any vehicle in the Marina Parking Lot for any other
purpose not expressly permitted herein.
(5) Any other noncompliance with the provisions of this article.
§ 282-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-41
1:547
§ 282-42. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department of the Borough of
Edgewater.
B. Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this
article shall be subject to a penalty in accordance with Chapter 1,
Article II, General Penalty, of the Code of the Borough of Edgewater.
§ 282-41 EDGEWATER CODE § 282-42
1:548
ARTICLE VI
Historic Borough Hall Parking Lot
[Adopted 3-18-2014 by Ord. No. 1504-2014]
§ 282-43. Lot affected.
The restrictions set forth in this article shall apply to the municipal parking
lot that is adjacent to the Borough of Edgewater Historic Borough Hall
located at 916 River Road, Edgewater, New Jersey, hereinafter referred to
as the "Historic Borough Hall Parking Lot."
§ 282-44. Parking permitted for specific purposes only.
Parking is permitted in the Historic Borough Hall Parking Lot only for
employees of the Borough of Edgewater who work at Historic Borough Hall
and for other individuals conducting business at Historic Borough Hall.
Parking in this lot for all other purposes is expressly prohibited.
§ 282-45. Violations and penalties.
§ 282-46. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department of the Borough of
Edgewater.
A. The following shall be deemed violations of this article:
(1) The parking of any vehicle in the Historic Borough Hall Parking Lot
for purposes other than those expressly permitted by this article.
(2) Any other noncompliance with the provisions of this article.
B. Every person who is found to violate any of the provisions of this article
shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty,
for each separate offense or violation.
§ 282-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-46
1:549
Chapter 287
PARKING RESTRICTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking lots — See Ch. 282.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 427.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 432.
§ 282-46 EDGEWATER CODE § 282-46
1:550
ARTICLE I
Parking on Public Property
[Adopted 5-17-1983 by Ord. No. 746-83 (Ch. 186B of the 1975
Code)]
§ 287-1. Definitions. [Amended 10-4-1983 by Ord. No. 762-83]
The terms, phrases and words used in and for the purpose of this article
shall have the same meaning as set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:1-1.
§ 287-2. Time limitations. [Amended 10-4-1983 by Ord. No. 762-83]
It shall be unlawful for any person to park on any highway or municipal
property in the same place within the Borough of Edgewater a motor vehicle
for a period in excess of 72 consecutive hours.
§ 287-3. Removal of vehicles; fees.
§ 287-4. Notification to police of extended absence.
Any person absent from the Borough of Edgewater and who is unable, for
good cause, to comply with the time limitations set forth in § 287-2 of this
article shall give notice to Police Department of the Borough of Edgewater
of such fact and the location of such person's motor vehicle, together with
the make, model and license number thereof, either personally or in writing.
Upon receipt of such notification, such person and such motor vehicle
shall not be deemed to be in violation of the provisions of this article,
notwithstanding that the time requirements of § 287-2 are not complied
with.
§ 287-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-20-2017 by Ord. No.
1439-2010]
Unless another penalty is provided by New Jersey statute, violations of
the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
Article II, General Penalty.
A. Whenever any member of the Police Department, Borough of
Edgewater, finds a motor vehicle which has been parked contrary to the
provisions of this article, such officer shall provide for the removal of
such vehicle without the necessity of notice prior to such removal. The
owner of such motor vehicle shall pay reasonable costs of removal and
storage as established by the Mayor and Council pursuant to § 427-5.
B. After removal of such vehicle, the Borough Police Department shall
make diligent efforts to identify and locate the owner of such removed
motor vehicle and shall advise such person as to the place to which said
vehicle has been removed.
§ 287-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 287-5
1:551

ARTICLE II
Parking During Emergencies
[Adopted 10-4-1983 by Ord. No. 761-83 (Ch. 185 of the 1975 Code)]
§ 287-6. Authorization to declare emergency.
§ 287-7. Parking after declaration of emergency. [Added 2-12-2001
by Ord. No. 1209-2001]
Any vehicle that is parked after the declaration of an emergency and the
posting of signs as referred to in § 287-6 shall be deemed to be in violation
of this article and may be removed consistent with the provisions of § 287-8
of this article.
§ 287-8. Removal of vehicles.
Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this article for a
period of 12 hours from the time of posting of "emergency — no parking"
signs shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper
regulation of traffic, and any police officer may provide for the removal of
such vehicle. The owner thereof shall pay the reasonable cost of the removal
and storage which may result from such removal, which fee shall net exceed
the maximum fees for storing of vehicles as established by the Mayor and
Council pursuant to § 410-8 of the Code.
§ 287-9. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute, any
person convicted of a violation of a provision of this article shall be liable
for a penalty of $50 or imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or both.
A. Whenever snow has fallen and accumulation is such that in the opinion
of the Chief of Police and/or Police Director it is necessary to declare an
emergency in order to clear the snow from the particular area, upon
declaration of such an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
streets or sections of streets where temporary "emergency — no
parking" signs are displayed. The Chief of Police and/or Police Director
or, in his absence, the ranking police officer, is authorized to declare an
emergency and to direct the posting of said "emergency no parking"
signs when weather conditions so dictate or require that such action be
taken. [Amended 3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 1541-2017]
B. The Chief or ranking police officer shall be further authorized to declare
an emergency and to direct the posting of said "emergency — no
parking" signs when weather conditions, fires, accidents or such other
occurrences necessitate or require the avoidance of hazards or such
other conditions which interfere with the free flow of traffic.
§ 287-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 287-9
1:553

ARTICLE III
Parking for Handicapped Persons
[Adopted 11-13-1990 by Ord. No. 953-90 (Ch. 186C of the 1975
Code)]
§ 287-10. Spaces established.
There are hereby established in the Borough of Edgewater restricted
parking spaces pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.5 for use by persons who have
been issued special vehicle identification cards by the Division of Motor
Vehicles in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-205 when using a
motor vehicle on which is displayed a certificate for which a special vehicle
identification card has been issued pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-206.
§ 287-11. Method of establishment.
A restricted parking space shall be established by one of the following:
§ 287-12. Permits for motor vehicles. [Added 10-2-1995 by Ord. No.
1060-95; amended 3-21-2005 by Ord. No. 1314-2005]
A. There has been adopted an ordinance, resolution or regulation creating
such parking space.
B. An approval has been granted by the appropriate land use agency of the
Borough of a development application, the plans for which designate
the particular space as being restricted for use by handicapped persons
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 52:32-12.
C. An ordinance has been adopted establishing a restricted parking zone
in front of a residence occupied by handicapped persons pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.6.
A. In connection with the establishment of a restricted parking space as
set forth in § 186C-2, the Borough may issue a permit for such space
identifying the specific motor vehicle entitled to the utilization of such
space, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.7. A permit shall
be issued only to a person who can prove ownership and operation of
the motor vehicle and residency at the location specified thereon and
who has no available on-premises parking. The permit shall be
prominently displayed on the vehicle and shall be of a size consistent
with the statutory requirement. Only a motor vehicle for which a valid
permit has been issued and which has such permit properly displayed
shall be permitted to be parked in the restricted parking zone indicated
on such permit.
B. A permit under Subsection A of this section shall be issued for the time
period that is concurrent with the time period for which the applicant
therefor has been issued a special vehicle identification card,
windshield placard or wheelchair symbol license plates by the Division
of Motor Vehicles and shall be required to be renewed at the same time
§ 287-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 287-12
1:555
§ 287-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person causing a motor vehicle to be parked in a restricted parking
space without possessing the necessary vehicle identification card or
without displaying on such vehicle the requisite identification card shall be
subject to such penalty as established by N.J.S.A. 39:4-203.
§ 287-14. Towing of vehicles in violation.
Any motor vehicle parked in a restricted parking space which does not have
displayed a certificate for which a special vehicle identification card has
been issued pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-206 may be towed therefrom by order
of the Police Department. The owner of such vehicle shall be responsible
for all towing costs and storage fees in connection with the removal of the
vehicle.
for the permit to continue to be valid. In the event that no time period
is specified, then such permit shall be required to be renewed on an
annual basis.
§ 287-12 EDGEWATER CODE § 287-14
1:556
ARTICLE IV
Residential Parking Permits
[Adopted 4-21-2003 by Ord. No. 1273-2003 (Ch. 207 of the 1975
Code)]
§ 287-15. Applicability. [Amended 5-17-2004 by Ord. No.
1298-2004]
This article shall be applicable to all streets and roads within the territorial
limits of the Borough of Edgewater.
§ 287-16. Residential permit parking areas. [Amended 5-17-2004 by
Ord. No. 1298-2004]
The Borough hereby designates all streets and roads within the territorial
limits of the Borough as permit parking areas, as set forth in § 287-15 of
this article, upon which resident vehicles displaying valid parking permits
may stand or be parked without limitation by parking time restrictions
established by this article, except as otherwise provided in § 287-21 of this
article.
§ 287-17. Hours of operation. [Amended 5-17-2004 by Ord. No.
1298-2004]
§ 287-18. Effect on metered parking spaces.
This article shall have no applicability to metered parking spaces within
any designated facility or on any designated street within the Borough. A
residential parking permit shall not exempt a resident when parked in a
metered space from purchasing the time from the meter at the established
rate.
§ 287-19. Issuance of residential parking permits and Borough
employer's nonresident employees permit. [Amended 5-15-2006 by
Ord. No. 1334-2006; 7-16-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-011]
A. Residential permit parking shall be in effect between the hours of 10:00
a.m. and 12:00 noon, weekdays, excluding holidays, on all streets and
roads within the territorial limits of the Borough to which this article is
applicable.
B. In addition to the permit parking requirement of this section, no vehicle
shall be permitted to park for longer than two consecutive hours on any
street or road within the Borough without a residential parking permit
displayed on such vehicle. [Added 5-15-2006 by Ord. No.
1334-2006118]
A. Upon the adoption of this article, the Borough shall issue the
appropriate permits in accordance with this article. A permit shall be
118. Editor's Note: This ordinance provided for a retroactive date of 4-21-2003.
§ 287-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 287-19
1:557
§ 287-20. Permit display.
§ 287-21. Nonexemption from enforcement of state and Borough
laws. [Amended 10-18-2004 by Ord. No. 1308-2004]
A resident or Borough business employee vehicle on which is displayed a
valid parking permit as provided for herein shall be permitted to stand or be
parked without being limited by time restriction requirements established
pursuant to this article; provided, however, that this unrestricted parking
shall not be applicable to the Hilliard Avenue municipal parking lot, being
known and designated as Lots 10 and 11 in Block 54 on the current Tax
Assessment Map, and being more commonly known as 21 Hilliard Avenue.
issued to an applicant, provided proof of residency is established. An
applicant shall be required to produce his or her motor vehicle
registration, together with one of the following: driver's license, deed
or lease to property, voter registration identification, or any other
evidence that the party applying for the permit is a resident of the
Borough.
B. Number of permits; multifamily developments.
(1) One residential parking permit shall be issued for each person
holding a valid New Jersey driver's license at each residence.
(2) Any resident who lives in a multifamily development which
provides for a parking space on site, whether it be as part of the
base rent or purchased with the unit, will only be permitted to
obtain a residential parking permit if a second licensed driver
resides at the premises. However, in any event, the parking spot on
site must be occupied by said vehicle before parking is permitted
on the street.
C. A residential parking permit shall be valid for up to two years from the
date of issuance (ending December 31 of the year following the permit's
issuance).
D. Nonresident employees of valid businesses operating in Edgewater will
be able to obtain a nonresident employee parking permit that will be
good for the calendar year in which it is issued. The nonresident
employee must present a current driver's license and motor vehicle
registration along with valid proof of employment, such as a pay stub or
letter from the employer on the employer's letterhead. This permit will
include nonresident employers. No overnight parking shall be
permitted by anyone holding a nonresident employee parking permit.
A. All residential permits and business employee permits must be
displayed in such a way that they are readily visible to parking
enforcement personnel.
B. Resident permits and business employee permits shall be displayed
attached to the driver's side rear window.
§ 287-19 EDGEWATER CODE § 287-21
1:558
However, said resident or Borough business employee vehicle shall not be
exempt from parking restrictions or prohibitions established pursuant to
Title 39 of the New Jersey State statutes, or Chapter 432 of the Borough
Code or the Borough ordinance for street sweeping or ordinance provisions
pertaining to public safety and handicapped parking zones and other special
parking restrictions established by law.
§ 287-22. Penalty for parking without permit; towing of
unauthorized vehicles.
§ 287-23. Nonresident contractor and commercial vehicles.
The restrictions on parking in designated residential areas shall not apply to
the following classifications of vehicles, provided they are property marked:
§ 287-24. Counterfeiting permit; penalty.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for a person to copy,
produce or otherwise bring into existence a facsimile or counterfeit parking
permit or alter an expired parking permit. It shall further be unlawful and a
violation of this article for a person to knowingly use or display an altered,
facsimile or counterfeit parking permit in order to evade time limitations
A. Anyone found guilty in the Borough Municipal Court of parking in a
residential permit zone without a permit will receive a summons with a
fine of:
(1) $50 for the first offense.
(2) $75 for the second offense.
(3) $100 for the third offense.
B. If an unauthorized vehicle remains in a resident permit-parking zone for
48 hours it will be towed. The fee for the towing of vehicles shall be the
rate established by the Borough by resolution or ordinance.
A. Contractor/service and delivery vehicles. Contractor, service and
delivery vehicles bearing the name and address of a commercial
business may park without permit during the times they are rendering
service within the Borough.
B. Emergency and utility vehicles. Emergency vehicles, gas, electric,
telecommunications and other similar vehicles may park within the
Borough during the times they are rendering service or repairs within
the Borough.
C. Health-care providers. May park their vehicles within the Borough
during the times they are rendering assistance and/or health-care
service to residents of the Borough (such health-care provider to be
defined as a nurse, home-health aid, physical therapist, or any other
medical professional).
§ 287-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 287-24
1:559
on parking. The person committing the aforementioned act shall be subject
to a penalty not to exceed $1,000 and/or imprisonment for not more than
10 days for such violation, such penalties to be imposed by the Municipal
Court.
§ 287-25. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Police Department of
the Borough of Edgewater.
§ 287-26. Types of permits issued.
Types of permits issued are:
§ 287-27. Fines for improper transfer of permits; revocation
periods.
If any such permit issued as defined in § 287-19 is used on any other
vehicle or is used for a parking use other than that which it was specifically
issued, a fine shall be levied and the permit revoked in accordance with the
following terms:
Type of Permit Maximum Fine
Revocation
Period
Residential parking permit $300 1 year
Borough employer's/nonresident
employees permit
$300 1 year
§ 287-28. Employee parking permit program.
The Borough of Edgewater be and hereby is authorized to prepare and
implement a parking program, in conjunction with the residential parking
permit program heretofore referred to, by or for employees of owners or
bona fide lessees of business premises operating within the Borough, such
employee parking permit program to be administered by the Borough and
enforced by the Police Department in accordance with reasonable rules and
regulations to be promulgated by the Borough for such employee parking
permit program, at a cost to be established by the Borough.
§ 287-29. Fire lane violations.
In addition to all other enforcement authority, the Mayor and Council shall
have authority to enforce the provisions of the Uniform Fire Code, insofar
as same applies to fire lane violations, and police personnel are hereby
A. Residential parking permit: permits issued to residents for use on their
own registered vehicles.
B. Borough employer's nonresident employees permit. A permit will be
available to nonresident employees and nonresident employers on an
annual basis.
§ 287-24 EDGEWATER CODE § 287-29
1:560
authorized to issue summonses for said fire lane violations. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, nothing contained herein shall affect the enforcement
jurisdiction of fire officials, police personnel or any other governmental
agencies with jurisdiction over fire lane violations.
§ 287-30. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of the provisions of this article for which a specific penalty is
not set forth herein shall be subject to such fines and penalties as are set
forth in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Borough Code.
§ 287-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 287-30
1:561

ARTICLE V
Municipal Parking Permits
[Adopted 3-16-2009 by Ord. No. 1405-2009 (Ch. 186A, Art. IV, of the
1975 Code)]
§ 287-31. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DEMPSEY-HILLIARD CORRIDOR — The area located between and
including the northern side of Dempsey Avenue to the southern side of
Hilliard Avenue, stretching from the eastern side of River Road to the
western side of Undercliff Avenue.
MUNICIPAL PARKING PERMIT — A monthly or yearly permit issued by
the Borough of Edgewater which, when properly displayed in a vehicle,
authorizes the operator of the vehicle to park in a municipal permit parking
space.
MUNICIPAL PERMIT PARKING SPACE — Any space within a parking area
or in a lot designated for parking which is duly designated for the parking
of a single vehicle with a municipal parking permit by lines painted or
otherwise durably marked on the curb or on the surface of the street
adjacent to or adjoining the parking space.
PARK or PARKING — The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
upon a street or in a parking area otherwise than in obedience to traffic
regulations, signs or signals.
VEHICLE — Passenger automobiles, motorcycles, and trucks weighing less
than 1/2 ton. It shall not include trailers, recreational vehicles, buses, or
farm machinery or equipment.
§ 287-32. Lot affected.
A portion of the parking area owned and maintained by the Borough and
designated as Block 53, Lot 1, and part of Lot 2.02, also known as the
parking lot across from the Municipal Building, as depicted on the Tax
Assessment Map, shall consist of municipal permit parking spaces. The
municipal permit parking spaces shall be exempt from the requirements of
Borough Code § 282-18, and shall be clearly demarcated by the Borough as
municipal permit parking spaces.
§ 287-33. Permit required.
A. No person shall park or cause to be parked a vehicle in a municipal
permit parking space unless said person has obtained a municipal
parking permit from the Borough Clerk and has properly displayed said
municipal parking permit in accordance with this article. The Borough
Clerk shall not issue more municipal parking permits than exist
municipal permit parking spaces.
§ 287-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 287-33
1:563
§ 287-34. Permit application; residency and ownership
requirements.
§ 287-35. Types of permits; fee; term.
B. A permit shall not be transferable to another individual or vehicle,
except as expressly set forth in this article.
C. The permit shall be conspicuously displayed on the reverse side of the
interior rear-view mirror of the vehicle, or, if on a motorcycle, in a
similar conspicuous location.
D. The permit shall be utilized only on the vehicle for which it was issued
and shall contain the registered license plate number for the vehicle as
issued by the Department of Motor Vehicles. It shall be incumbent upon
the permit holder to notify the Borough Clerk should the resident
change vehicles or the license plate of said vehicle. Failure to notify the
Borough Clerk may result in a ticket being issued for violation of this
article.
E. When the permit is so affixed, the vehicle may be parked in a municipalowned
parking lot in one of the designated municipal permit parking
spaces.
A. Any resident of the Borough of Edgewater desiring to park in a
municipal permit parking space shall apply for a municipal parking
permit from the Borough Clerk.
B. The Borough Clerk is hereby authorized to issue municipal parking
permits for vehicles owned by a bona fide resident of the Borough of
Edgewater on a first-come, first-served basis; however, preference shall
be given to those residents or business owners located in the Dempsey-
Hilliard Corridor.
C. In the event that there exist more municipal permit parking spaces than
residents and business owners located in the Dempsey-Hilliard
Corridor who desire to purchase municipal parking permits, the
Borough Clerk may offer such excess municipal parking permits to all
other residents and business owners in the Borough of Edgewater on a
first-come, first-served basis.
D. Each permit shall be issued and be valid for and during the designated
month or year for which it is issued and not thereafter. The application
shall include the following information:
(1) Proof of primary residency or ownership of a business in the
Borough of Edgewater.
(2) Make, model, year, and license plate number of the vehicle on
which the permit shall be displayed.
(3) The appropriate fee as specified in § 287-35.
§ 287-33 EDGEWATER CODE § 287-35
1:564
§ 287-36. Violations and penalties.
§ 287-37. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department of the Borough of
Edgewater.
A. The Borough may issue both yearly and monthly municipal parking
permits, at the option of the Mayor and Council. All permits shall be
issued on a first-come, first-served basis. In the event that the demand
for permits exceeds the supply, the Borough Clerk may maintain a
waiting list to establish priority for any permit that may become
available.
B. The cost of a monthly municipal parking permit shall be $40, and the
permit shall be valid from the first day of the designated month until
11:59 p.m. on the last day of the month.
C. The cost of a yearly municipal parking permit shall be $400, and the
permit shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance.
A. The following shall be deemed violations of this article:
(1) The parking of any vehicle not bearing a valid municipal parking
permit in a municipal permit parking space;
(2) Failure to properly display a municipal parking permit;
(3) The parking of a vehicle in a municipal permit parking space
bearing a municipal parking permit that has been issued for a
different vehicle; or
(4) Any other noncompliance with the provisions of this article.
B. Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine in the amount
of $50 for each violation.119
119. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 287-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 287-37
1:565
Chapter 293
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Recreation Department — See Ch. 92.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 121.
Animals — See Ch. 129.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 204.
Minibikes and go-carts — See Ch. 264.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 386.
Trees — See Ch. 421.
§ 287-37 EDGEWATER CODE § 287-37
1:566
ARTICLE I
Municipal Recreation Area
[Adopted 7-20-1954 by Ord. No. 366; readopted 8-1-1967 by Ord.
No. 476 (Ch. 187, §§ 187-1 through 187-25, of the 1975 Code)]
§ 293-1. Location of area; hours. [Amended 5-20-1969 by Ord. No.
507-69; 9-20-2010 by Ord. No. 1439-2010; 6-11-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-008]
§ 293-2. Golf activities prohibited. [Added 2-1-1993 by Ord. No.
1004-93]
No person within the area shall engage in the playing of golf or the putting,
chipping and/or driving of the golf balls or practice golf balls. The use of
golf clubs for any reason is also prohibited.
§ 293-3. Vandalism prohibited.
No person shall cut, break, deface, defile or ill use any building, equipment,
tree, bush, plant, turf or other thing situated at the Municipal Recreation
Area.
§ 293-4. Weapons and fireworks prohibited; exceptions.
No person within the area shall throw a stone or other missile, have
possession of any firecracker, torpedo or firework or have possession of any
air gun, slingshot or other instrument or weapon in which propelling force
is a spring or air. No person except those authorized by law shall discharge
or have possession of any firearm.
A. The Municipal Recreation Area, which will be open for public use at
such reasonable hours as shall be designated from time to time by the
Mayor and Council, shall consist of the parks and recreation areas
located as follows:
Block Lot Name of Park Hours
30 1 and 2 Veterans Field Dawn to 10:00 p.m.
34 1.02 Memorial Park Dawn to 10:00 p.m.
46 4 Municipal Lot Park Dawn to 10:00 p.m.
51 21 Kiddie Park Dawn to dusk
38 1 The Marina Dawn to 10:00 p.m.
47 1.01 Duck Duck Park Dawn to dusk
B. The above hours can be extended upon application and prior approval
by the Mayor and Council, and the Mayor and Council may set other
reasonable restrictions on hours by resolution.
§ 293-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 293-5
1:567
§ 293-5. Selling, advertising, contests for money and gambling
prohibited without permission. [Amended 5-20-1969 by Ord. No.
507-69]
No person shall sell goods, wares or circulars; or post or display any sign,
placard or advertising device; or solicit any subscription or contribution;
or play, engage or take part in any game or competitive sport for money
or other valuable thing; or play any game of chance without the written
permission of the Mayor and Council.
§ 293-6. Permission required for performances or assemblies.
No person within the area shall preach or make any harangue, sing, play a
musical instrument or move in a military or civic parade, drill or procession
or hold any meeting or exhibit to the public any performance of any kind
without written permission of the Edgewater Mayor and Council.
§ 293-7. Public prohibited from certain activities.
No person except an employee of the Borough of Edgewater shall go within
the shrubbery or climb a tree, and no person shall sit or stand on a
balustrade, wall or fence or stand or lie down on a bench.
§ 293-8. Water sports restricted.
No person within the area, except in a place provided therefor and only at
such times and under such regulations as the Borough of Edgewater may
prescribe, shall bathe, skate or fish or place in the water a boat, or place,
throw or drain any substance into the water.
§ 293-9. Animals at large prohibited. [Amended 9-18-2000 by Ord.
No. 1195-2000]
No dogs or other domestic animals shall be permitted in or to be taken into
the Municipal Recreation Area at any time.
§ 293-10. Feeding of animals prohibited. [Added 3-15-1999 by Ord.
No. 1147-99]
No person shall feed geese, birds, fowl or any nondomesticated animals
within the Municipal Recreation Area at any time.
§ 293-11. Driving and riding restrictions; speed limit.
No person shall ride or drive except on established roads and ways, and
then only at a speed not in excess of 15 miles per hour.
§ 293-12. Littering prohibited.
No person shall drop, place or throw any paper or other refuse anywhere in
the area, except in a place provided for the reception thereof.
§ 293-5 EDGEWATER CODE § 293-13
1:568
§ 293-13. Erection of structures; vending; permission required.
No person shall erect any tent, stand or structure or sell or give away from
any tent, stand or structure or vehicle any food, drink or other thing without
the written permission of the Borough of Edgewater.
§ 293-14. Use of undesignated areas for sports prohibited.
No person shall throw, cast, catch, kick or strike any baseball, golf ball,
football, basketball or any other object, except in places designated
therefor.
§ 293-15. Use of drives restricted.
No person shall use the area drives for the purpose of instructing another
to drive or operate any vehicle nor for the purpose of demonstrating any
vehicle.
§ 293-16. Destruction or removal of Borough property prohibited.
No person shall destroy, remove or carry away or have possession of any
building, fence, tree, bush, plant or any part thereof, turf or other property
belonging to the Borough of Edgewater.
§ 293-17. Disorderly conduct prohibited.
No person within the area shall annoy another person or utter any profane,
threatening, indecent or abusive language, or act in a disorderly manner.
§ 293-18. Destruction of roads, sidewalks, curbs and paths
prohibited without permission.
No one shall be permitted to cut into, destroy or remove any of the curbing,
roadways, sidewalks or paths within the area, without written permission
from the Mayor and Council.
§ 293-19. Aircraft landing prohibited; emergencies excepted.
No person, except in an emergency, shall bring, land or cause to descend
or alight within or upon the area any airplane, flying machine, balloon,
parachute or other apparatus for aviation.
§ 293-20. Fires permitted in designated areas only.
No person shall make any fire within the area except at such places as may
be designated by the Borough of Edgewater and only under such conditions
and instructions as may be prescribed by the Borough of Edgewater.
§ 293-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 293-21
1:569
§ 293-21. Unlawful conduct by minors prohibited.
No parent, guardian or custodian of any minor shall permit or allow him or
her to do any act prohibited by the rules and regulations of the Borough of
Edgewater.120
§ 293-22. Permit required for scheduled sports.
All regularly scheduled games to be played or conducted on area facilities
shall require a permit noting the day, hour and duration. No other person or
group of persons shall use such facilities during the period covered by any
such permit except by the specific authority of the Borough of Edgewater.
§ 293-23. Small children restricted near bulkhead area.
No parent, guardian or custodian of any minor child below the age of
seven years shall permit him or her to enter any area within 20 feet of the
bulkhead unless accompanied by an adult.
§ 293-24. Public prohibited in out-of-bounds areas.
No person shall enter any section of the Municipal Recreation Area that is
marked "out of bounds."
§ 293-25. Enforcement. [Amended 9-3-1975 by Ord. No. 581-75]
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Superintendent of the
Department of Recreation, his assistant and the Police Department of the
Borough of Edgewater.
§ 293-26. Permission required for mooring of boats. [Amended
5-20-1969 by Ord. No. 507-69]
No person shall moor any boat to the bulkhead or piers extending from the
Municipal Recreation Area without written permission from the Mayor and
Council.121
§ 293-27. Violations and penalties.122
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
120. Editor's Note: A section which originally followed this section, and which set specific
hours for the Municipal Recreation Area, was repealed 5-20-1969 by Ord. No. 507-69.
121. Editor's Note: Former § 187-25, Permit required for use by nonresidents of Borough,
which immediately followed this section, was repealed 3-18-2008 by Ord. No. 1268-2008
122. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 293-21 EDGEWATER CODE § 293-27
1:570
ARTICLE II
Borough Hall Playground Area
[Adopted 9-7-1954 by Ord. No. 367; readopted 8-1-1967 by Ord. No.
476 (Ch. 187, Art. II, of the 1975 Code)]
§ 293-28. Vandalism prohibited.
No person shall cut, break, deface, defile or ill use any building, equipment,
tree, bush, plant or other thing situated at the Borough Hall Playground
Area.
§ 293-29. Weapons and fireworks prohibited; exceptions.
No person within the playground shall throw a stone or other missile, have
possession of any firecracker, torpedo or firework, or have possession of any
air gun, slingshot or other instrument or weapon in which propelling force
is a spring or air. No person except those authorized by law shall discharge
or have possession of any firearm.
§ 293-30. Selling, advertising, contests for money and gambling
prohibited.
No person shall sell goods, wares or circulars; or post or display any sign,
placard or advertising device; or solicit any subscription or contribution; or
play, engage or take part in any game or competitive sport for money or
other valuable thing; or play any game of chance.
§ 293-31. Public prohibited from certain activities.
No person except an employee of the Borough of Edgewater shall go within
the shrubbery or climb a tree, and no person shall sit or stand on a
balustrade, wall or fence or stand or lie down on a bench.
§ 293-32. Littering prohibited.
No person shall drop, place or throw any paper or other refuse anywhere in
the playground, except in a place provided for the reception thereof.
§ 293-33. Destruction or removal of Borough property prohibited.
No person shall destroy, remove or carry away or have possession of any
building, fence, tree, bush, plant or any part thereof or other property
belonging to the Borough of Edgewater.
§ 293-34. Disorderly conduct prohibited.
No person within the playground shall annoy another person, utter any
profane, indecent or abusive language or act in a disorderly manner.
§ 293-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 293-35
1:571
§ 293-35. Fires prohibited.
No person shall make any fire within the playground.
§ 293-36. Unlawful conduct by minors prohibited.
No parent, guardian or custodian of any minor child shall permit or allow
him or her to do any act prohibited by the rules and regulations of the
Borough of Edgewater.123
§ 293-37. Permits required for use by nonresidents of Borough.
The Borough Hall Playground Area and its facilities are provided for the
residents of Edgewater. Nonresidents shall be prohibited from using the
facilities of this playground without a written permit authorized by a
resolution of the Mayor and Council.
§ 293-38. Age restriction on use of wading pool or playground
facilities; exceptions.
No child that has attained the age of 12 years shall be permitted to use the
wading pool, nor shall any child who has completed the eighth grade use
any of the facilities of the playground unless attending a function sponsored
by the Department of Recreation.
§ 293-39. Hardball and stickball games prohibited.
Hardball and stickball games are prohibited in the Borough Hall Playground
Area.
§ 293-40. Toys prohibited in wading pool.
No bicycles, wagons, roller skates or other toys are to be used in the wading
pool.
§ 293-41. (Reserved)124
§ 293-42. Preschool children to be accompanied by adult.
Children of preschool age shall be accompanied by a parent or guardian
when using any of the facilities of the playground area.
§ 293-43. Enforcement. [Amended 9-3-1975 by Ord. No. 5-81-75]
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Superintendent of the
Department of Recreation, his assistant and the Police Department of the
Borough of Edgewater.
123. Editor's Note: Former § 187-35, Permits required for use by nonresidents of Borough,
which immediately followed this section, was deleted 9-20-2010 by Ord. No. 1439-2010.
124. Editor’s Note: Former § 293-41, Hours, was repealed 6-11-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-008.
§ 293-35 EDGEWATER CODE § 293-44
1:572
§ 293-44. Violations and penalties. [Added 9-20-2010 by Ord. No.
1439-2010]
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
§ 293-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 293-44
1:573

ARTICLE III
Park of the Palisades
[Adopted 12-20-1955 by Ord. No. 383; readopted 8-1-1967 by Ord.
No. 476 (Ch. 187, Art. III, of the 1975 Code)]
§ 293-45. Creation of park. [Amended 10-4-1983 by Ord. No.
763-83]
§ 293-46. Preservation of area.
No use or activity, municipal or otherwise, shall be permitted in, on or of
such lands which will require artificial recreational facilities or lend itself
to the commercial exploitation of such lands, or will tend to endanger
or prevent the preservation and development of the natural scenic
attractiveness and the wildlife therein.
§ 293-47. Violations and penalties. [Added 9-20-2010 by Ord. No.
1439-2010]
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
A. The lands contiguous to the westerly boundary line of the Borough of
Edgewater for a maximum width of 325 feet from the north Borough
line to the southerly Borough line as depicted on the Tax Map of the
Borough of Edgewater shall, when acquired by gift, purchase,
condemnation or otherwise by the Borough of Edgewater, be held in
perpetuity by the Borough and dedicated as a natural park area to
preserve and enhance the natural beauty of the Palisades and the
adjacent wooded area. [Amended 3-15-1999 by Ord. No. 1145-99]
B. Excluded from the provisions of Subsection A of this section shall be
any land conveyed or leased by the Borough to the Housing Authority of
the Borough of Edgewater for the construction of housing for senior
citizens and the handicapped with funds provided in whole or in part
from any grants received by the Department of Housing and Urban
Development; provided, however, that such lands shall not lie closer
than 150 feet from the top edge of the Palisades.
§ 293-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 293-47
1:575

ARTICLE IV
Use of Baseball Diamonds
[Adopted 6-4-1991 by Ord. No. 969-91 (§§ 187-25.1 through
187-25.3 of the 1975 Code)]
§ 293-48. Use of baseball diamonds by non-Borough organizations.
[Amended 3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 1542-2017; 4-22-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-002]
Any person, firm, entity, league or organization not affiliated with or
sponsored by the Borough of Edgewater and/or its Recreation Department
shall not be entitled to the exclusive use of any recreational facilities unless
a permit is issued therefor by the Department of Recreation.
§ 293-49. Requirements for permits. [Amended 3-20-2017 by Ord.
No. 1542-2017; 4-22-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-002]
§ 293-50. Fee schedule. [Amended 3-20-2017 by Ord. No.
1542-2017; 4-22-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-002]
The following fee schedule shall be applicable for use of the Borough's
recreational facilities:
Daytime Rental Fees
6:00 a.m. - 4:00 p.m.
RESIDENT
Facility Rate Per Time
slot
Total (time
slots x rate)
Refundable
Deposit
James Monroe Little
League
$100 _____ $200
Half multipurpose
field
$150 _____ $200
A. An application for a permit shall be on a form as provided by the
Borough and shall include the name and address of the person, firm,
entity, league or organization seeking permission to use any
recreational facilities. If the application is being made by a firm, entity,
league or organization, the application shall include the name of one or
more individuals who are authorized to sign the application.
B. The application shall be accompanied by a certificate of insurance, in a
form acceptable to the Borough, which shall include general liability
and appropriate umbrella coverage.
C. No permit shall be granted unless the individual applicant or the
persons acting on behalf of a firm, entity, league or organization
execute an indemnification and hold harmless agreement to the
Borough of Edgewater, its agents and employees.
§ 293-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 293-50
1:577
Daytime Rental Fees
6:00 a.m. - 4:00 p.m.
Full multipurpose
field
$200 _____ $200
Baseball field (North;
LL)
$200 _____ $200
Baseball field (South) $200 _____ $200
Softball field $200 _____ $200
Basketball court, full
court
$100 _____ $200
Basketball court, half
court
$50 _____ $200
Picnic grove $125 _____ $200
Pavilion 1 (2-hour
time slots)
$50 _____ $200
Pavilion 2 (2-hour
time slots)
$50 _____ $200
Room rental $100 per 2 hours $200
Total Rental Fee
Due:
_____
NONRESIDENT
Facility Rate Per Time
Slot
Total (time
slots x rate)
Refundable
Deposit
James Monroe Little
League
$200 _____ $200
Half multipurpose
field
$250 _____ $200
Full multipurpose
field
$300 _____ $200
Baseball field (North;
LL)
$300 _____ $200
Baseball field (South) $300 _____ $200
Softball field $300 _____ $200
Basketball court, full
court
$200 _____ $200
Basketball court, half
court
$150 _____ $200
Picnic grove $200 _____ $200
§ 293-50 EDGEWATER CODE § 293-50
1:578
Daytime Rental Fees
6:00 a.m. - 4:00 p.m.
Pavilion 1 (2-hour
time slots)
$75 _____ $200
Pavilion 2 (2-hour
time slots)
$75 _____ $200
Room rental $150 per 2 hours $200
Total Rental Fee
Due:
_____
Evening Rental Rates
4:30 p.m. - 10:00 p.m.
RESIDENT
Facility Rate Per Time
Slot
Total (time
slots x rate)
Refundable
Deposit
James Monroe Little
League
$150 _____ $300
Half multipurpose
field
$200 _____ $300
Full multipurpose
field
$300 _____ $300
Baseball field (North;
LL)
$250 _____ $300
Baseball field (South) $250 _____ $300
Softball field $250 _____ $300
Basketball court, full
court
$150 _____ $300
Basketball court, half
court
$100 _____ $300
Picnic grove $150 _____ $300
Room rental $200 per 2 hours $300
Pavilion 1 (2-hour
time slots)
$100 _____ $300
Pavilion 2 (2-hour
time slots)
$100 _____ $300
Total Rental Fee
Due:
_____
NONRESIDENT
§ 293-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 293-50
1:579
Evening Rental Rates
4:30 p.m. - 10:00 p.m.
Facility Rate Per Time
Slot
Total (time
slots x rate)
Refundable
Deposit
James Monroe Little
League
$250 _____ $300
Half multipurpose
field
$300 _____ $300
Full multipurpose
field
$350 _____ $300
Baseball field (North;
LL)
$350 _____ $300
Baseball field (South) $350 _____ $300
Softball field $350 _____ $300
Basketball court, full
court
$250 _____ $300
Basketball court, half
court
$125 _____ $300
Picnic grove $150 _____ $300
Room rental $250 per 2 hours $300
Pavilion 1 (2-hour
time slots)
$150 _____ $300
Pavilion 2 (2-hour
time slots)
$150 _____ $300
Total Rental Fee
Due:
_____
Resident Only Activity Fee
Activity Fee
Kiddie Camp $450 per child
Summer Camp $500 per child
Community Center Camp $500 per child
After Camp
5 class unit $200 per child
Breakfast Club $150 per child
Community Center after Camp
5 class unit $100 per child
School Vacation Camp
§ 293-50 EDGEWATER CODE § 293-50
1:580
Resident Only Activity Fee
Activity Fee
Out and about mini $250 per child
School Vacation Camp
Out and about $395 per child
Pool pass $25 per child, season
Splash pad $25 per child, season
Pool/pad season combo $40 per child, season
Baby basketball $100 per child, season
Travel basketball, with uniform $200 per child, season
Travel basketball, no uniform $125 per child, season
Soccer season $50 to $200 dated scale pricing per
child
Baseball season $50 to $200 dated scale pricing per
child
Flag football $50 per child season
§ 293-51. Violations and penalties. [Added 9-20-2010 by Ord. No.
1439-2010]
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
§ 293-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 293-51
1:581

ARTICLE V
Parking of Vehicles
[Adopted 3-18-2003 by Ord. No. 1269-2003 (§ 187-25.4 of the 1975
Code)]
§ 293-52. Parking restrictions. [Amended 3-18-2014 by Ord. No.
1504-2014]
Parking is permitted in municipal recreation area parking lots only for
employees of the Borough of Edgewater performing work at the municipal
recreation areas and for other individuals conducting business, attending
sporting events, or otherwise lawfully utilizing the municipal recreation
areas. Parking in these lots for all other purposes is expressly prohibited.
§ 293-53. Suspension of requirements.
The requirements of § 293-52 of this article may be temporarily suspended
by resolution of the Mayor and Council in connection with the holding of
certain public events in the municipal recreation area.
§ 293-54. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of § 293-52 of this article shall be
subject to such fines and penalties as set forth in Chapter 1, Article II,
General Penalty, of the Borough Code.
§ 293-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 293-54
1:583
Chapter 305
PEDDLING, SOLICITING AND ADVERTISING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 248. Vending machines — See Ch. 438.
§ 305-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHARITABLE AND PHILANTHROPIC — Patriotic, religious, welfare,
benevolent, educations, civil or fraternal corporations, organizations,
societies and like groups.
NON-PROFIT-MAKING VENDOR — A person who sells or collects goods or
services, the proceeds of which are devoted exclusively to the purposes of a
charitable and philanthropic society on whose behalf he acts as agent.
PEDDLER — A person who goes from place to place, also known as a
"hawker," by traveling on the street or from house to house and who carries
with him goods, wares and merchandise for the purpose of selling and
delivering them to consumers or buyers.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, member of firm, partnership, member
of partnership, political association, church, religious denomination,
corporation or any officer, director or stockholder of said corporation, or
any agent of the same.
SOLICITOR — A person who goes from house to house selling or buying
goods, wares or merchandise by sample or taking orders for future delivery
or selling a service to be rendered in the future, with or without accepting
advance payment for the goods, wares, merchandise or services, or any
person requesting, directly or indirectly, money, credit, property, financial
assistance and other things of value on the representation that same will be
used for a charitable and philanthropic purpose.
§ 305-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to prevent fraud, crime and dishonest
business practices. All application fees are not charged as revenue, but for
the purpose of covering the expenses incurred in regulation and control of
licenses and permits.
§ 305-3. Prohibited activities; permit required.
A. It shall be unlawful for any peddler, non-profit-making vendor, solicitor
or other person to sell, buy or dispose of or offer to sell or dispose of any
goods, wares, merchandise or services or to contract for services to be
§ 293-54 EDGEWATER CODE § 305-3
1:584
§ 305-4. Permit application, issuance, restrictions and expiration.
Any person desiring a permit for the purposes herein mentioned in this
chapter shall file an application with the Police Department in duplicate and
sworn to by the applicant.
rendered or to take or offer to take orders for any goods, wares,
merchandise or services to be rendered or delivered in the future or to
solicit for charitable and philanthropic purposes within the Borough of
Edgewater without first obtaining a permit therefor as provided in this
chapter.
B. No person shall distribute or cause to be distributed, in, to or upon any
house, residence, apartment house or other building or any portion of
the premises connected therewith, any printed matter of whatsoever
kind, without a permit for that purpose first had and obtained in the
manner provided for in this chapter.
C. No person shall distribute or cause to be distributed, in any street or
public place or in or upon any motor vehicle in the Borough of
Edgewater, any circular, card, pamphlet or other advertising matter
whatsoever.
D. No person shall distribute or cause to be distributed, in any street or
public place in the Borough of Edgewater, any newspaper, book,
magazine or other printed matter of a noncommercial character
containing matter of public interest, in any manner which will impede
or interfere with the members of the general public using such street
and public places for their intended purposes.
A. Every application required under this chapter shall contain the
following information:
(1) The name and permanent address of the applicant.
(2) The age, weight, and height of the applicant.
(3) A description of and the registration number of the vehicle to be
used, if any.
(4) The name and address of the employer or charitable and
philanthropic organization.
(5) The nature of the business to be conducted and the type of
merchandise to be sold or services to be solicited, or the nature of
the charitable and philanthropic solicitation, or the nature of the
advertising material to be distributed, as the case may be.
(6) At least three business or character references.
(7) A list of places where the applicant has resided for a period of three
years immediately prior to making the application.
§ 305-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-4
1:585
§ 305-5. Permit fee exemptions.
(8) Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a crime or as a
disorderly person or of any violation of any ordinance regulating
peddlers, hawkers, solicitors or canvassers, stating the date of each
conviction, name of the court, violation charged in the complaint
and the disposition thereof.
B. Said application shall be accompanied by:
(1) A letter or written statement from the individual, firm, corporation
or organization employing or authorizing the applicant to act on its
behalf, certifying that the application may make such application.
(2) A recent photograph of the applicant taken within one year of the
date of application and whose dimensions shall be approximately
passport size.
(3) Fees, as hereinafter prescribed.
C. Investigation; approval or rejection. When said application is properly
filled out and signed by the applicant and deemed complete by the Chief
of Police and/or Police Director, the Chief of Police and/or Police
Director shall investigate the statements made therein, as well as the
information provided, and a period of not more than five days shall be
allowed for such investigation, whereupon the Chief of Police and/or
Police Director shall approve or disapprove of the permit application.
When a fee is required under this chapter, the application bearing the
approval of the Chief of Police and/or Police Director shall be presented
to the Borough Clerk to whom the requisite fee shall be paid.
[Amended 3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 1541-2017]
D. The fee for a permit shall be $50, and shall be valid from January 1 until
December 31 of each calendar year. Each permit issued under this
chapter shall expire on December 31 of the year in which the permit
was issued, regardless of the date of issuance of said permit.
E. A permit issued under this chapter shall be nonassignable and
nontransferable. Every permittee shall be required to carry the permit
in his possession while engaged in the business permitted. The
permittee shall produce his permit at the request of any person
solicited, any Borough police officer, or any official of the Borough.
A. The following persons are expressly exempt from the payment of any
permit fees under this chapter:
(1) Non-profit-making vendors.
(2) Charitable and philanthropic organizations and their authorized
representatives.
(3) Candidates for any public office and persons accompanying such
candidates.
§ 305-4 EDGEWATER CODE § 305-5
1:586
§ 305-6. Suspension and renovation of permit.
§ 305-7. Hours of operation.
No peddling, advertising or soliciting activities shall be conducted before
10:00 a.m. or later than 9:00 p.m. on any day.
(4) Any persons honorably discharged from the military service of the
United States, or who qualify as exempt firemen or other qualified
individuals, possessing a peddler's license issued pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 and 45:24-10.
B. Any person claiming an exemption pursuant to Subsection A of this
section shall indicate on the application the status claimed. An exempt
fireman or veteran pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 and 45:24-10 shall
exhibit to the Chief of Police and/or Police Director or officer in charge a
copy of the license issued by the Clerk of the County pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 45:24-10. [Amended 3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 1541-2017]
A. Permits issued under this chapter may be revoked by the Chief of Police
and/or Police Director, after notice and hearing, for any of the following
causes: [Amended 3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 1541-2017]
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement in application for the
license.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement in the course of
carrying on the permitted business, advertising or solicitation in
the Borough.
(3) Any violation of this chapter.
(4) Conviction of any crime involving moral turpitude or of a violation
of any ordinance concerning peddling, hawking, soliciting or
canvassing.
(5) Conducting the permitted business, advertising or solicitation in
the Borough in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to
constitute a detriment to the health, safety or general welfare of
the public.
B. Notice of the hearing for revocation of a permit shall be given in
writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time
and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be given personally or
mailed to the permittee at his last known address at least five days prior
to the date set for such hearing.
C. Such permit may, pending revocation proceedings, be suspended for
not more than 10 days by the Chief of Police and/or Police Director if, in
his opinion, the conduct of the permittee is detrimental to the health,
safety or welfare of the Borough. [Amended 3-20-2017 by Ord. No.
1541-2017]
§ 305-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-8
1:587
§ 305-8. Residents requesting no peddling, advertising or soliciting.
Residents of the Borough of Edgewater who shall prefer not to have printed
matter delivered to their homes or to have solicitors or peddlers call may
notify the Police Department to that effect, and thereafter lists of the
addresses of such persons shall be furnished to applicants for permits under
this chapter, and to that extent permits issued hereunder shall be restricted.
§ 305-9. Nonapplicability to requested calls.
The provisions of this chapter shall not affect any person calling at or
distributing printed matter to any premises at the previous request of the
occupant thereof.
§ 305-10. Painting and posting of advertisements; restrictions;
consent of owner required.
No person or persons shall paint, post or cause to be painted or posted any
notice or advertisement on the public streets, highways or public places
of the Borough or upon private property within the Borough without the
consent of the owners thereof.
§ 305-11. Posters; permit and bond required.
All persons desiring to temporarily post advertisements, posters, placards,
signs or similar objects upon or in close proximity to the public streets or
sidewalks in the Borough of Edgewater shall first obtain a permit to do so
from the Borough Clerk, and shall post with the Borough Clerk cash money
for a bond in the amount of $50 to ensure the timely and proper removal
of all such advertisements, posters, placards, signs or similar objects and to
defer any cost to the Borough of Edgewater in maintaining or cleaning its
streets or sidewalks by virtue of the improper removal of said objects.
§ 305-12. Time limit for removal.
All advertisements, posters, placards, signs or similar objects which are
posted in connection with a particular event or election shall be removed
within 30 days after the completion of said event or election or said $50
shall be automatically forfeited to the Borough.
§ 305-13. Violations and penalties.
In addition to the renovation or suspension of the permit granted under this
chapter, any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1, Article
II, General Penalty.
Chapter 310
PORTABLE COOKING UNITS
§ 305-8 EDGEWATER CODE § 310-1
1:588
§ 310-1. Use prohibited.
The use or possession of portable gas and kerosene stoves, propane
barbecue stoves and other similar fuel-burning appliances using highly
flammable liquids or gases is prohibited in or on any building within the
Borough of Edgewater.
§ 310-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING — Includes any balcony, roof or extension thereof.
§ 310-3. Distance requirements. [Amended 11-10-1992 by Ord. No.
996-92]
Cooking equipment such as barbecue grills shall not be stored or used on
any porch, balcony or any portion of a building, within any room or space of
a building, within five feet of any exterior wall or within five feet vertically
or horizontally of an opening in any wall.
§ 310-4. Violations and penalties.125
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
notification thereof, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article II,
General Penalty. Each and every day a violation of this chapter shall occur
shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
Chapter 314
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dangerous buildings — See Ch. 147.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 151.
Certificates of continuing occupancy — See
Ch. 157, Art. III.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 166.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 204.
Regulation of substandard dwellings — See
Ch. 339, Art. I.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 368.
Parking of trailers — See Ch. 416.
Waterfront drift and debris — See Ch. 444,
Art. II.
Heating of buildings — See Ch. 466.
Solid waste disposal — See Ch. 529.
125. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 310-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 314-1
1:589
§ 314-1. Adoption of standards.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Construction Code Official of the Borough of Edgewater, being marked
and designated as the "BOCA National Property Maintenance Code, Third
Edition, 1990," as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the Property
Maintenance Code of the Borough of Edgewater, in the State of New Jersey,
for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each
and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of
said BOCA National Property Maintenance Code are hereby referred to,
adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 314-2 of
this chapter.
§ 314-2. Additions, insertions and changes.
The BOCA National Property Maintenance Code is amended and revised in
the following respects:
§ 314-3. Additional requirements. [Added 11-14-1994 by Ord. No.
1032-94]
On all properties within the Borough grass and weeds shall be trimmed to
less than eight inches of height on all areas of a property.
§ 314-4. Enforcement procedure. [Added 11-14-1994 by Ord. No.
1032-94]
A. In Section PM-100.1 (page 1, second line), insert: "Borough of
Edgewater."
B. In Section PM-109.2 (page 7, third line), insert: "$100 nor more than
$2,000."126
C. In Section PM-109.2 (page 7, fourth line), insert: 90 days."
D. In Section PM-302.12 (page 17, first line), insert: "May 15 to October
1."
E. In Section PM-601.1 (page 27, tenth line), insert: "October 1 to May
15."
F. In Section PM-601.1 (page 27, eleventh line), insert: "70° F. (20° C.)" in
place of "65° F. (18° C.)."
G. In Section PM-601.2 (page 27, second line), insert: "October 1 to May
15."
A. When the enforcement officer determines that there has been a
violation of any provision of this chapter, he shall give notice of such
126. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 314-1 EDGEWATER CODE § 314-4
1:590
Chapter 318
PUBLIC RECORDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department fees — See Ch. 81.
§ 318-1. Fees payable for copies of public records.
All persons seeking to inspect, examine or copy a public record of the
Borough shall make application in writing to the Borough Clerk, during
regular business hours. The request shall be hand-delivered, mailed,
transmitted electronically, or otherwise conveyed to the Borough Clerk.
All requests for public records shall be as specific as possible, including
the type of record and date created, if known. Copies of records may
be obtained for the fee prescribed by law or regulation. If a fee is not
prescribed by law or regulation, the fee shall be the actual cost of
duplicating the record; provided, however, that where the actual cost for
duplication of a record exceeds the rates below, the actual cost shall be
imposed.
violation to the persons or entities having ownership or control of the
subject area where the violation exists. Such notice shall be given in
writing and shall be sent by certified mail and regular mail to the last
known address as evidenced by the most recent tax duplicate of the
Borough.
B. The notice shall specify the nature of the violation and that unless the
same is removed, remedied or cured within 10 days of the date of such
notice, a summons shall be issued for the violation.
C. In addition, the notice shall further state that absent the violation being
eliminated, the Borough shall have the right to undertake the removal
of the violation by entering into a contract for the abatement of the
violation and may thereafter cause the same to be eliminated or
removed. The cost that the Borough incurs in having the violation
eliminated shall thereafter become a municipal lien on the subject
premises and shall be added to and become and form a part of the taxes
to be assessed and levied upon such property and shall bear interest at
the same rate as taxes and shall be collected and enforced in the same
manner.
A. Standard-sized paper documents.
§ 314-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 318-1
1:591
Size
Fee
(per page)
Letter size or smaller $0.05
Legal size or larger $0.07
B. Large-sized paper documents and maps. Fees shall be for actual costs
incurred; a deposit of $5 per page shall be required.
(1) Zoning Map.
(2) Street Map.
(3) Drug-Free School Zone Map.
(4) Soils Survey Map.
(5) Site plan.
(6) Subdivision plat.
(7) Tax maps.
(8) Engineering plans.
C. Preprinted documents.
(1) Codebook: cost set by General Code.
(2) Zoning/land use pamphlet: actual cost to copy.
(3) Master Plan: actual cost to copy.
D. The furnishing of any information on a CD-ROM, including any Mayor
and Council, board or commission meeting recorded in the Borough of
Edgewater's Council Chambers on the recording system, shall be at the
cost of $2 per CD, including case.
E. Police reports.
(1) Police accident reports: same as Subsection A above, if requested
and picked up in person.
(2) Police accident reports, when copies are requested other than in
person: $5 for the first three pages and $1 per page for each
additional page, as established by N.J.S.A. 39:4-131.
F. A special service charge shall be imposed, in addition to the actual cost
of duplicating the record, where the nature, format, manner of collation
or volume of printed matter is such that it cannot be reproduced by
ordinary document-copying equipment in ordinary business size or
where such record involves an extraordinary expenditure of time and
effort to accommodate the request. The estimated and actual charges
shall be calculated based upon the hourly pay as set forth or
§ 318-1 EDGEWATER CODE § 318-1
1:592
§ 318-2. Fees payable for Municipal Court discovery.
The fees payable by the requestor to the Borough of Edgewater for
discovery in the Municipal Court shall be as set forth in § 318-1 of this
chapter. Notwithstanding the foregoing, to the extent said fees conflict with
the fee schedule promulgated by the Administrative Director of the Courts,
the latter shall control.
§ 318-3. Disposition of fees.
All sums collected under this chapter shall be considered the funds of the
Borough of Edgewater and shall be paid by the respective officers to the
Treasurer of the Borough of Edgewater.
Chapter 320
PUBLIC PROPERTY
§ 320-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit and/or regulate certain activities
on public property in the Borough of Edgewater, including property owned
and/or operated by the Borough of Edgewater Board of Education.
§ 320-2. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall
be construed as hereinafter set out, unless it shall be apparent from the
context that they have a different meaning:
MUNICIPAL PROPERTY — Property owned and/or operated by the Borough
of Edgewater.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Property owned and/or operated by any public entity
within the territorial jurisdiction of the Borough of Edgewater, and shall
include but not be limited to school property and municipal property.
SCHOOL PROPERTY — Property owned and/or operated by the Borough of
Edgewater Board of Education.
determined by the salary ordinance for the employee performing the
work times the number of hours. The requestor shall have the
opportunity to review and object to the special service charge prior to
it being incurred.
G. Applicable postage shall be added for any and all records requested by
mail. The cost of standard-sized envelopes shall be $0.25.
H. A deposit shall be paid prior to filling any anonymous or out-of-state
request where it is estimated that the information requested will cost in
excess of $5 to reproduce. The amount of the deposit shall equal the
total estimated cost of filling the request.
§ 318-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-3
1:593
§ 320-3. Prohibited activities. [Amended 9-18-2017 by Ord. No.
1552-2017]
The following activities shall be prohibited within the Borough of Edgewater
at the following locations:
§ 320-4. Violations and penalties.
Failure to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter shall be
punishable as provided for in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the
Borough Code.
Chapter 322
PUBLIC SAFETY RADIO COVERAGE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 204.
§ 322-1. Emergency responder radio coverage in existing buildings.
A. Smoking on all property owned or operated by the Borough of
Edgewater or the Borough of Edgewater Board of Education.
B. School property:
(1) Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages.
(2) Use of skateboards, in-line skates or roller skates.
(3) Dog walking.
(4) Presence on school property after dark, unless attending an event
approved by the Board of Education.
(5) Bike riding.
A. Existing buildings that do not have approved radio coverage for
emergency responders within the building, based upon the existing
coverage levels of the public safety communication systems of the
jurisdiction at the exterior of the building, shall be equipped with such
coverage according to one of the following:
(1) Where an existing wired communication system cannot be repaired
or is being replaced, or where not approved by the Fire Code
Official.
(2) Where minimum signal strength measurements in 95% of all areas
on each floor of the building do not meet the signal strength
requirements in Subsection A(2)(a) and (b) below.
§ 320-3 EDGEWATER CODE § 322-1
1:594
§ 322-2. Permit required.
§ 322-3. Technical requirements.
Systems, components and equipment required to provide the emergency
responder radio coverage system shall comply with the following:
(a) Minimum signal strength into the building. A minimum signal
strength of -95 dBm shall be receivable within the building.
(b) Minimum signal strength out of the building. A minimum signal
strength of -95 dBm shall be received by the agency's radio
system when transmitted from within the building.
B. Exception: where it is determined by the Fire Code Official that the
radio coverage system is not needed.
A. A construction permit for the installation of or modification to
emergency responder radio coverage systems and related equipment,
for both newly constructed and existing buildings, is required as
specified in IFC Section 105.7.5.
B. Maintenance performed in accordance with this code is not considered
a modification and does not require a permit.
A. Radio signal strength. The building shall be considered to have an
acceptable emergency responder radio coverage when signal strength
measurements in 95% of all areas on each floor of the building meet the
signal strength requirements in Subsection A(1) and (2) below.
(1) Minimum signal strength into the building. A minimum signal
strength of -95 dBm shall be receivable within the building.
(2) Minimum signal strength out of the building. A minimum signal
strength of -95 dBm shall be received by the agency's radio system
when transmitted from within the building.
B. System design. The emergency responder radio coverage system shall
be designed in accordance with the below sections:
(1) Amplification systems allowed. Buildings and structures that
cannot support the required level of radio coverage shall be
equipped with a radiating cable system, a distributed antenna
system with Federal Communications Commission (FCC) certified
signal boosters, or other system approved by the Fire Code Official
in order to achieve the required adequate radio coverage.
(2) Technical criteria. The Fire Code Official shall maintain a document
providing the specific technical information and requirements for
the emergency responder radio coverage system. This document
shall contain, but not be limited to, the various frequencies
required, the location of radio sites, effective radiated power of
radio sites, and other supporting technical information.
§ 322-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-3
1:595
§ 322-4. Installation requirements.
The installation of the public safety radio coverage system shall be in
accordance with the following:
(3) Standby power. The standby power supply shall be capable of
operating the emergency responder radio coverage system for a
duration of not less than 24 hours.
(4) Signal booster requirements. If used, signal boosters shall meet the
following requirements:
(a) All signal booster components shall be contained in a National
Electrical Manufacturer's Association (NEMA) 4 type
waterproof cabinet.
(b) Battery systems used for the emergency power source shall be
contained in a NEMA 4 type waterproof cabinet.
(c) The signal booster system and battery system shall be
electrically supervised and monitored by a supervisory service
or, when approved by the Fire Code Official, shall sound an
audible signal at a constantly attended location.
(d) Equipment shall have FCC certification prior to installation.
(5) Additional frequencies and change of frequencies. The emergency
responder radio coverage system shall be capable of modification
or expansion in the event frequency changes are required by the
FCC or additional frequencies are made available by the FCC.
A. Approval prior to installation. Amplification systems capable of
operating on frequencies licensed to any public safety agency by the
FCC shall not be installed without prior coordination and approval of
the Fire Code Official.
B. Minimum qualifications of personnel.
(1) The minimum qualifications of the system designer and lead
installation personnel shall include both of the following:
(a) A valid FCC-issued general radio operator's license.
(b) Certification of in-building system training issued by a
nationally recognized organization or school or a certificate
issued by the manufacturer of the equipment being installed.
(2) These qualifications shall not be required where demonstration of
adequate skills and experience satisfactory to the Fire Code Official
is provided.
C. Acceptance test procedure. Where an emergency responder radio
coverage system is required, and upon completion of installation, the
building owner shall have the radio system tested to verify that two-way
§ 322-3 EDGEWATER CODE § 322-4
1:596
§ 322-5. Maintenance.
The emergency responder radio coverage system shall be maintained
operational at all times in accordance with the following:
coverage on each floor of the building is not less than 90%. The test
procedure shall be conducted as follows:
(1) Each floor of the building shall be divided into a grid of 20
approximately equal test areas.
(2) The test shall be conducted using a calibrated portable radio of the
latest brand and model used by the agency talking through the
agency's radio communications system.
(3) Failure of not more than two nonadjacent test areas shall not result
in failure of the test.
(4) In the event that three of the test areas fail the test, in order to be
more statistically accurate, the floor shall be permitted to be
divided into 40 equal test areas. Failure of not more than four
nonadjacent test areas shall not result in failure of the test. If the
system fails the forty-area test, the system shall be altered to meet
the 90% coverage requirement.
(5) A test location approximately in the center of each test area shall
be selected for the test, with radio enabled to verify two-way
communications to and from the outside of the building through the
public agency's radio communications system. Once the test
location has been selected, that location shall represent the entire
test area. Failure in the selected test location shall be considered
failure of that test area. Additional test locations shall not be
permitted.
(6) The gain values of all amplifiers shall be measured, and the test
measurement results shall be kept on file with the building owner
so that the measurements can be verified during annual tests. In
the event that the measurement results become lost, the building
owner shall be required to rerun the acceptance test to reestablish
the gain values.
(7) As part of the installation, a spectrum analyzer or other suitable
test equipment shall be utilized to ensure spurious oscillations are
not being generated by the subject signal booster. This test shall be
conducted at the time of installation and subsequent annual
inspections.
D. FCC compliance. The emergency responder radio coverage system
installation and components shall also comply with all applicable
federal regulations, including, but not limited to, FCC 47 CFR Part
90.219.
§ 322-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-5
1:597
§ 322-6. Violations and penalties.
Any persons or entities found to be in violation of these requirements of
this chapter shall, upon certification of said violation by the Borough of
Edgewater Fire Official, be subject to a penalty. Such penalties shall not
exceed a rate of $1,000 per day for failure to abate the violation. If the
violation is not remedied within three months, the certificate of occupancy
for the building in violation may be revoked.
§ 322-7. Payment of fees.
The applicant for a permit under this chapter shall be responsible for all
fees for review and inspection of the radio amplification system incurred by
the Borough's public safety radio engineer and shall be charged the hourly
rate approved by the Borough.
A. Testing and proof of compliance. The emergency responder radio
coverage system shall be inspected and tested annually or where
structural changes occur, including additions or remodels that could
materially change the original field performance tests. Testing shall
consist of the following:
(1) In-building coverage test as described in § 322-4C.
(2) The signal booster shall be tested to verify that the gain is the same
as it was upon initial installation and acceptance.
(3) Backup batteries and power supplies shall be tested under load of a
period of one hour to verify that they will properly operate during
an actual power outage. If, within the one-hour test period, the
battery exhibits symptoms of failure, the test shall be extended for
additional one-hour periods until the integrity of the battery can be
determined.
(4) Other active components shall be checked to verify operation
within the manufacturer's specifications.
(5) At the conclusion of the testing, a report, which shall verify
compliance with this subsection, shall be submitted to the Fire
Code Official.
B. Additional frequencies. The building owner shall modify or expand the
emergency responder radio coverage system at his or her expense in
the event frequency changes are required by the FCC or additional
frequencies are made available by the FCC. Prior approval of a public
safety radio coverage system on previous frequencies does not exempt
this section.
C. Field testing. Agency personnel shall have the right to enter onto the
property at any reasonable time to conduct field testing to verify the
required level of radio coverage.
§ 322-5 EDGEWATER CODE § 322-8
1:598
§ 322-8. Severability.
If any provision or portion of this chapter is held to be unconstitutional,
preempted by federal or state law, or otherwise invalid by any court of
competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions of the chapter shall not be
invalidated and shall remain in full force and effect.
Chapter 326
PUBLIC UTILITY INSTALLATIONS
§ 326-1. Words defined.
As used herein, the term "public utility" shall mean every individual,
copartnership, association, corporation or joint stock company, their
lessees, trustees or receivers appointed by any court whatsoever, their
successors, heirs or assigns, that now or hereafter may own, operate,
manage or control within this state any railroad, street railway, traction
railway, autobus, charter bus operation, special bus operation, canal,
express, subway, pipeline, gas, electric light, heat, power, water, oil, sewer,
solid waste collection, solid waste disposal, telephone or telegraph system,
plant or equipment for public use under privileges granted or hereafter to
be granted by this state or by any political subdivision thereof.
§ 326-2. Replacement of underground pipelines or fixtures to be
installed below surface.
Any public utility which replaces a pipeline, facility or fixture located below
the surface with a new or replacement pipeline, facility or fixture shall be
required to locate the new pipeline, facility or fixture below the surface or
below ground level.
§ 326-3. Appeals.
On any parcel where soil conditions, rock formations, woods or other special
conditions exist and the public utility deems it a hardship to comply with
the provisions of this chapter, the public utility may apply to the Mayor
and Council for a waiver of the requirements of this chapter. In connection
with such appeal, the public utility shall have the burden of proof that
existing conditions preclude the placement of the pipeline, facility or fixture
underground or below the surface. Absent a showing by the public utility
that the pipeline, facility or fixture may not be installed on a portion of the
subject premises entirely underground, the Mayor and Council may grant
a waiver of this requirement subject to such conditions such as location,
buffering and landscaping as may be reasonably imposed.
§ 322-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 326-4
1:599
§ 326-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject
to a fine pursuant to Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Borough
Code.
Chapter 335
RENTAL PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 166.
Land use and development — See Ch. 240.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 314.
Rent control — See Ch. 339.
Heating of buildings — See Ch. 466.
Maintenance of hot water temperature — See
Ch. 523, Art. I.
§ 326-4 EDGEWATER CODE § 326-4
1:600
ARTICLE I
Fuel Oil Emergency Delivery
[Adopted 2-3-1981 by Ord. No. 680-81 (Ch. 154 of the 1975 Code)]
§ 335-1. Designation of officer; duties of officer. [Amended 2-4-1992
by Ord. No. 979-92]
§ 335-2. Procedure for payment. [Amended 2-4-1992 by Ord. No.
979-92]
Any fuel oil dealer or contractor who delivers fuel oil, refires the burner
or makes such other repairs as are necessary to restore proper heating
of any residential property in accordance with § 335-1 of this article may
bill the landlord directly or, in the alternative, the Borough of Edgewater
may issue a voucher to the fuel oil dealer or contractor who delivered the
fuel oil, refired the burner or made such repairs or provided such other
services as necessary to restore proper heating to a residential property.
Upon the issuance of such a voucher for the fuel oil delivered or services
rendered, the voucher shall be paid in the manner provided for the approval
and payment of claims pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:5-17.
§ 335-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-20-2010 by Ord. No.
1439-2010]
Any landlord or his agent whose negligence or failure to act results in
municipal action, as set forth in § 335-1 of this article, shall be liable to
a civil penalty for not more than provided for in Chapter 1, Article II,
General Penalty, for each affected dwelling unit in the residential property.
A. The Mayor and Council hereby designates the Construction Official
and, in his absence, the Borough Clerk of the Borough of Edgewater to
act as agent for a landlord in engaging a fuel oil dealer to deliver fuel oil
at a reasonable price per gallon and to refire the burner to restore the
proper heating of any residential property rented by said landlord;
provided, however, that at least 12 hours have elapsed if the outside air
temperature is between 33° and 55° F. inclusive, or at least four hours
have elapsed if the outside air temperature is 32° F. or less, since the
tenant has lodged a complaint with any municipal officer or agency,
prior to which time a bona fide effort has been made by the tenant or his
representative to notify the landlord of the lack of heat and the landlord
has failed to take appropriate action to restore heat to the premises. As
used herein and hereinafter, "lack of heat" means maintaining less heat
than required by N.J.S.A. 26:3-31.
B. In addition, the Mayor and Council hereby designate the officials
referred to in Subsection A of this section to engage or retain such
other contractors as are necessary to restore the proper heat of any
residential property of a landlord, provided that the time periods and
temperature requirements referred to in Subsection A have been
satisfied, together with the notice requirements detailed therein.
§ 335-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 335-3
1:601
The municipality may recover such penalty in a civil action in summary
proceeding pursuant to the Penalty Enforcement Law (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-1 et
seq.). Any action to collect or enforce any such penalty shall be brought in
the court having jurisdiction over such action, and the amount thereof shall
be paid to the municipality to be used for general municipal purposes.
§ 335-4. Immunity of officials.
The Borough shall not be liable for any damages to any person or property
in enforcing the provisions of this article, except for the gross negligence
or malfeasance of any municipal official, officer or employee, and under no
circumstances shall the Borough be held liable for damages from the lack
of heat in the residential property.
§ 335-5. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to owner-occupied residential
rental properties containing five units or less.
§ 335-6. Construal of provisions.
Whenever the provisions of this article impose a higher standard than that
set forth in any other local ordinances or under the laws of the State of
New Jersey, then the standard as set forth herein shall prevail, but if the
provisions of this article shall impose a lower standard than the higher
standards contained in any such other ordinance or state law, then the
higher standard contained in any other such ordinance or law of the State
of New Jersey shall prevail.
§ 335-3 EDGEWATER CODE § 335-6
1:602
ARTICLE II
Payment of Utility Bills
[Adopted 2-2-1982 by Ord. No. 715-82 (Ch. 233 of the 1975 Code)]
§ 335-7. Authorization of payment; notification of landlord.
§ 335-8. Procedure for payment.
Any utility company continuing to provide service to a multiple dwelling
in accordance with § 335-7 of this article shall be paid by the Borough by
issuing a voucher to the utility company providing the water, electric or
gas service to the multiple dwelling for the amount due on the appropriate
account and the service charge, if any. Said voucher shall be paid in the
manner provided for the approval and payment of claims pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:5-17.
§ 335-9. Violations and penalties.
Any landlord whose negligence or failure to act results in municipal action
as set forth in § 335-7 of this article shall be liable to a fine of not more than
$300 for each affected dwelling unit in the residential property. In addition,
the amount paid by the Borough, together with any incidental expenses
incurred in making such payment, shall be a municipal lien against the real
property upon which such expense was incurred.
§ 335-10. Liability.
The Borough shall not be liable for any damages to any person or property
in enforcing the provisions of this article, and under no circumstances shall
A. The Borough of Edgewater is hereby authorized to pay any water,
electric or gas bill of any landlord where such landlord has permitted
the utility bill to become delinquent and service provided by the utility
has been curtailed or is about to be terminated.
B. In such case where the Borough has been notified by the utility
company that service to a multiple dwelling is about to be terminated
due to the failure of the landlord to make payment thereon, the Borough
may immediately notify the landlord by certified mail that, unless
payment is made within the time prescribed by the utility company
before service is to be terminated, the Borough may avail itself of the
provisions of this article and issue a check to the utility company so as
to continue service to the building.
C. Where utility service has already been curtailed without the Borough
having received notification from the utility company of such
curtailment of service, or if the Borough has been unable to notify the
landlord after having made a bona fide effort to do so, the Borough may
make immediate payment in order to continue utility service without
notification to the landlord.
§ 335-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 335-10
1:603
the Borough be held liable for damages resulting from the lack of water,
electric or gas service to the residential property.
§ 335-11. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to owner-occupied residential
rental properties containing three units or less.
§ 335-12. Higher standards to prevail.
Whenever the provisions of this article impose a higher standard than that
set forth in any other local ordinances or under the laws of the State of
New Jersey, then the standard as set forth herein shall prevail, but if the
provisions of this article shall impose a lower standard than the higher
standards contained in any such other ordinance or state law, then the
higher standard contained in any other such ordinance or law of the State
of New Jersey shall prevail.
§ 335-10 EDGEWATER CODE § 335-12
1:604
ARTICLE III
Hotels and Multiple Dwellings
[Adopted 5-18-1982 by Ord. No. 725-82 (Ch. 162, Art. I of the 1975
Code)]
§ 335-13. Adoption of standards.127
The provisions of the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law, N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et
seq., and the regulations promulgated thereunder entitled "Regulations for
Maintenance of Hotels and Multiple Dwellings," and amendments thereto,
which are set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:10-1 et seq., are enforced in the Borough of
Edgewater as the standards for the maintenance of such structures within
the Borough. Where said rules and regulations conflict with the standards
set forth in the regulations for the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code,
N.J.A.C. 5:23-1 et seq., the higher standard shall prevail.
§ 335-14. Position of Housing Inspector established; duties.
There is hereby established in the Borough of Edgewater the position of
Housing Inspector to enforce the regulations hereinabove set forth within
the Borough. The Housing Inspector shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the advice and consent of the Council and, in addition to the abovedescribed
duties, shall perform such other functions as may be designated
from time to time by the Mayor and Council.
§ 335-15. Prohibited acts; violations and penalties.
A. No person shall:
(1) Obstruct, hinder, delay or interfere with, by force or otherwise, the
Housing Inspector in the exercise or discharge of his powers or
duties.
(2) Prepare, utter or render any false statement, report or document
permitted or required to be prepared, uttered or rendered under
the provisions of the aforesaid regulations.
(3) Render ineffective or inoperative any protective equipment
installed or intended to be installed in any hotel or multiple
dwelling.
(4) Refuse or fail to comply with any lawful ruling, action, order or
notice issued by the Housing Inspector.
(5) Violate or cause to be violated any of the provisions of the aforesaid
regulations.
B. Violations of the provisions of Subsection A of this section shall be
punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty. Where
any violation of Subsection A of this section is of a continuing nature,
127. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 335-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 335-15
1:605
§ 335-16. Salary of Housing Inspector.
The Housing Inspector shall receive an annual salary as set forth in the
current annual Salary Ordinance of the Borough of Edgewater.129
each day during which such continuing violation remains unabated
after the date fixed by the Housing Inspector in any order or notice
for the correction or termination of such continuing violation shall
constitute an additional, separate and distinct violation.128
C. For the purposes of this section, any person shall be deemed to have
violated or to have caused to be violated any provision of Subsection A
of this section whenever any officer, agent or employee thereof, under
the control of and with the knowledge of said person, shall have
violated or caused to be violated any of the provisions of Subsection A of
this section.
128. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
129. Editor's Note: See Ch. 96, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 335-15 EDGEWATER CODE § 335-16
1:606
ARTICLE IV
Illegal Apartments
[Adopted 2-7-1984 by Ord. No. 775-84 (Ch. 162, Art. II of the 1975
Code)]
§ 335-17. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APARTMENT/UNIT — That portion of a dwelling rented or offered for rent
for living and dwelling purposes, together with all privileges, services,
furnishings, furniture, equipment, facilities and improvements connected
with the use or occupancy of such portion of the property.
ILLEGAL APARTMENT/UNIT — Any one of the following shall constitute an
illegal apartment or unit:
OWNER — The holder or holders of the title to the premises in fee simple
or having charge, care or control of the premises, as owner or agent of the
owner or as executor, administrator, trustee, receiver or guardian of the
estate or as mortgagee in possession, regardless of how such possession
was obtained.
TENANT — Any person residing with the consent of the owner in an
apartment or unit of housing space.
§ 335-18. Reimbursement of relocation expenses; additional
penalty. [Amended 12-20-1993 by Ord. No. 1019-93130]
An apartment or unit for which no certificate of occupancy has been
issued.
A.
An apartment or unit which would exceed the number of units
permitted under the Zoning Ordinance or any approvals granted by a
land use agency of the Borough.
B.
An apartment or unit which fails to meet the requirements of any
regulation affecting the health, safety and welfare of the general public.
C.
An apartment or unit which fails to satisfy the requirements of the
Multiple Dwelling Law or any other statute, ordinance or regulation
governing multiple dwellings.
D.
An apartment or unit which the owner has permitted occupancy thereof
without obtaining therefor required plumbing, electrical and building
permits.
E.
Any other apartment or unit deemed by an official of a government
agency or by judicial decree to be in violation of any state, county or
municipal regulation.
F.
130. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 335-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 335-18
1:607
§ 335-19. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-20-1993 by Ord.
No. 1019-93; 9-20-2010 by Ord. No. 1439-2010]
The failure of an owner to comply with the provisions of this article shall
subject the landlord to penalties as provided in Chapter 1, Article II,
General Penalty.
A. Any tenant who receives a notice of eviction pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2A:18-61.2 that results from zoning or code enforcement activity for an
illegal occupancy, defined as set forth in paragraph 3 of subsection g. of
N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.1, shall be considered a displaced person and shall be
entitled to relocation assistance in an amount equal to six times the
monthly rent paid by the displaced person. The owner-landlord of the
structure shall be liable for the payment of relocation assistance
pursuant to this section.
B. The owner shall also be required to return to the tenant the security
deposit, together with interest thereon, plus any rental payment
required to be apportioned, upon notification by the Housing Inspector
or such other official that the illegal apartment or unit must be vacated.
§ 335-18 EDGEWATER CODE § 335-19
1:608
ARTICLE V
Short-Term Rental of Property
[Adopted 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 1546-2017]
§ 335-20. Findings.
The Mayor and Council hereby find and adopt, as if set forth more fully
herein, the fact assertions of the "Whereas" clauses of this article as their
findings of fact.131
§ 335-21. Prohibited uses.
§ 335-22. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADVERTISE or ADVERTISING — Any form of solicitation, promotion, and
communication for marketing, used to solicit, encourage, persuade, or
manipulate viewers, readers, or listeners into contracting for goods and/
or services in violation of this article, as same may be viewed through
various media, including, but not limited to, newspapers, magazines, flyers,
handbills, pamphlets, commercials, radio, direct mail, internet websites,
or text or other electronic messages, for the purpose of establishing
occupancies or uses of rental property, for consideration, which are
prohibited by this article.
CONSIDERATION — Soliciting, charging, demanding, receiving or
accepting any legally recognized form of consideration, including a promise
or benefit, a quid pro quo, rent, fees, other form of payment, or thing of
value.
DWELLING UNIT — Any structure, or portion thereof, whether furnished or
unfurnished, which is occupied in whole or in part, or intended, arranged,
or designed to be occupied, for sleeping, dwelling, cooking, gathering and/
or entertaining, as a residential occupancy, by one or more persons. This
A. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the Borough
Code, it shall be unlawful for an owner, lessor, subessor, any other
person(s) or entity(ies) with possessory or use right(s) in a dwelling
unit, their principals, partners or shareholders, or their agents,
employees, representatives and other person(s) or entity(ies), acting in
concert or a combination thereof, to receive or obtain actual or
anticipated consideration for soliciting, advertising, offering and/or
permitting, allowing or failing to discontinue the use or occupancy of
any dwelling unit, as defined herein, for a period of 30 days or less.
B. Nothing in this article will prevent formation of an otherwise lawful
occupancy of a dwelling unit for a rental period of more than 30 days.
131. Editor's Note: The "Whereas" clauses are included in Ord. No. 1546-2017, on file in the
Borough offices.
§ 335-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 335-22
1:609
definition includes an apartment, condominium, building, cooperative,
converted space, or portions thereof, that is offered for use, made available
for use, or is used for accommodations, lodging, cooking, sleeping,
gathering and/or entertaining of occupants and/or guest(s) for
consideration, for a period of 30 days or less.
HOUSEKEEPING UNIT — Constitutes a family-type situation, involving
one or more persons living together that exhibit the kind of stability,
permanency and functional lifestyle equivalent to that of a traditional family
unit, as further described in the applicable reported and unreported
decisions of the New Jersey Superior Court.
OCCUPANT — Any individual using, inhabiting, living, gathering,
entertaining, being entertained as a guest, or sleeping in a dwelling unit, or
portion thereof, or having other permission or possessory right(s) within a
dwelling unit.
OWNER — Any person(s) or entity(ies), association, limited liability
company, corporation, or partnership, or any combination, who legally uses,
possesses, owns, leases, subleases or licenses (including an operator,
principal, shareholder, director, agent or employee, individually or
collectively) or that has charge, care, control, or participates in the
expenses and/or profit of a dwelling unit pursuant to a written or unwritten
agreement, rental, lease, license, use, occupancy agreement or any other
agreement.
PERSON — An individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership,
limited liability company, association, entity, and any person(s) and/or
entity(ies) acting in concert or any combination thereof.
RESIDENTIAL OCCUPANCY — The use of a dwelling unit by an occupant(s).
§ 335-23. Permitted uses.
The residential occupancy of an otherwise lawful and lawfully occupied
dwelling unit for a period of 30 days or less by any person who is a member
of the housekeeping unit of the owner, without consideration, such as house
guests, is permitted.
§ 335-24. Advertising.
It shall be unlawful to advertise, solicit or promote by any means actions in
violation of this article.
§ 335-25. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Building Code
Official, Fire Official, Health Department, or other subcode or code
official, as their jurisdiction may arise, including legal counsel for the
Borough or other persons designated by the Borough Council to issue
municipal civil infractions directing alleged violators of this article to
appear in court or file civil complaints.
§ 335-22 EDGEWATER CODE § 335-25
1:610
§ 335-26. Severability.
If any section, provisions, or clause of this article or the application thereof
to any person or circumstance is judicially held invalid, a reviewing court
may "blue pencil" the article to correct such invalidity and carry out the
intent of this article. Such invalidity shall not affect any remaining portions
or application of this article which can be given effect without the invalid
portion or application.
§ 335-27. Effect on other provisions.
This article shall supersede and replace any other provisions of the Code
of the Borough of Edgewater, now or later enacted, which have or may be
construed to have differing or contrary terms or conditions relating to the
subject of this article. This article is not intended to alter the current or
later enacted amendments to the Borough's Zoning Code.
B. A violation of this article is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, a
nuisance per se, and is hereby further found and declared to be
offensive to the public health, safety and welfare.
C. Any person found to have violated any provision of this article, without
regard to intent or knowledge, shall be liable for the maximum civil
penalty, upon adjudicated violation or admission, of a fine not exceeding
$1,250. Each day of such violation shall be a new and separate violation
of this article.
D. The penalty imposed herein shall be in addition to any and all other
remedies that may accrue under any other law, including, but not
limited to, eviction proceedings and/or injunction, reasonable
attorneys' fees or other fees and costs, in the Borough's Municipal
Court or the Superior Court of New Jersey in the vicinage of Bergen
County, or in such other court or tribunal of competent jurisdiction, by
either summary disposition or by zoning or construction code municipal
proceeding.
§ 335-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 335-27
1:611
Chapter 339
RENT CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dangerous buildings — See Ch. 147.
Certificates of substantial compliance — See
Ch. 157, Art. III.
Heating of buildings — See Ch. 466.
Maintenance of hot water temperature
(BOH) — See Ch. 523, Art. I.
§ 335-27 EDGEWATER CODE § 335-27
1:612
ARTICLE I
Substandard Dwellings
[Adopted 12-20-1966 by Ord. No. 471; readopted 8-1-1967 by Ord.
No. 476 (Ch. 203, Art. I of the 1975 Code)]
§ 339-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HOUSING SPACE — That portion of a multiple dwelling rented or offered
for rent for living or dwelling purposes in which cooking equipment is
supplied, and includes all privileges, services, furnishings, furniture,
equipment, facilities and improvements connected with the use or
occupancy of such portion of the property. The term shall not mean or
include condominium or cooperative units unless the landlord owns more
than three units in the same building, public housing or dwelling space in
any hotel, motel or established guesthouse.[Amended 6-16-1981 by Ord.
No. 691-81]
MULTIPLE DWELLING — Includes any building or structure and land
appurtenant thereto containing three or more apartments or rented or
offered for rent to three or more tenants or family units.
OWNER — The holder or holders of the title in fee simple.
PARTIES IN INTEREST — All individuals, associations or corporations who
have interests of record in a multiple dwelling and who are in actual
possession thereof, and any person authorized to receive rents payable for
housing space in a multiple dwelling.
PUBLIC OFFICER — The Supervisor of Multiple Dwellings of the Borough
of Edgewater, hereinafter "Supervisor."[Amended 9-3-1975 by Ord. No.
581-75]
SUBSTANDARD MULTIPLE DWELLING — Any multiple dwelling
determined to be substandard by the Supervisor.
§ 339-2. Supervisor: powers; appointment; term of office. [Amended
9-3-1975 by Ord. No. 581-75]
The Supervisor is hereby authorized to exercise the powers prescribed by
this article. Said Supervisor shall be appointed at a public meeting by the
Mayor, with the consent of a majority of the Councilmen.
§ 339-3. Legislative finding.
The health and safety of residents of the Borough of Edgewater are
impaired and threatened by the existence of substandard multiple dwellings
within the Borough.
§ 339-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 339-4
1:613
§ 339-4. Substandard multiple dwellings: complaint procedure;
hearing.
Whenever it appears by preliminary investigation that a multiple dwelling
is substandard, the Supervisor shall cause a complaint to be served upon
the owner of and parties in interest in such multiple dwelling, stating the
reasons why said multiple dwelling is deemed to be substandard and setting
a time and place for hearing before said Supervisor. The owners and parties
in interest shall have the right to file an answer and to appear and give
testimony. The rules of evidence shall not be controlling in hearings before
the Supervisor.
§ 339-5. Findings of hearing; order and time limit for repairs.
If, after notice and hearing, the Supervisor determines that the multiple
dwelling under consideration is substandard, he shall state his findings
in writing and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner or
other person entitled to receive rents an order requiring that such repairs,
alterations or improvements necessary to bring such property up to
minimum standards be made within a reasonable time, the date of the
expiration of said reasonable time to be set forth in the said order.
§ 339-6. Failure to comply shall be cause for imposing rent control.
Failure to complete such repairs, alterations or improvements within the
time set by the Supervisor shall be cause to impose rent control on the
substandard multiple dwelling.
§ 339-7. Basis for establishing maximum rents; determination of
net operating income.
A. In establishing maximum rents which may be charged for housing
space in a multiple dwelling subject to rent control, the permissible
rents shall be sufficient to provide the owner or other person entitled to
receive said rents with a fair net operating income from the multiple
dwelling. The net operating income shall not be considered less than
fair if it is 20% or more of the annual income in the case of a multiple
dwelling containing less than five dwelling units or if 15% or more in
the case of a multiple dwelling containing five or more dwelling units.
B. In determining the fair net operating income, the Supervisor shall
consider the following items of expense: heating fuel, utilities, payroll,
janitorial materials, real estate taxes, insurance, interior painting and
decorating, depreciation and repairs and replacements and additions to
furniture and furnishings, which expenses shall be deducted from the
annual income derived from the multiple dwellings. All items of
expenses and the amount of annual income shall be certified by the
owner or other person entitled to receive said rents on forms provided
by the Supervisor.
§ 339-4 EDGEWATER CODE § 339-8
1:614
§ 339-8. Imposition of rent control at expiration of lease;
nonapplicability to existing leases. [Amended 9-3-1975 by Ord. No.
581-75]
The imposition of rent control on any substandard multiple dwelling shall
not impair any leases existing at the time of the adoption of this article, but
shall take effect at the expiration of the term of any such lease and shall
remain in effect thereafter so long as the multiple dwelling is subject to rent
control.
§ 339-9. Restrictions and rights of owner regarding rents.
§ 339-10. Lifting of rent controls.
Whenever the Supervisor finds that a multiple dwelling subject to rent
control is no longer substandard, he shall so inform the governing body and
rent control on said multiple dwelling shall be removed.
§ 339-11. Supervisor appointed receiver ex officio in case of
noncompliance.
In the event that the owner of the substandard multiple dwelling fails to
comply with an order for repair, alteration or improvement, after notice and
reasonable opportunity to do so and where such failure to comply results
in the continuation of the condition or conditions harmful to the health and
safety of the occupants of the multiple dwelling or to the general public, the
Supervisor may, by and with the approval of the Mayor and Council, bring
an action in the Superior Court to be appointed receiver ex officio of the
rents and income from such property and expend the same for the purpose
of making such repairs, alterations or improvements as are necessary to
correct said harmful condition or conditions.
§ 339-12. Rents and income to be available for costs and expenses
caused by violation. [Amended 9-3-1975 by Ord. No. 581-75]
Said rents and income so collected by the said receiver shall also be
available for the payment of such costs and expenses of the receivership
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to demand or receive any rent in
excess of the maximum rent established for housing space in multiple
dwellings subject to rent control or to demand possession of the space
or evict a tenant for refusal to pay rent in excess of the established
maximum rent.
B. The owner or other person entitled to receive said rents shall not be
prevented, however, from exercising his rights to obtain possession of
housing space from a tenant as a result of the tenant's violation of law
or contract, and the owner or other person entitled to receive said rents
shall be provided reasonable grounds to obtain possession of premises
for his own personal use and occupancy or to demolish the multiple
dwelling.
§ 339-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 339-12
1:615
as may be adjudged by the court, and for the payment to the municipality
of any fines or permits which may have been imposed on the owner for
violations of this article and which have not been paid by the person liable
therefor.
§ 339-13. Appointment of mortgagee by Supervisor; dereliction by
mortgagee.
§ 339-14. Registration of owners of multiple dwellings.
Every owner and manager of every multiple dwelling in the Borough of
Edgewater shall register his name and address with the Borough Clerk
on forms prescribed by and furnished by said Borough Clerk. Every such
registration shall include the name and address of the owners and the
name and address of an agent in charge of the premises residing in the
municipality.
§ 339-15. Standards for substandard dwellings.
The standards which shall govern the Supervisor determining whether a
multiple dwelling is substandard shall be those minimum standards which
A. Upon his appointment, the Supervisor, acting as receiver, by and with
the approval of the Mayor and Council, in all cases where the real
property in question is encumbered by a first mortgage, shall appoint
such first mortgagee, if such mortgagee is a proper person and is
willing to accept such appointment, as the receiver's agent to collect
the rents and income from such rental property and manage the same;
and in all other cases the receiver, by and with the approval of the
Mayor and Council, may designate the person in charge of management
of such real property or some other competent person as the receiver's
agent to collect the rents and income from such real property and
manage the same. The said mortgagee or other person shall account
promptly to the receiver for the rents and income so collected.
B. If the mortgages or other persons so designated are derelict in
collecting or accounting for such rents and income or in the
management of such real property, the receiver shall apply to the court
for the removal of such designated mortgages or other persons, upon
notice in writing to them, and the court upon removing such designated
mortgagee or other persons, in its discretion, may designate another
person to collect the rents and income from such real property and
manage the same and account to the receiver for the rents and income
of such real property as aforesaid. In any such receivership no fees shall
be allowed the receiver or his counsel for action as such receiver or
counsel. Except as otherwise provided herein, the procedure in respect
to any such receivership shall be as in the case of receiverships to
secure the payment of delinquent taxes, penalties, interest, costs and
expenses wherein a collector of taxes of the municipality or other
officer of the municipality is such receiver.
§ 339-12 EDGEWATER CODE § 339-15
1:616
are set forth in the State Housing Code promulgated by the Department of
Conservation and Economic Development, Bureau of Housing, State of New
Jersey, filed on July 25, 1966, in the Office of the Secretary of State of the
State of New Jersey, and any amendments or additions thereto which may
be promulgated from time to time by said Department of Conservation and
Economic Development, Bureau of Housing.
§ 339-16. Interpretation of provisions.
Nothing herein shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of any
department of the Borough of Edgewater to enforce any provisions of its
laws or regulations, nor to prevent or punish violations thereof. Powers
conferred shall be in addition and supplemental to the powers conferred
hereby by the Borough of Edgewater or any law of the State of New Jersey
or of the United States.
§ 339-17. Violations and penalties.132
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
132. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 339-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 339-17
1:617

ARTICLE II
Rent Stabilization
[Adopted 6-19-1973 by Ord. No. 544-73; amended in its entirety
6-17-1982 by Ord. No. 726-82 (Ch. 203, Art. II of the 1975 Code)]
§ 339-18. Definitions. [Amended 4-19-1983 by Ord. No. 744-83]
As used in this article, the following words shall have the meanings
indicated:
COOPERATIVE — A housing corporation or association which entitles the
holder of a share of membership interest thereof to possess and/or occupy
for dwelling purposes a house, apartment or other structure owned or
leased by said corporation or association.[Added 8-9-1983 by Ord. No.
755-83]
DWELLING — Any building or structure rented or offered for rent for
residential use to one or more tenants or family units. Exempt from this
article are motels, hotels and similar-type buildings, floor space used for
commercial purposes, two-housing units, owner-occupied three-housing
units and condominium and cooperative units, unless the landlord owns
three or more units in the same building. However, included herein shall
be any non-owner-occupied building or structure rented or offered for rent
where there is a decrease in occupancy in the number of units to less than
three units resulting from the Borough's enforcement of any provision of
the Zoning Ordinance133 or of any approval granted by a land use agency of
the Borough of Edgewater and non-owner-occupied three-or-more-housing
units or four-or-more-housing units, if owner occupied, which are located on
the same tax lot and owned by the same person, firm, corporation or other
entity or group of persons.[Amended 4-3-1984 by Ord. No. 779-84]
HOUSING SPACE/UNIT — That portion of a dwelling rented or offered for
rent for living and dwelling purposes, together with all privileges, services,
furnishings, furniture, equipment, facilities and improvements connected
with the use or occupancy of such portion of the property.[Amended
4-3-1984 by Ord. No. 779-84]
PERIODIC TENANT — Any person(s) lawfully residing in a unit of housing
space under an oral lease of any duration.[Amended 4-3-1984 by Ord.
No. 779-84]
§ 339-19. Establishment; membership; appointment; terms.
A. There is hereby created a Rent Control Board within the Borough of
Edgewater. The Board shall consist of five members, and two alternate
members, who shall be called upon to serve in the event of the absence
or infirmity or disqualification of any of the five regular members. Three
members of the Board shall be required for a quorum in order that the
Board may conduct its business.
133. Editor's Note: See Ch. 240, Land Use and Development.
§ 339-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 339-19
1:619
§ 339-20. Powers and duties of Board.
The Rent Control Board is hereby granted and shall have and exercise,
in addition to other powers herein granted, all the powers necessary and
appropriate to carry out and execute the purposes of this article, including
but not limited to the following:
§ 339-21. Establishment of rent; increases.
B. The members and alternates of the Board shall be appointed by the
Mayor, with the consent of the Council, for three-year terms as
successive vacancies occur. All present members and alternates shall
continue to serve the terms to which they were previously appointed.
A. To issue and promulgate such rules and regulations as it deems
necessary to implement the purposes of this article, which rules and
regulations shall have the force of law until revised, repealed or
amended from time to time by the Board in the exercise of its
discretion, provided that such rules are filed with the Borough Clerk.
B. To supply information and assistance to landlords and tenants to help
them comply with the provisions of this article.
C. To hold hearings and adjudicate applications from landlords for
additional rental as hereinafter provided.
D. To hold hearings and adjudicate applications from tenants for reduced
rental as hereinafter provided. Said Board shall give both landlord and
tenant reasonable opportunity to be heard before making any
determination.
E. The Rent Control Board shall further have the power to hire legal
counsel, secretarial and clerical help, expert witnesses and such other
personnel as may be necessary, from time to time, in order to effectively
perform all of the duties for which the Rent Control Board was created.
F. To authorize the Secretary of the Rent Control Board to issue
subpoenas requiring the attendance of witnesses who, or the
production of documents which, the Board may deem necessary in
order to effectuate the purposes of this article.
A. Establishment of rents between a landlord and a tenant to whom this
act is applicable shall hereafter be determined by the provisions of this
article.
B. Except as otherwise provided in § 339-22, a landlord may increase the
rental by a maximum of 5% during each twelve-month period where the
landlord is required to furnish heat and by a maximum of 3 1/2% during
a twelve-month period where the landlord is not required to furnish
heat. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a landlord shall not increase the
monthly rental during each twelve-month period; provided, however,
that a landlord shall be entitled to a minimum monthly rental increase
§ 339-19 EDGEWATER CODE § 339-21
1:620
§ 339-22. Rent increases for qualified senior citizens and disabled
persons. [Added 12-20-1988 by Ord. No. 909-88]
during each twelve-month period as follows: [Amended 12-20-1988
by Ord. No. 909-88]
(1) The sum of $15 for the period commencing on the first expiration of
a tenant's lease, after such adoption of this article, and terminating
on the first anniversary date of such lease.
(2) The sum of $17 for the period commencing on the first anniversary
date of a tenant's lease and terminating on the second anniversary
date.
(3) The sum of $20 for the period commencing on the second
anniversary date of a tenant's lease and each anniversary date
thereafter.
C. No landlord shall increase the rental of any housing space more than
once in any twelve-month period unless permitted by this article. Any
rental increases in excess of that authorized by the provisions of this
article shall be void.
D. Should a landlord fail to raise rent of any tenant upon the anniversary
date of the beginning of a tenancy, the landlord shall be permitted to
increase the rent in any subsequent month and shall thereafter have the
right to increase rent upon the new anniversary date the following year.
[Amended 7-13-1982 by Ord. No. 728-82]
E. Any landlord seeking an increase in rent up to the maximum allowable
percentage shall notify the tenant in writing, by certified mail, return
receipt requested, or by personal service of the increase and the
calculations involved in computing the increase, including the previous
rent and its effective date, the proposed rent and its effective date, the
allowable percentage increase and the allowable rental increase in
dollars and cents.
F. The landlord shall notify the tenant of the proposed rental increase at
least 30 days prior to the expiration of the lease if such an expiration
date is fixed therein. If the expiration date is not fixed therein, then the
aforesaid notification shall be given according to the law governing the
giving of notices to quit and demand for possession for the specific
rental period. The contents of this notification shall conform to the
requirements herein set forth for leases of one year or greater.
G. The base rent shall be deemed to be the lawful rent for the housing
space which was in effect on May 1, 1973, and further provided that
rent for the housing space shall not exceed base rent plus any rent
increase authorized by the provisions of this article.
§ 339-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 339-22
1:621
§ 339-23. Hardship increase.
A. Annual rent increases for qualified senior citizens and disabled persons
shall not exceed 3 1/2%, irrespective of whether the landlord furnishes
heat for the leased unit or apartment.
B. Qualification for eligibility for senior citizens and disabled persons
status:
(1) In determining whether a person qualifies as a senior citizen or
disabled person under this section, such person shall be required to
satisfy the criteria as set forth in the Senior Citizens and Disabled
Persons Protective Tenancy Act, N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.22 et seq.
(2) All persons seeking to qualify as senior citizens or disabled persons
shall complete application forms provided by the Rent Control
Board.
(3) The determination as to eligibility shall be made by the Rent
Control Board within 60 days after the receipt of a complete
application.
(4) Hearings by the Rent Control Board on applications for eligibility
shall be held in closed session with only the affected landlord and
tenant and their agents in attendance. All data utilized at such
hearing shall be held in strict confidence at the request of the
tenant.
(5) Once a tenant obtains initial eligibility, said tenant must certify at
the expiration of every two years thereafter as to his/her continued
eligibility. Such certification forms shall be provided by the Rent
Control Board.
(6) Said certification must be completed by an eligible tenant not less
than three months prior to lease-renew or annual rent increase.
(7) For good cause shown, a landlord may apply to the Rent Control
Board for a hearing on the question of a tenant's eligibility at the
anniversary date of such tenant's eligibility after the initial twoyear
period of eligibility.
A. A landlord who is unable to meet his mortgage payments, expenses and
maintenance costs or is not making a fair return on investment shall be
entitled to apply for a hardship increase to the Rent Control Board. The
Rent Control Board shall supply forms for this purpose and require the
landlord to notify the tenants of the pendency of this hardship increase
application. Prior to any determination, the landlord must give notice to
the tenants by certified mail, return receipt requested, or personal
service, and by posting in the lobby of each affected building or, if no
lobby, in a conspicuous place or places in and about the premises, a
notice of said hardship increase request, setting forth thereon the basis
for said request. Said notice must be at least 20 days prior to the
§ 339-22 EDGEWATER CODE § 339-23
1:622
proposed hearing date. The affected tenants shall have a right to
challenge the basis or facts for the hardship increase on the hearing
date thereof. The Rent Control Board shall have the right, after notice
or hearing, to grant or deny a hardship increase without regard to the
rental restrictions set forth in this article or its amendments.
B. A landlord may increase the rental by a maximum of 5% during each
twelve-month period, where the landlord is required to furnish heat,
and by a maximum of 3 1/2% during a twelve-month period, where the
landlord is not required to furnish heat. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
a landlord shall not increase the monthly rental during each twelvemonth
period by more than $40 over the rental paid during the prior
twelve-month period; provided, however, that a landlord shall be
entitled to minimum monthly rental increase during each twelve-month
period, as follows: [Amended 4-21-1987 by Ord. No. 857A-87]
(1) The sum of $15 for the period commencing on the first expiration of
a tenant's lease, after such adoption of this article, and terminating
on the first anniversary date of such lease.
(2) The sum of $17 for the period commencing on the first anniversary
date of a tenant's lease and terminating on the second anniversary
date.
(3) The sum of $20 for the period commencing on the second
anniversary date of a tenant's lease and each anniversary date
thereafter.
C. No hardship rental increase shall be granted unless the landlord
produces all the documentary evidence which may be requested by the
Board to make the determination herein required, including but not
limited to the copies of all deeds, mortgages, notes or bonds,
appraisals, income and expense statements, rent rolls (at the time of
purchase or financing or refinancing of the mortgage and at the time of
appeal) and all bills, invoices, canceled checks and federal and status
tax returns.
D. No hardship rental increase granted pursuant to this article shall apply
to a housing unit which has had a rental increase during the previous 12
months, due to the application of vacancy decontrol.
E. In the event that the landlord applies for a hardship rental increase, and
the time of the application coincides with the anniversary date upon
which the landlord would be permitted to increase the rent under
§ 339-21 of this article, then the landlord shall be permitted to increase
the rent to the extent of the maximum allowable percentage during the
pendency of such application. Any determination of the Board of a
hardship increase shall be modified by any rental increase applied by
the landlord.
F. The cost or expense for maintenance and/or improvements of the
subject premises which exceeds the total cost of $3,000, requested to
§ 339-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 339-23
1:623
§ 339-24. Capital improvements surcharge. [Amended 9-3-1986 by
Ord. No. 847-88]
§ 339-25. Payment of taxes; certification of compliance with certain
standards.
be considered by the Board as a hardship increase and/or capital
improvement surcharge, shall have three written estimates as to the
cost or expense of said item, in order for the Board to determine its
reasonableness. [Added 9-3-1986 by Ord. No. 847-86]
G. Any hardship rental increase granted pursuant to this section shall be
apportioned over a thirty-six-month period. The amount so apportioned
shall not be considered as base rent in the calculation of annual rental
increases but shall be considered as a separate charge unrelated to
base rent. [Added 4-21-1987 by Ord. No. 861-87]
A. A landlord may seek a surcharge for capital improvements made by him
in the rental unit or attributable to the rental unit.
B. As used herein and hereinafter, "capital improvement" shall mean a
substantial change in the housing accommodations such as would
materially increase the rental value of the subject premises in a normal
market, i.e., an added benefit to the subject premises and the tenant's
enjoyment thereof.
C. The landlord must notify each tenant by certified mail, return receipt
requested, or personal service and by posting in a conspicuous place in
the lobby of the building or, if there is no lobby, then in a conspicuous
location, at least 20 days prior to the hearing, of the total cost of the
completed capital improvement, the number of years of useful life of the
improvement, the average costs of the improvement, the total number
of square feet of the dwelling or apartment complex, the total square
feet occupied by the tenant and the capital improvement surcharge he
is seeking from each, so as to indicate the costs for the improvement
per square foot per month, the total for each tenant per month and the
number of years of duration of the surcharge.
D. The landlord seeking a capital improvement surcharge shall appeal for
said surcharge to the Rent Control Board, which shall determine if said
improvement is a major improvement and, if so, may permit such
increase to take place. If said increase is granted, it shall not be
considered rental and shall not be considered part of the base rent for
computing rent increases.
E. The amount of monthly increase allocated to a capital improvement
surcharge which a landlord may charge, if the landlord's application is
granted by the Rent Control Board, shall be determined by the Board as
to said improvement's life cycle.
§ 339-23 EDGEWATER CODE § 339-25
1:624
§ 339-26. Delivery of notices.
All required notices herein mentioned may, at the option of the landlord, be
either hand-delivered and personally served by the landlord or his agents
and employees, or delivered by certified mail, return receipt requested. In
any event, the burden of proof of actual delivery shall be on the landlord.
§ 339-27. Vacancy decontrol.
A. Every petition filed with the Rent Control Board of the Borough of
Edgewater seeking a hardship increase or a capital improvement
surcharge shall be accompanied by the tax bill for the property, to
demonstrate if taxes or assessments for local improvements are due or
delinquent on the property which is the subject of such petition. If it is
shown that taxes or assessments are delinquent on said property, any
rental increase in excess of the maximum allowable percentage, or any
capital improvement surcharge granted by said Board, shall be
conditioned upon either the prompt payment of such taxes or
assessments or the making of adequate provision for the payment
thereof in such manner that the municipality will be adequately
protected.
B. Every petition shall contain a certification by the Building Code Official
that there are no Housing or Health Code violations more than 60 days
old. An application for hardship rental increase or capital improvement
surcharge will not be heard by the Rent Control Board until there has
been material compliance with the Housing and Health Codes, which
shall mean that 100% of those prior existing violations shall have been
remedied. The Board may condition any rental increase above the
maximum allowable percentage of surcharge on the receipt of
certifications from the local Building Code Official or Health Officer that
all of the violations have been corrected. As used herein, the term
"violations" shall mean any and all defects which affect the habitability
of the subject premises and the tenant's right to a safe, sanitary, decent
place to reside. [Amended 9-3-1986 by Ord. No. 847-86]
A. Notwithstanding any limitations upon permissible rent increases under
any other provision of this article, upon the voluntary, uncoerced
vacation of any apartment, the landlord shall have the right to fix the
rent for such vacated apartment at such a sum as he deems
appropriate.
B. Filing of statement; hearing.
(1) In order for a landlord to qualify for the vacancy decontrol rent
increase, the landlord shall first be required to file with the Rent
Control Board a written statement, signed by the vacating tenant,
certifying to the Board that the landlord has not, in any way,
harassed or pressured the tenant into vacating the housing space
unit and that the vacation of such unit was a voluntary act on the
part of the tenant. Such noncoercion certification shall not be
§ 339-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 339-27
1:625
§ 339-28. Conversion to condominiums or cooperative units.
required in order for the landlord to qualify for the vacancy
decontrol increase if the increase does not exceed the total of all
permissible increases authorized by any other provisions of this
article, the tenant has moved from the unit without notice to the
landlord, the unit has been vacated pursuant to a court-ordered
eviction, unless the court-ordered eviction shall have been the
result of a dispute brought about by changes in the terms of a
lease, or the tenant has refused to sign such certification, and upon
appeal by the landlord, the Rent Control Board has found that such
refusal was unwarranted, and that there was, in fact, no coercion
exerted by the landlord upon the vacating tenant.
(2) A hearing pursuant to Subsection B(1) above shall be held before
the Rent Control Board upon at least seven days' notice to the
public and the vacating tenant. Pending the result of the hearing,
the landlord may increase the rent as permitted by § 339-27A.
C. The decontrol provisions of this section shall only apply to dwelling
units which are physically vacated subsequent to the effective date of
this section.
D. Upon vacation of any apartment hereafter, the landlord shall file a
statement with the Rent Control Board, certifying to the Board the
apartment and building numbers of such dwelling unit, the rent paid by
the vacating tenant, the maximum rent increase which would be
permissible under the other provisions of this chapter, the number of
days such apartment remains vacant, the rent agreed to by the new
tenant for such apartment, and that the vacation of such apartment was
the voluntary act of the vacating tenant and that such vacation was not
the result of landlord harassment or pressure upon such vacating
tenant.
A. In the event that the owner of a multiple dwelling subject to rent control
converts the building from the rental market to a condominium or a
cooperative, a rental apartment unit within that multiple dwelling shall
remain under rent control if the tenant occupying that apartment began
his or her initial tenancy before the master deed or agreement
establishing the cooperative was recorded. That rental apartment shall
continue to be subject to rent control so long as the same tenant
remains in possession for the period of time permitted by state law,
regardless of whether the purchaser of that apartment unit owns less
than three condominium or cooperative units in the same multiple
dwelling.
B. Housing space occupied by a tenant whose initial tenancy began after
the master deed or agreement establishing the cooperative was
recorded shall remain subject to rent control only until such time that
the apartment unit is sold to an owner of less than three condominium
or cooperative units. Thereafter, the housing space owned by an owner
§ 339-27 EDGEWATER CODE § 339-28
1:626
§ 339-29. Designation of administrative agency. [Added 6-5-1984 by
Ord. No. 784-84]
The Rent Control Board of the Borough of Edgewater is hereby established
as the administrative agency for the purpose of determining the eligibility of
senior citizens and disabled tenants for protected tenancy status, pursuant
to the Senior Citizens and Disabled Protected Tenancy Act, N.J.S.A.
2A:18-61.22 et seq.
§ 339-30. Registration by persons owning certain number of
cooperative units. [Added 8-9-1983 by Ord. No. 755-83]
Any person, firm, corporation or other entity, or group of persons holding
shares to three or more dwelling units in a cooperative shall register his
or her name and address with the Rent Control Board on forms prescribed
by and furnished by said agency. Every such registration shall include
the name and address of the owners, the building wherein such units are
situated, a description of the units owned and the amount of rental charged
for each dwelling unit.
§ 339-31. Fees. [Amended 7-13-1982 by Ord. No. 728-1982;
6-5-1984 by Ord. No. 784-84]
of less than three condominium or cooperative units shall not be subject
to rent control.
C. In the event that any multiple dwelling subject to the Rent Control
Ordinance is converted, changed or in any manner modified,
whereupon said multiple dwelling is no longer subject to this article,
then, in that event, any and all rental units thereinafter existing shall
remain subject to rent control if the tenant(s) so occupying that rental
unit began his or her tenancy prior to the conversion, change or
modification of the said multiple dwelling, and that said rental unit shall
continue to be subject to rent control so long as the said tenant remains
in possession thereof pursuant to state law. No existing tenancy subject
to this article shall lose its rights as provided herein as a result of a
conversion, change or modification of a multiple dwelling thereafter
exempt by this article pursuant to § 339-18. [Added 4-3-1984 by Ord.
No. 780-84]
A. The following fees shall apply to all applications or other proceedings of
the Rent Control Board:
(1) Tenant request for filing with or without a hearing before the
Board: $5.
(2) Landlord request for increase in permitted rental or surcharge: $10
for the first four or less dwelling units and an additional $5 for each
additional unit up to a maximum charge of $200.
§ 339-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 339-31
1:627
§ 339-32. Standards to be maintained.
§ 339-33. Tax appeal; distribution of tax reduction.
(3) At the time that an owner of a building or structure who seeks to
convert such premises to a condominium or cooperative and is
required to notify the Rent Control Board, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2A:18-61.27, such person shall pay a fee of $10 for each rental unit
for the first $200 units in such building or structure and $5 for each
rental unit in excess thereof.
B. Fees shall be paid only by check or money order, made payable to the
Borough of Edgewater. No cash shall be accepted.
A. During the term of a tenancy, the landlord shall maintain the same
standard of services, privileges, garaging or parking spaces,
maintenance, storage space, rights to use appliances, facilities (such as
pools or tennis courts), furniture, furnishings or equipment in the
housing space and dwelling as he provided or was required to do by law
or lease at the date the lease was entered into. Tenants who have been
assigned garage and/or parking spaces shall not be reassigned a
different space, unless it is mutually agreed upon in writing, or unless it
can be established by the landlord as being reasonable and necessary.
[Amended 9-8-1986 by Ord. No. 847-86]
B. An individual tenant or class of tenants who are not receiving
substantially the same services or privileges as specified in Subsection
A hereof may have the Rent Control Board determine the reasonable
rental value of the housing unit or dwelling in view of this deficiency.
Such deficiency may be found and disclosed only after a duly noticed
hearing. The tenant or class of tenants shall pay the reasonable rental
value as full payment for rent until the landlord proves that the
deficiency has been corrected.
C. Fee increases for off-street parking which is provided by the landlord of
housing space subject to rent control, even though such parking is not
part of a residential lease, shall be limited to 1% annually, representing
an administrative fee that the landlord may charge. This charge shall be
limited to the number of parking spaces rented by the tenant at the
beginning of the tenancy. [Amended 9-3-1986 by Ord. No.
847-1986; 4-21-1987 by Ord. No. 861-87]
D. If a tenant is permitted by the landlord to keep a pet or pets at the
beginning of a tenancy or initial lease, then that privilege to keep pets
shall be irrevocable as to that tenant, for the lifetime of the specific
animal. If the landlord desires to eliminate the privilege to keep pets in
the building, notice must be given to all tenants. Any tenant keeping a
pet or pets at the time of such notice shall be permitted to keep the
specific pet or pets for the animal's lifetime or for so long as the tenant
may wish to keep the specific animal.
§ 339-31 EDGEWATER CODE § 339-33
1:628
§ 339-34. Exemption for newly constructed housing. [Amended
10-8-1985 by Ord. No. 829-85]
§ 339-35. Unauthorized rent increases prohibited.
No landlord shall, after the effective date of this article, charge any rents
in excess of what he was receiving from the effective date of this article,
except for increases as authorized by this article.
§ 339-36. Initial rent charges.
The owner of a housing space or dwelling being rented for the first time
shall not be restricted in the initial rent he charges. Any subsequent rental
increases, however, shall be subject to the provisions of this article.
§ 339-37. Construal of provisions.
This article, being necessary for the welfare of the Borough and its
inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes thereof.
A. In the event of a tax appeal, the portion of a tenant's tax surcharge not
being paid by the landlord to government will be held in an interestbearing
account.
B. In the event the appeal is successful and the taxes reduced, the tenant
shall receive 65% of said reduction as applied ratably to its tax portion
after deducting from the total tax reduction all expenses incurred by
the landlord in prosecuting said appeal.
C. In the event the landlord receives interest on any tax overpayment,
such interest shall be deemed part of the tax reduction for purposes of
reimbursement under Subsection B above.
A. This article shall not apply to newly constructed housing space or
dwelling units being rehabilitated for the purpose of housing space in
structures formerly used for industrial or commercial purposes, but
only for a period of five years after the date a certificate of occupancy is
issued for such housing space or dwelling units. After the expiration of
said five-year period, said housing space or dwelling units shall be
subject to the other provisions of this article. This provision shall apply
in cases where construction on such units has commenced after the
effective date of this article.
B. In addition to the exemption for the five-year period provided for in
Subsection A of this section, any structure formerly used for industrial
or commercial purposes being rehabilitated for the purpose of
providing housing space, and which qualifies as a registered historic
site by the Federal Register of Historic Landmarks, shall be entitled to
an additional exemption from the provisions of this article for a period
of 15 years.
§ 339-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 339-38
1:629
§ 339-38. Violations and penalties.134
A willful violation of any provisions of this article, including but not limited
to the willful filing with the Rent Control Board of any material
misstatement of fact, shall be punishable by a fine as set forth in Chapter 1,
Article II, General Penalty, of this Code. A violation affecting more than one
leasehold shall be considered a separate violation as to each leasehold.
134. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 339-38 EDGEWATER CODE § 339-38
1:630
Chapter 344
SECONDHAND JEWELRY AND PRECIOUS METALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 305.
§ 344-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DEALER — Any person, partnership, corporation or other business entity
who or which, through any means, buys or sells secondhand gold, silver,
precious metals or jewelry, and includes anyone advertising the purchase or
sale of the aforementioned items.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
§ 344-2. Registration with Chief of Police and/or Police Director.
[Amended 3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 1541-2017]
Each dealer conducting business or intending to conduct business within
the jurisdiction of the Borough of Edgewater shall first register with the
Chief of Police and/or Police Director,and provide the following information:
§ 344-3. Records to be kept by dealer; inspections.
A. The dealer's name. In the event that the dealer is a business entity other
than a sole proprietorship, the dealer shall provide the names of all
partners (for a partnership) or officers (for a corporation).
B. Home address and phone number for the dealer and any partner(s) or
officer(s).
C. Business name, including any names under which the business is
authorized by the State of New Jersey to conduct business.
D. Business address and phone number.
A. Each dealer shall keep a bound record book in which every purchase
and sale shall be legibly written in English, including the following
information:
(1) A description of each item involved in the sale.
(2) The number or numbers of any identification appearing on each
item, including monograms and identifying numbers or markings, if
any.
§ 339-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 344-3
1:631
§ 344-4. Description of transactions; delivery to Chief of Police and/
or Police Director. [Amended 3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 1541-2017]
Each dealer doing business in the Borough of Edgewater shall deliver to the
Chief of Police and/or Police Director the description of all items purchased,
received or sold within 72 hours of the completion of the transaction, on
forms prescribed by the Chief of Police and/or Police Director.
§ 344-5. Unlawful acts. [Amended 3-20-2017 by Ord. No.
1541-2017]
No dealer shall sell, melt, change the form of or otherwise dispose of any
articles purchased or received within five days from the date the notification
is made to the Chief of Police and/or Police Director, and all such items shall
remain on the premises where the item was purchased or received for no
less than five days.
§ 344-6. Transaction restrictions.
Each dealer must require two forms of identification, one with photo
identification, from each person with whom business is transacted, and no
transaction may be made with any minor, as hereinabove defined.
§ 344-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-20-2010 by Ord. No.
1439-2010]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction,
be subject to the penalties in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty. If the
violation is of a continuing nature, each day during which it continues shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense.
(3) The name, address and general description of the person from
whom the purchase was made or to whom the sale was made.
(4) The date and time of the purchase or sale.
(5) Copies of two forms of identification from the person making the
purchase or sale, at least one of which must be a photo
identification.
B. The above records shall be subject to the inspection of any authorized
police officer of the Borough of Edgewater at any time.
§ 344-3 EDGEWATER CODE § 344-7
1:632
Chapter 347
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 210.
Land use and development — See Ch. 240.
Public utility installations — See Ch. 326.
Rental property — See Ch. 335.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 374.
Streets and sidewalks openings — See Ch.
380, Art. III.
§ 344-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 344-7
1:633

ARTICLE I
Construction of Sewers
§ 347-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AS-BUILT PLAN — A plan prepared by the Borough Engineer showing
existing house sewer laterals.
BERGEN COUNTY UTILITIES AUTHORITY — The district sewer system
into which the Borough sewer system connects and discharges.
BOARD OF HEALTH — The Board of Health of the Borough of Edgewater.
BOD (DENOTING "BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND") — The quantity
of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under
standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20° C., expressed in parts per
million by weight.
BUILDING CONNECTION — That part of the sewage system beginning five
feet outside the inner face of the building wall that receives the discharge
from the building drain and conveys it to the building sewer lateral.
BUILDING DRAIN — The lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system
within a building which receives the discharge from soil and waste pipes
and conveys it to the building connection.
BUILDING SEWER LATERAL — That part of the sewage system that runs
from the sewer main to the curbline and includes all necessary fittings.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of
food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — The liquid waste from industrial processes, as
distinct from sanitary sewage.
MAIN SEWER or PUBLIC SEWER — The sewers laid longitudinally along
the center line or other part of the street or other right-of-way in which all
owners of abutting properties have equal rights and which is controlled by
the Borough.
MUNICIPAL SEWER SYSTEM — The Edgewater sewer system and all
appurtenances thereto.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or
other body of surface water or groundwater.
pH — The logarithm to the base 10 of the reciprocal of the weight of
hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.
PLUMBING — The practice of installing, maintaining, extending, repairing
and altering plumbing systems. It is also the installed plumbing system
piping, materials, plumbing fixtures and appurtenances of such systems in
connection with the following: sanitary drainage or storm drainage facilities
together with their venting systems, a public or private water supply system
§ 347-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 347-1
1:635
and fire protection systems within or adjacent to any building, structure or
conveyance.
PLUMBING INSPECTOR — A person licensed and authorized to inspect
plumbing pursuant to the provisions of State Uniform Construction Code
Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
PLUMBING SYSTEM — The sanitary and storm drainage facilities, together
with their venting systems and plumbing fixtures, a public or private water
supply system and the fire protection systems within or adjacent to any
building, structure or conveyance to a point of connection to a public or
private sewage system, public or private water supply or other acceptable
terminal.
PUBLIC SEWER — The same as "main sewer."
SANITARY SEWAGE — That domestic sewage, with stormwater and surface
water excluded, such as sewage discharging from the sanitary conveniences
of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels, office and commercial
buildings, factories and institutions).
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage and to which
stormwater, surface water and groundwater are not admitted.
SEWAGE — Any liquid waste containing animal, chemical or vegetable
matter in suspension or solution.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — Any arrangement or devices and
structures used for treating sewage.
SEWAGE WORKS — All facilities for collecting, pumping and disposing of
sewage.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SEWER INSPECTOR — The Sewer Inspector of the Borough or his
authorized deputy, agent or representative.
SLUDGE — Any solid waste remaining after the partial or preliminary
treatment of domestic or industrial waste.
SLUG — Any discharge of water or wastewater which, in concentration
of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of
duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average twentyfour-
hour concentration or flow during normal operation.
STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN — A sewer which carries stormwater or
surface water and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial
waste.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface or are in
suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
WASTEWATER — Sewage or spent water, and includes liquid and watercarried
wastes from residences and commercial and industrial
§ 347-1 EDGEWATER CODE § 347-1
1:636
establishments and other buildings, but shall not include stormwater or
surface water.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES — The structures, equipment and processes
required to collect, carry away and treat wastewater and dispose of effluent.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS — An arrangement of devices and
structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge.
WATERCOURSE — A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
§ 347-2. Installation and connection of sanitary facilities.
§ 347-3. General provisions.
A. The owner of any property upon which there is erected a house,
building or other structure used for human occupancy, employment,
recreation or other purpose situated within the Borough and abutting
on any street, alley or right-of-way or located in the rear of other
properties so abutting and having access to such street, alley or rightof-
way, in which street, alley or right-of-way there is now located or may
in the future be located a public or sanitary sewage system of the
Borough, is hereby required at his own expense to:
(1) Install suitable toilet facilities therein; and
(2) Connect such facilities and all sanitary sewage facilities in such
house, building or structure directly with the proper public sewer
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and of the
requirements of the Board of Health.
B. Such toilet facilities shall be installed and connection shall be made
with the public sewer as described in Subsection A hereof within 180
days after the date of official notice requiring such action.
C. All costs and expenses incident to the installation of the house
connection shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the
Borough for any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation of the house connection.
A. Application and installation.
(1) Before any portion of the building drain outside of the building is
connected to the building connection, the owner shall prove to the
satisfaction of the Plumbing Inspector that it is clean and conforms
in every respect to the Uniform Construction Code, and before any
portion of the building connection is connected to the building
sewer lateral, the Plumbing Inspector shall be satisfied that the
building connection is in good order and conforms in every respect
to the Uniform Construction Code.
§ 347-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 347-3
1:637
(2) No person shall install a building sewer or connect a building sewer
without first obtaining a permit therefor from the Director of Public
Works and paying the required fee for such permit.
(3) Application for such permits shall be made to the Director of Public
Works on an application form prescribed and supplied by the
Borough, which application shall be accompanied by such plans
and specifications and other information as the Borough Engineer
and/or the Director of Public Works shall require in order to
determine that the building sewer and the proposed connection to
the public sewer shall comply with all provisions of this chapter.
B. Sewer lateral permit.
(1) Where there is no building sewer lateral available, the property
owner shall, prior to the issuance of a building permit, apply to the
Borough Clerk for a sewer lateral permit and a street opening
permit, if necessary, on a form provided by the Borough Clerk, for
installation from the sewer main to the curb or from the curb to the
building. The fee charged for a license or permit issued pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter shall be as follows:
Type of License or Permit Permit Fee
Bond for
Inspection
For a connection to the
public sewer, residential or
commercial property
$250 per ERU $250 per ERU
For a connection to the
public sewer, industrial
property
$300 per ERU $250 per ERU
For a disconnection from
the public sewer
$100 per ERU $150 per ERU
For a connection to
stormwater facilities
$300 per ERU $250 per ERU
The permit fee and bond for inspection shall be based on the
equivalent residential unit (ERU) calculations defined in Article
III of this chapter.
The charge for the street opening permit, if required, shall be
assessed separately and require an additional connection and
inspection fee as required by the Code of the Borough of
Edgewater.
(2) All construction work shall be performed in accordance with all
applicable safety codes. Applicable safety codes shall include the
latest edition, including any and all amendments, revisions and
additions hereto, of the Federal Department of Labor, Occupational
Safety, and Health Administration's "Occupational Safety and
Health Standards" (OSHA), and applicable safety, health
regulations and building codes for construction in the State of New
§ 347-3 EDGEWATER CODE § 347-3
1:638
Jersey. For all building connection, the trenches shall be excavated
in a careful manner and properly sheathed where required. The
excavated materials shall be piled in a compact heap, so placed
as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the public. Proper
barricades and lights must be maintained around the trench to
guard against accidents. Extreme care shall be taken to prevent
any dirt, stones or other undesirable material from entering the
public sewer system through the building sewer lateral during
these operations.
(3) In backfilling, the material for the two feet immediately over the
pipe shall be selected so it contains no stones. All backfill material
for the trench shall be placed by tamping in eight-inch layers so as
to avoid any settlement. When the trench has been filled to the
proper height, the surface material shall be replaced and heavily
tamped and rolled.
(4) Where the trench is excavated in rock, the rock must be carefully
excavated to a depth of six inches below the grade line of the sewer
and the trench brought to the proper elevation with gravel or other
material satisfactory to the Plumbing Inspector. The remainder of
the trench must be backfilled with suitable material.
(5) Nothing in this subsection shall be construed as abrogating any of
the existing requirements of the Borough relating to the excavation
and backfilling of trenches, but the requirements herein contained
shall be in addition thereto.
(6) Where subsoil conditions are bad, such special precaution must be
taken to secure a watertight job as may be directed by the
Plumbing Inspector.
C. Where connection is made between the building drain outside of the
building and the building connection, a long radius bend shall be
appropriately installed at this connection along with a cleanout as
required by the Uniform Construction Code. This connection shall be
subject to the approval of the Plumbing Inspector, who shall be given
ample notice prior to such work.
D. The Plumbing Inspector may apply any appropriate test as defined in
the Uniform Construction Code to the plumbing, and the plumber and
contractor, at his own expense, shall furnish all necessary tools, labor,
materials and assistance for such tests and shall remove or repair any
defective materials when so ordered by the Inspector.
E. Each contractor or other person performing work on private property
for the purpose of connecting from the curb or street line onto private
property shall be governed by the terms of the ordinances of the
Borough, the Uniform Construction Code and of the Board of Health.
§ 347-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 347-3
1:639
F. All applicants for a permit shall pay a fee for review and inspection to
be made by the Borough Engineer or Director of Public Works as
follows:
(1) The fee for inspection shall be based on the number of hours spent
by the Borough Engineer, Director of Public Works or their
representatives in reviewing the plans and specifications and in
inspecting the work covered by the permit, computed at the rate of
$50 per hour.
(2) Prior to issuance of a permit, the applicant shall deposit with the
Director of Public Works, on account of such review and inspection
fees, a sum estimated by the Director of Public Works to represent
the probable total fees. In the event the estimated review and
inspection fees deposited by the applicant are insufficient, the
applicant shall deposit with the Director of Public Works such
additional amount as may be required, based on the actual amount
of time spent performing such reviews and inspections. In the event
the total time spent on such inspections is less than that originally
estimated, the Director of Public Works shall refund any excess
payment to the applicant.
(3) All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection
of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner of the property
being connected to the public sewer, and the owner shall be
responsible for and shall reimburse the Borough for any loss or
damage to the public sewer caused, directly or indirectly, by the
installation of the building sewer.
(4) A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for
every building, except where one building stands at the rear of
another on an interior lot and it is not possible to make a direct
connection from such rear building to the public sewer, in which
event the building sewer connecting the front building to the public
sewer may be extended to the rear building and the whole
considered as one building sewer.
(5) An existing building sewer previously used to service a former
building located on a particular property may be used to service a
new building to be constructed on the property only if, upon
examination and testing by the Borough Engineer, such building
sewer is found to meet all the requirements of this chapter. The
testing shall be done by dye test, smoke test and the television
camera method, video recording with narrative, the cost of which
shall be borne by the owner or builder for new construction.
G. Applicable standards for size and placement.
(1) The size, slope, alignment, material for construction of a building
sewer and the method to be used in excavating, placing of pipe,
jointing, testing and backfilling shall conform to the requirements
of the Uniform Construction Code and all other applicable
§ 347-3 EDGEWATER CODE § 347-3
1:640
ordinances, rules and regulations of the Borough and all other
applicable provisions of law.
(2) All requirements of federal, state and local safety regulations,
including the regulations of the Borough's confined space rules
shall be adhered to.
(3) Unless authorized in advance by the Borough Engineer and/or
Director of Public Works, whenever possible the building sewer
shall enter the building at an elevation below that of the basement
floor.
(4) In any building in which the building drain is too low to permit
gravity flow to the public sewer, sewerage carried by such building
drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the
building sewer, and each such connection shall be protected by a
backflow preventive device which shall be maintained by the owner
of the property.
(5) No person shall connect any roof, downspout, foundation drain,
areaway drain or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to
a building sewer or building drain which is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sewer unless prior approval there for is
granted by the Borough Engineer and/or Director of Public Works,
which approval shall be granted only if necessary for proper and
sanitary disposal of polluted surface drain water.
H. Applicable standards for connection.
(1) The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to all applicable requirements of the Uniform Construction
Code and all other applicable ordinances, rules and regulations and
all other applicable provisions of law.
(2) Unless otherwise provided herein, or in any other ordinance, rule,
regulation or other provision of law, the procedures and
specifications established by the American Society of Civil
Engineers and Manual of Practice No. 9 of the Water Pollution
Control Federation shall represent the standards to be applied with
respect to such installations.
(3) All connections between the building sewer and the public sewer
shall be made gas-tight and watertight, which conditions shall be
verified by testing.
I. Any person installing a building sewer shall notify the Borough
Engineer and the Director of Public Works, in advance, when such
building sewer is to be connected to the public sewer, and such
connection and testing thereof shall be made under the supervision of
the Borough Engineer and/or Director of Public Works or their
representative.
§ 347-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 347-4
1:641
§ 347-4. Public sewer connections and maintenance.
A. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or building sewer
lateral and the appurtenances thereof. The sewer contractor retained
by the Borough, the Department of Public Works or such other official
or department of the Borough as may hereafter be designated by the
Mayor and Council shall make all connections, alterations and repairs
upon the public sewer and shall alter, maintain and repair the house
sewer laterals and appurtenances thereof.
B. Maintenance of the public sewer and building sewer laterals and all
connections to the public sewer and all work performed on the sewer
system between the main and the curb shall be performed by the
Department of Public Works or by a contractor selected by the Borough
as a result of open competitive bidding or under the supervision of such
other person or department of the Borough as may hereafter be
designated by the Mayor and Council. Said contractor shall be
governed by the terms of the ordinances of the Borough relating to
sewer installation and maintenance and shall comply with plans and
specifications of the Department of Public Works on file with the
Borough Clerk. Such contractor may be required to post a performance
bond suitable to the Mayor and Council and the Borough Attorney.
C. Each contractor or other person performing work on Edgewater public
property for the purpose of installing building sewer laterals may be
required to post a bond or cash acceptable to the Mayor and Council or
such other official or department of the Borough as may hereafter be
designated by the Mayor and Council. All work shall be adequately
guarded with barricades, lights and other measures for protection of
the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, curbs and other
public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in
a manner satisfactory to the Borough.
D. All municipal improvement shall conform to the requirements of the
Municipal Land Use Law,135including performance and maintenance
bond requirements. The bonds posted by the party or parties
responsible for the sewer system improvements from the requirement
to indemnify the Borough and its agents from all suits or actions for
damages, as herein provided.
E. An applicant for such license shall also present to the Director of Public
Works a certificate of insurance evidencing that the licensee is insured
against liability for personal injury, including death from motor vehicle
operations and business operations, with limits of not less than
$1,000,000, and liability for property damage through motor vehicle
operation or business operation in an amount not less than $500,000,
said certificate to be in a form approved by the Borough Attorney.
135. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 347-4 EDGEWATER CODE § 347-5
1:642
§ 347-5. Administration.
§ 347-6. Notice; violations and penalties.
§ 347-7. Charge for a new sewer connection.
The charge for a new connection to the Borough's sewer system shall be as
determined per ERU in accordance with the requirements of Article III of
this chapter. Payment shall be made in accordance with the requirements of
the Borough Clerk.
§ 347-8. Rules and regulations of Bergen County Utilities Authority.
A. In the administration of this chapter, the connections from the curb or
street line onto private property shall be supervised and administered
by the Edgewater Plumbing Inspector, and all matters relating to
sewers lying within the street, from the curb or from the public sewer to
curb or street line, shall be within the jurisdiction of the Edgewater
Department of Public Works.
B. The Edgewater Department of Public Works and other duly authorized
employees of the Borough bearing proper credentials and identification
shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
C. Decisions of the Edgewater Department of Public Works or the Mayor
and Council in the interpretation and application of the provisions of
this chapter shall be final and binding upon the property owner
affected. The Mayor and Council may waive strict compliance with the
provisions of this chapter where such compliance would cause great
hardship other than increased financial expense to the property owner
involved. No action which shall be authorized by a permit from the
Borough shall be deemed a violation of this chapter, provided that the
action authorized is not injurious in any manner to the health, safety
and welfare of the residents of the Borough. The issuance of any such
permit by the Borough shall be within its discretion and revocable at its
pleasure; and, upon such revocation, the provisions of this chapter shall
apply as though said permit had never been granted.
A. Any person found to be violating any provisions of this chapter shall be
served by the Borough with written notice stating the nature of the
violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated
in such notice, permanently cease all such violation.
B. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than
penalties provided for in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 347-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 347-8
1:643
§ 347-9. User charges for tax-exempt properties.
§ 347-10. User charges for non-tax-exempt properties.
§ 347-11. System adopted.
A. The use of all sanitary sewers of the Borough of Edgewater shall be in
compliance with the rules and regulations enacted by the Bergen
County Utilities Authority.
B. Copies of the rules and regulations of the Bergen County Utilities
Authority are filed in the office of the Borough Clerk and are available
for public inspection during normal business hours. Copies of the rules
and regulations of the Bergen County Utilities Authority can be
obtained from the Bergen County Utilities Authority for the cost of
publication.
A. The Borough of Edgewater hereby adopts a user charge system for all
tax-exempt properties located in the Borough in accordance with the
rules and regulations of the Bergen County Utilities Authority, as
amended.
B. Nothing shall prohibit the Borough from charging other amounts which
are due and payable under contractual agreements with the County of
Bergen and other municipalities.
A. The federal government has enacted the amended Federal Water
Pollution Control Act, now known as the "Federal Clean Water Act" (33
U.S.C § 150 et seq.).
B. The Bergen County Utilities Authority has enacted rules and
regulations, as required by the Federal Clean Water Act, in
incorporating an industrial cost recovery system, a user charge system
and regulations pertaining to the use of sanitary sewers.
C. The Borough of Edgewater is within the district serviced by the Bergen
County Utilities Authority and has contracted with the Bergen County
Utilities Authority for the removal and treatment of the wastewater
contained within the sanitary sewers of the Borough of Edgewater.
D. The Borough of Edgewater desires to assure that the sanitary sewers
operated and maintained by it will conform to the best sanitary
engineering practices and comply with the requirements of the Federal
Clean Water Act.
A. The Borough hereby adopts and enacts the user charge system
contained in the rules and regulations of the Bergen County Utilities
Authority, as if set forth herein at length, and authorizes the immediate
implementation by the appropriate municipal official, to be designated
by resolution of the governing body.
§ 347-8 EDGEWATER CODE § 347-11
1:644
§ 347-12. Copies on file.
Not fewer than three copies of the rules and regulations of the Bergen
County Utilities Authority have been and are filed in the office of the
Borough Clerk and are available for public inspection during normal
business hours.
§ 347-13. Amount of charges.
The annual user charge shall be computed on the previous calendar year's
amount of water used and the current calendar year's charges imposed
by the Bergen County Utilities Authority upon the Borough of Edgewater,
together with all appropriate administrative costs for the operation and
maintenance of the Edgewater sewer system.
§ 347-14. Exemption from user charge.
There shall be allowed an exemption from the annual user charge for
all residential usage less than 300,000 gallons of water used, with the
exception of hotels, motels and apartments, for which provision is made
hereinafter. With respect to hotels and motels, the exemption shall apply if
water usage is less than 300,000 gallons of water used with respect to every
eight rooms used for residential occupancy. With respect to apartments, the
exemption shall apply to usage less than 300,000 gallons of water used with
respect to each separate and individual living unit within the apartment
complex.
§ 347-15. Private water wells.
All privately owned water wells which are connected to water systems
eventually discharging into the sanitary sewers of the Borough of
Edgewater shall be subject to the following provisions:
B. Nothing contained herein shall preclude the Borough from challenging
any amendments to the rules and regulations which may be hereafter
adopted.
A. The owners of wells existing at the date of adoption of this article shall
notify the Borough Clerk of Edgewater, in writing, of the existence and
location of such wells within 30 days after the date of passage of this
article.
B. The owners of wells constructed or completed after the adoption of this
article shall notify the Borough Clerk of Edgewater, in writing, of the
existence and location of such wells within 30 days of the first usage of
such well.
C. The Borough Engineer of Edgewater may inspect such wells to
determine the usage thereof if, in the opinion of the Borough Engineer,
such well's actual water production, together with the other water
usage of the owner thereof, exceeds 400,000 gallons of water per year.
§ 347-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 347-15
1:645
§ 347-16. Allowances.
The Borough Engineer shall transmit his opinion, in writing, to the
Borough Council of Edgewater. After receiving such opinion, the
Borough Council may require the owner of such well to install and
maintain a water meter thereon, at the owner's expense, by adoption of
a resolution.
D. If a water meter is required by resolution as provided in Subsection C
hereof, the owner must install such meter within 60 days of adoption
thereof. If the owner shall fail to do so, the Borough Council of
Edgewater may, by resolution, provide for the installation of such meter
and add the cost thereof to the user charge levied under this article.
A. No allowance shall be made for water which is metered but which does
not enter the sanitary sewer system unless the owner installs and
maintains, at his expense, a meter approved by the Borough to measure
the water so diverted from the sewer lines.
B. In case of business or industry, where water is lost by evaporation, the
Borough Engineer, with the approval of the Council, may make a proper
allowance for such evaporation.
C. Where sprinkler systems are maintained, a proper credit shall be given
for water contained or passing through such sprinkler system, which
water does not reach a sanitary sewer line.
§ 347-15 EDGEWATER CODE § 347-16
1:646
ARTICLE II
Public and Private Sewers
§ 347-17. Unlawful acts; sewer cleaning registration.
No person shall:
A. Place, deposit or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner upon
public or private property within the Borough or in any area under the
jurisdiction of the Borough any human or animal excrement, garbage,
industrial waste, foul liquids or other objectionable waste.
B. Discharge to any natural outlet, gutter, stream, ditch, culvert, catch
basin or watercourse in the Borough or in any area under the
jurisdiction of the Borough any sanitary sewage, industrial waste or
other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been
provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
C. Uncover any portion of the public sewers or drains or the connection
branches thereof or open any manhole or flush tank except with written
permission of the Mayor and Council or some person designated by the
Mayor and Council to issue permits.
D. Open any public street or place for the purpose of making sewer
connection or make or cause to be made any connection with a building
connection branch of a public sewer, except under a special written
permit, signed by the Mayor and Council or such other official or
department of the Borough as may hereafter be designated by the
Mayor and Council, allowing such specific connection and under the
supervision of the Mayor and Council or such other official or
department.
E. Make or cause or allow to be made any excavation within four feet of
any public sewer or blast any rock within 10 feet thereof, save with the
express written permission of the inspector employed by the Mayor and
Council and under his supervision and control.
F. Break or cut or remove any pipe of any main or public sewer or make or
cause to be made any connection with such sewer except through the
specific branch or branches allotted for the purpose, the allotment of
such connection and its location to be designated by the Mayor and
Council or such other official or department as may hereafter be
designated by the Mayor and Council.
G. Discharge or cause or permit the discharge into any main or public
sewer, directly or indirectly, of any clear drainage, swimming pools, airconditioning
units, groundwater, surface water or rainwater from
sidewalks, yard areas, courts, roofs, basements, or any sump, cistern or
tank overflow.
H. Discharge or cause to permit the discharge into any main or public
sewer, directly or indirectly, of any drainage or overflow from cesspools,
§ 347-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 347-17
1:647
§ 347-18. Prohibited discharges.
Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public
sewers:
manure pits, privies or other receptacles storing or designed to store
organic wastes.
I. Connect or cause or permit the connection with any main or public
sewer, directly or indirectly, of any garbage disposal units, exhausts,
boiler blowoffs, sediment drips or any pipes carrying or constructed to
carry hot water, acids, dyes, brine, germicides, greases, brewery mash,
gasoline, naphtha, benzene, oil, flammable or explosive liquids,
industrial wastes, radioactive materials or any other substance
detrimental to the sewers or their appurtenances or to the operation of
the sewage system or sewage disposal works.
J. Throw or deposit or cause or allow to be thrown or deposited in any
fixture, vessel, receptacle, inlet or opening connected directly or
indirectly with any main or public sewer any straw, garbage, wood,
glass, feathers, tar, plastics, vegetable, cloth, parings, ashes, cinders,
rags or viscous substance capable of causing obstructions to the flow in
the sewers, except feces, urine, necessary toilet papers and liquid
house slops, or allow any house sewer connection with a main or public
sewer to be likewise connected with any privy vault or cesspool or
underground drain or with any channel conveying water or filth, except
such soil pipes, building drains, building sewers and other plumbing
works as shall have been duly inspected and approved by the Plumbing
Inspector.
A. Liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150° F.
B. Water or waste which may contain more than 100 parts per million, by
weight, of fat, oil or grease.
C. Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive
liquid, solid or gas.
D. Wastewater containing more than 25 milligrams per liter of petroleum
oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or any product of mineral oil origin.
E. Water or waters having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.0 or having
any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structure, equipment and personnel of the sewage works.
F. Waters or water containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient
quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, to
constitute a hazard to humans or animals or to create any hazard in the
receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
§ 347-17 EDGEWATER CODE § 347-18
1:648
G. Waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and
quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such
matters at the sewage treatment plant.
H. Noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public
nuisance.
I. Garbage, kitchen refuse or similar matter, including the installation,
maintenance or use in or about any premises of any device which grinds
mashes, crushes, pulverizes, shreds or otherwise similarly treats
garbage or refuse and permits the garbage or refuse to enter into the
sanitary sewerage system. The aforesaid prohibition shall apply to
those devices which are commonly referred to as "garbage disposal
units" or "garbage grinders."
J. Prior to the issuance of permission to discharge additional flow to the
Borough's sanitary sewer or storm sewer systems, the applicant for the
proposed sanitary sewer or storm sewer system improvement is require
to demonstrate to the Borough Engineer that adequate downstream
hydraulic conveyance capacity exists for the proposed sanitary sewer or
storm sewer system improvement. As part of this requirement for
permission to discharge additional flow to the Borough's sewer system,
the information submitted to the Borough Engineer shall include a
report prepared by a professional engineer, including grading and
drainage plans and profiles, computations and other information that
may be required by the Borough Engineer.
K. Prior to the issuance of permission to discharge additional flow to the
Borough's storm sewer system, the applicant for the proposed storm
sewer system improvement is require to demonstrate to the Borough
Engineer that the improvement will not cause flooding, exceed the
hydraulic capacity of the sewer or cause surcharge of the storm sewer
system. As part of this requirement for permission to discharge
additional flow to the Borough's sewer system, the information
submitted to the Borough Engineer shall include a report prepared by a
professional engineer, including grading and drainage plans and
profiles, computations and other information that may be required by
the Borough Engineer.
L. Prior to the issuance of permission to discharge additional flow to the
Borough's sanitary sewer or storm sewer systems, the applicant for the
proposed sanitary sewer storm sewer system improvement is require to
demonstrate to the Borough Engineer that the improvement will not
cause deterioration or intensification of deterioration of the sanitary or
storm sewer systems. As part of this requirement for permission to
discharge additional flow to the Borough's sewer system, the
information submitted to the Borough Engineer shall include a report
prepared by a professional engineer, including grading and drainage
plans and profiles, computations and other information that may be
required by the Borough Engineer.
§ 347-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 347-19
1:649
§ 347-19. Grease, oil and sand interceptor standards.
A. Grease traps at existing establishments.
(1) Grease traps are required for all waste outlets from all greaseproducing
establishments. The type of grease traps must be
approved by the Borough prior to installation in accordance with
the specifications.
(2) Each grease-producing establishment shall be required to control
oil and grease discharges, as follows:
(a) Where outside space permits the installation of a grease trap of
the type shown on Diagram A (attached hereto as Appendix
D136), an exterior grease trap shall be installed, sized as shown
below, and a bacterial pretreatment program shall be
developed and implemented.
(b) Where outside space does not permit the installation of an
exterior grease trap, an interior grease trap shall be installed,
and a bacterial pretreatment program shall be developed and
implemented. Such interior grease traps and pretreatment
program shall be approved by the Borough prior to installation
and implementation, respectively.
(c) No existing or new grease traps shall be installed adjacent to
or immediately downstream from a hot water source. Every
grease trap shall be so located as to be readily accessible for
inspection, cleaning and removal of intercepted waste
products.
B. Grease traps at new establishments.
(1) Grease traps shall be installed on the exterior of each new greaseproducing
establishment so as to ensure that the grease-producing
establishment's effluent will meet the grease and oil limitations
listed in this section.
(2) Each new grease-producing establishment shall furnish the
following information to the Borough prior to discharging any
effluent to the Borough sewer system:
(a) Description of the establishment, including number of
employees, number of patrons, number of seats, frequency of
seating, and type of grease-producing facilities;
(b) Listing of fixtures, including, but not limited to, dishwashers
and other grease-producing units, describing their function
and volume;
(c) Listing of drain outlet sizes or trap sizes at each fixture;
136. Editor's Note: Appendix D is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 347-19 EDGEWATER CODE § 347-19
1:650
(d) Total annual water use and daily minimum and maximum use;
and
(e) Expected concentrations of grease and oil (as estimated from
similar establishments).
(3) All exterior grease trap chambers shall be constructed of
noncorrosive materials, such as reinforced concrete or fiberglass.
The chamber shall be capable of sustaining ten-ton truck loading
and shall have baffles and fittings made of noncorrosive materials.
Access shall be available through twenty-four-inch manhole frames
and covers located at each end of the chamber. All grease traps
shall be equal to the product of Tyler Pipe (Tyler, TX), Town &
Country (as distributed by Trap-Zap of South Norwalk, CT), or Zum
Industries (Dallas, TX). See Diagram A attached.137
(4) The following design method for the sizing of grease interceptors
has been developed and recommended for use by the International
Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, under Uniform
Plumbing Code, Appendix H. The Borough has elected to adopt this
method for all future grease trap sizing, with the exceptions noted
below.
(a) Restaurants.
[1] The calculation of the required size of grease interceptors
to be installed in restaurants shall be as follows:
Number
of Meals
per Peak
Hour
x Waste
Flow
Rate
x Retention
Time
x Storage
Factor
= Interceptor
Size
(liquid
capacity)
[2] The following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
[a] Number of meals per peak hour. For restaurants:
multiply the number of seats by 60, divide by the
estimated time a patron takes to eat. A restaurant
which serves people quickly may have a seating time
from 30 minutes to 45 minutes. Another restaurant
may be the type for leisurely meals with a seating time
from 90 minutes to 120 minutes.
[b] Waste flow rate.
[i] With dishwashing machine: six-gallon (22.7 liter)
flow.
[ii] Without dishwashing machine: five-gallon (18.9
liter) flow.
137. Editor's The diagram, Appendix D, is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 347-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 347-19
1:651
[iii] Single-service kitchen: two-gallon (7.6 liter) flow.
[iv] Food waste disposer: one-gallon (3.8 liter) flow.
[c] Retention times.
[i] Commercial kitchen waste dishwasher: 2.5 hours.
[ii] Single-service kitchen, single serving: 1.5 hours.
[d] Storage factors.
[i] Fully equipped commercial kitchen:
[A] Eight-hour operation: 1.
[B] Sixteen-hour operation: 2.
[C] Twenty-four-hour operation: 3.
[ii] Single-service kitchen: 1.5.
(b) Other oil- or grease-producing establishments. Review by the
Borough of other grease-producing establishments will be
based on submitted data and required pretreatment to meet
the effluent standards.
(5) Exceptions to the above requirements will be considered on written
request to the Borough where the above formula requires a grease
trap in excess of 1,000 gallons. In this regard, the Borough will
permit the following:
(a) The Borough will permit the trial installation of a single
external one-thousand-gallon grease trap for restaurants
seating less than 100 persons, except for restaurants known to
produce exceptional quantities of grease and oil.
(b) The Borough will permit the trial installation of two external
one-thousand-gallon grease traps in series for restaurants
seating more than 100 persons or for restaurants known to
produce exceptional quantities of grease and oil.
(c) Reductions in these requirements will be considered if there
are no deep-fat fryers, minimal cooking, and minimal
dishwashing.
(6) It is the property owner's obligation to meet the discharge
concentration standards for oil and grease set forth in other
sections of these regulations. If subsequent tests show that the
discharge concentration standard is not being met, then the abovedescribed
design method shall apply and additional grease trap
capacity shall be furnished.
(7) Additional requirements are as follows:
§ 347-19 EDGEWATER CODE § 347-19
1:652
(a) The grease trap(s) shall be placed at a distance from the
structure sufficient to permit cooling and coagulation of oil and
grease within the grease trap.
(b) Piping must be arranged so that only kitchen wastes and
kitchen floor drains are tributary to the grease traps. Bathroom
facilities and all other waste outlets must bypass the grease
traps.
(c) Cleanouts must be provided between the building and the
grease traps, between grease traps in series, and (as a
sampling point) downstream of the last grease trap.
(d) The trap openings must be extended to the surface, using
minimum thirty-inch-diameter barrels, and topped with a
standard manhole frame and cover.
(e) Every installation shall be reviewed for uplift resistance, with
groundwater assumed to be at the surface.
(8) Installation of grease traps shall meet the recommendations of the
Uniform Plumbing Code, including locations, flow control and
venting. Grease trap installation will also require a plumbing
permit and compliance with municipal plumbing code regulations.
Sampling manholes for food service establishments shall be
installed downstream of the grease trap, but upstream of any
interconnection with bathroom sanitary service lines.
C. Grease trap maintenance.
(1) Each grease-producing establishment shall submit a grease trap
maintenance program to the Borough for approval, prior to
construction. The frequency of grease removal is dependent upon
the capacity of the interceptor and the quantity of grease in the
wastewater. Maintenance intervals may vary from once a week to
once in several weeks, but in no event less than once monthly.
When the grease removal interval has been determined for a
specific installation, regular cleaning at that interval is necessary
to maintain the rated efficiency of the interceptor. After the
accumulated grease and waste material has been removed, the
interceptor should be checked to make sure that the inlet, outlet
and air relief ports are clear of obstructions such as solidified
grease.
(2) The maintenance program must include provision for a bacterial
pretreatment program, using products, equipments and dosage as
approved by the Borough. Records must be kept of all maintenance
on grease traps. The record must be available for inspection by
Borough representatives, upon request during normal business
hours. The record shall include the following information: date,
time, description of work done, comments on the additional work
needed, quantity of grease removed, and names of personnel
§ 347-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 347-19
1:653
§ 347-20. Oil and grease violations.
§ 347-21. Rules and regulations.
The Borough of Edgewater has adopted "Sanitary Sewer Collection System
and Pump Station Rules and Regulations," revised August 19, 2008.
§ 347-22. Restricted discharges.
performing the work. Any establishment which fails to provide
such records or provides inadequate records shall be subject to a
penalty and/or termination of service.
A. General. All penalty assessment hearings shall be held before the
Edgewater Municipal Court and shall be conducted in accordance with
the rules established pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act.
B. Final decision. Any final decision issued by the Edgewater Municipal
Court shall be in writing or stated in the record and must include a
separately stated findings of facts and conclusions of law. The parties of
record shall be notified of any final decision or order by personal
service or mail and any such decision or order shall be effective, unless
otherwise stated therein, upon delivery or mailing whichever is sooner.
C. Cost recovery. If the Borough prevails, it may then recover court costs,
as well as other costs associated with preparing and litigating the
matter, from the violator. To accomplish recovery the Borough must
include an assessment for hearing costs along with the final decision.
D. Penalty reduction. The Borough may, at its own discretion, reduce any
penalty up to 50%; however the Borough may not reduce the amount of
any component of a penalty which represents the economic benefit
gained by the violator from the violation.
E. Penalties. The Borough or its authorized representative may assess a
penalty for violations of the requirements, limitations and prohibitions
concerning oil and grease expressed in § 347-19 of the Borough Code. It
is the Borough's intention to inspect installation and maintenance
records of significant discharges of oil and grease discharges. Where
violations are discovered, the Borough may assess fines in the following
manner, and as described in this section.
(1) First offense: Up to $250/day until corrected, plus reimbursement
of costs and damages.
(2) Second offense: $500/day until corrected, plus reimbursement of
costs and damages.
(3) Third or more offense: $1,000/day until corrected, plus
reimbursement of costs and damages, plus possible closure of
discharge to Borough sewers.
§ 347-19 EDGEWATER CODE § 347-22
1:654
§ 347-23. Preliminary treatment facilities.
§ 347-24. Control manholes.
When required by the Department of Public Works, the owner of any
property served by a building connection or building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the building
sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the waste.
Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located and
shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Plumbing
Inspector and the Department of Public Works. The manhole shall be
installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as
to be safe and accessible at all times.
A. The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having a
five-day BOD greater than 300 parts per million by weight, more than
350 parts per million by weight of suspended solids, any quantity of
substances with the characteristics described in the previous sections
of this chapter, or an average daily flow greater than 2% of the average
daily sewage flow of the Borough shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Edgewater Department of Public Works.
B. When there is reasonable indication, as determined by Borough
personnel, that the discharge is exceeding the maximum allowed limits,
then the Borough shall have the discharge sampled and tested. The
grease-producing establishment shall pay for the cost of this effort.
A. Where necessary, in the opinion of the Plumbing Inspector, the owner
shall provide, at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be
necessary to:
(1) Reduce the BOD to 300 parts per million and suspended solids to
350 parts per million by weight;
(2) Reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the
maximum limits provided for in § 347-18, Prohibited discharges, of
this chapter; or
(3) Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or
wastes.
B. Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to
proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the
approval of the Plumbing Inspector and of the New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection, if required, and no construction of such
facilities shall be commenced until said approvals are obtained in
writing.
C. Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or
wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and
effective operation by the owner at his expense.
§ 347-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 347-25
1:655
§ 347-25. Measurements, tests and analyses.
§ 347-26. Right of entry for inspection.
The Borough and its duly authorized officers and employees bearing proper
credentials and identifications shall be permitted to enter upon all
properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this article.
§ 347-27. Damage to system.
A. All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods
for the Examination of Water, Sewage and Industrial Wastes, published
by the American Public Health Association, Inc. Said publication is
hereby incorporated in this chapter by reference and made a part
hereof as fully as though it had been set forth at length herein. In
accordance with law, the required number of copies have been placed
on file in the office of the Borough Clerk and in the office of the Board of
Health and shall remain on file in said offices for use and examination
by the public so long as this chapter shall remain in effect.
B. All such measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of
waters and wastes shall be determined from samples taken at the
control manhole provided for as described in the previous section. In
the event that no special manhole has been required, the control
manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in
the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected.
A. No person shall break, damage, destroy, deface or tamper with any
structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the municipal
sewer system.
B. Any person who, by reason of the violation of the provisions of this
chapter or other improper use of the municipal sewer system or any of
its branches, appurtenances or connections, shall cause damage to said
municipal sewer system or to the facilities of the Bergen County
Utilities Authority to which the municipal sewer system is connected, by
reason of which the Borough may sustain damage or may be or become
liable to the Bergen County Utilities Authority for damages which it
may sustain, shall be liable to the Borough for all costs and expenses
that may be incurred by the Borough for the correction of any such
damage. The Borough shall have the right to recover such costs and
expenses from any such person by appropriate action at law in a court
of competent jurisdiction. The right of the Borough to be reimbursed for
any costs and expenses incurred by it by reason of such damages shall
be an additional remedy, and such person shall also be subject to the
penalties contained in this chapter for violation of its provisions.
§ 347-25 EDGEWATER CODE § 347-27
1:656
§ 347-28. Violations and penalties.
Unless otherwise provided in this article, violations of the provisions of this
article shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General
Penalty.
C. Any owner may install and maintain, at his expense, a sewage flow
meter, approved by the Borough Engineer, to measure the flow into the
sewer lines. Where such a sewage flow meter is maintained, the owner
shall be billed on the actual readings of such meter at the same rate as
determined hereinabove.
D. In any specific case not contemplated or not clearly defined herein or
where the type of waste will place an extraordinary burden on the
sewerage facilities either because of its quantity or its quality, the
Borough Council is hereby authorized, by contract or otherwise, to
establish a specific rate as may be necessary.
§ 347-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 347-28
1:657

ARTICLE III
Charge for New Connections
§ 347-29. Imposition of charge.
There is hereby imposed a one-time charge for any new connection, as
defined herein, to the Edgewater publicly owned treatment works and the
system for collection and transmission of sewage originating in the Borough
of Edgewater and those portions of the Boroughs of Cliffside Park and Fort
Lee served by said publicly owned treatment works, to represent a fair
payment toward the capital cost of said facilities.
§ 347-30. Collection; basis for charge.
The preliminary connection charge for each such connection shall be
collected by the Construction Official on behalf of the Borough, at the time
of issuance of a construction permit, as follows:
§ 347-31. Determination of final charge.
The preliminary connection charge shall be the final connection charge,
unless the owner of the property shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the Construction Official, or the Construction Official shall determine, that
the number of applicable units in the facility, as built, shall differ from the
number of said units originally certified by the applicant for the purposes
of the preliminary connection charge, in which case the final connection
charge shall be recomputed in accordance with the revised number of
units, and the excess of the final connection charge over the preliminary
connection charge shall be paid to the Borough within 30 days of such
determination, or the excess of the preliminary connection charge over the
final connection charge shall be refunded by the Borough within 30 days or
as soon thereafter as may be practicable.
§ 347-32. Computation of charge; changes; payments; refunds.
The connection charge per ERU, computed as set forth in this article, shall
be computed for each calendar year. Any connection charges computed
A. The gallons per unit for the type of facility involved, as shown on Table
A138 attached to this article and made a part hereof, shall be multiplied
by the number of the applicable units shown on said table, as certified
by the applicant for the construction permit;
B. The product thereof (being the estimated flow from the facility in
gallons per day) shall be divided by 200; and
C. The quotient thereof [being the number of equivalent residential units
(ERUs) or portion thereof for the facility] shall be multiplied by the
connection charge then in effect for each ERU.
138. Editor's Note: Table A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 347-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 347-32
1:659
prior to the date of such annual redetermination shall be recomputed
thereafter, and the excess of the recomputed connection charge over the
previously computed connection charge shall be paid to the Borough within
30 days of such determination, or the excess of the previously computed
connection charge over the recomputed connection charge shall be
refunded by the Borough within 30 days or as soon thereafter as may be
practicable.
§ 347-33. Charge to be in effect; future charges.
The connection charge to be in effect for connections made during the
calendar year 1988, and for connections made and to be made during
the calendar year 1989, shall be set by the Borough by resolutions to be
adopted concurrently with this article.139 The connection charge for future
years shall be set, annually, by resolution.
§ 347-34. Change of use.
For purposes of the charges imposed by and pursuant to this chapter, "new
connections to the sewage treatment system" shall be deemed to mean
and include all connections made to properties and facilities which were
not connected to said system on January 1, 1988, and also all changes of
use of existing properties which result, based upon the application of the
information contained in Table A, in an increased flow from said facility;
provided, however, that for such a change of use, a connection charge,
computed as hereinabove set forth, shall be applied only to the extent of the
estimated increased flow from said facility.
139. Editor's Note: This article was originally adopted 10-18-1988 by Ord. No. 903-88.
§ 347-32 EDGEWATER CODE § 347-34
1:660
ARTICLE IV
Sanitary Sewer Overflow Elimination Plan
[Added 6-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1473-2012]
§ 347-35. Intent and purpose.
The implementation of this article will aid the Borough by limiting and
reducing the inflow of additional water into the sanitary sewer systems. By
prohibiting the discharge of water from any roof, surface, ground, sump
pump, swimming pool, other natural precipitation, and other sources of
inflow into the Borough's sanitary sewer system, the Borough is seeking
to reduce costs as well as protect against other damaging effects. Further,
all water that enters the system must be treated at the sewage treatment
plant. Therefore, by reducing and eliminating this inflow of "clean water"
into the sanitary sewer system and the subsequent unnecessary treatment,
the expenses to the Borough and the citizens will be reduced and will assist
in protecting the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Borough.
§ 347-36. Prohibited discharges; disconnection of illicit
connections; fees.
A. Prohibited discharges. No person or entity shall discharge or cause to
be discharged any stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, yard drainage,
yard fountain, swimming pool, pond, overflow, or any other substance
other than sanitary sewage into the sanitary sewer collection system.
No person, business or other entity shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any hazardous substances into any public sewers.
B. Amnesty period for disconnection.
(1) On or before December 31, 2012, any person, business, or other
entity who shall have a connection described above and who shall
voluntarily report said connection to the Borough, so that said illicit
connection shall be remedied, shall have any and all permit,
connection and inspection fees waived by the Borough. This waiver
of fees applies only to Borough fees, and does not include the actual
cost of remediation.
(2) After December 31, 2012, any person, business, or other entity who
shall have a connection described above, and shall fail to
voluntarily report such connection by December 31, 2012, shall be
liable for all permit fees, inspection fees, and connection fees as
required by the Borough, to remedy the illicit connection.
C. Manner of disconnection.
(1) Any property owner, tenant, landlord or other person with a
property interest who shall have a connection in violation of this
article, or not obtained a waiver pursuant to § 347-41, shall
immediately remove such connection and correct such situation. If
not removed or corrected within 120 calendar days after receiving
§ 347-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 347-36
1:661
§ 347-37. Inspections.
§ 347-38. Surcharge.
a notice of violation which has been personally delivered or
delivered via certified mail, the Borough shall impose a surcharge
in the amount provided for in § 347-38.
(2) All disconnections of said illicit connections shall be accomplished
by a complete and permanent method and performed in a
competent manner and approved and inspected by the Borough
Building Inspector, any Borough subcode inspector, Borough Fire
Code official and/or Borough Engineer. Any disconnection,
plugging, capping, rerouting, altering, or modifying must be done
in accordance with all applicable state and municipal building
codes.
(3) Upon issuance of the surcharge pursuant to § 347-38, if the
property owner, tenant, landlord, or other person with a property
interest remedies the illicit connection, said property owner,
tenant, landlord, or other person with a property interest shall call
the Borough's Building Department for an inspection of the
connection by the Borough's Building Inspector, a Borough
subcode inspector, Borough Fire Code official or Borough Engineer,
and upon certification that the illicit connection has been remedied,
the surcharge shall be lifted, beginning the month following the
inspection and certification. If, however, on a subsequent and
periodic inspection for which a property was subject to the
surcharge, the illicit connection exists, the surcharge amount as
provided for in § 347-38 shall be calculated from the previous
inspection date.
A. The Building Inspector, Borough Engineer, Borough Fire Code official
and/or a Borough subcode inspector, as long as they display the proper
credentials and identification, shall be permitted to request entrance to
any property for the purpose of inspecting, observing, testing and
sampling to confirm that there is no sump pump or other prohibited
discharge into the sanitary sewer system in accordance with this
chapter.
B. Any owner, tenant, landlord, or other person with a property interest
who shall refuse entrance to the Building Inspector, Borough Engineer,
Borough Fire Code official or Borough subcode inspector, shall
immediately become subject to the monthly surcharge noted in
§ 347-38 of this article. Said property shall remain subject to the
monthly surcharge until such time as an inspection is permitted to
ensure compliance by the Borough of all terms of this chapter.
A. A surcharge of $50 per month is hereby imposed upon every sewer
utility bill to property owners, tenants, landlords, or other persons with
a property interest for the following conditions:
§ 347-36 EDGEWATER CODE § 347-38
1:662
§ 347-39. Appeal of surcharge.
Any property owner who shall be assessed a surcharge pursuant to this
article shall have a right to appeal to the Municipal Court for the purposes
of proving compliance with this article.
§ 347-40. Municipal assistance.
The Borough shall assist and provide guidance to any property owner,
tenant, landlord, or other person with a property interest in remedying the
situation as it involves a matter of public concern to the resident's health,
safety and welfare of the community in remedying the illicit connection.
Except as specifically set forth in this article, all costs associated to comply
with this article shall be borne by the property owner, tenant, landlord, or
other person with a property interest.
§ 347-41. Waiver.
Any person, business, or other entity, who shall by inspection or voluntary
reporting be determined to be in violation of any section of this article, shall
be permitted to file for a waiver of the surcharge requirement of § 347-38,
if they can prove that they have exhausted all possible remedial measures.
Remedial measures include but are not limited to, the installation of a dry
well, the connection to a storm sewer, and/or use of one's own property
for discharge of the water so long as such discharge does not adversely
affect any neighboring property owner. Upon certification of the Building
Inspector and/or Borough Engineer, the person, business, or other entity
shall be granted such waiver, but only for such time as to when a remedy
becomes available. If such remedy is made available by the Borough, the
Borough shall notify the person, business, or other entity, that they shall
comply with this article within 120 days of receiving said notice. Failure to
comply will result in the imposition of a surcharge as per § 347-38.
(1) Not in compliance with this article.
(2) Refusal of properly inspection.
B. If the surcharge is not paid and received by the Borough of Edgewater,
a lien shall be imposed upon the property as per N.J.S.A. 40:14B-42.
C. Said surcharge shall remain on the property and sewer utility bill until
such time as the Borough Building Inspector or Borough Engineer
certifies that the property owner, tenant, landlord, or other person with
a property interest is in full compliance with this article.
§ 347-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 347-41
1:663

ARTICLE V
(Reserved)
§ 347-42. through § 347-45. (Reserved)
§ 347-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 347-42
1:665

ARTICLE VI
(Reserved)
§ 347-46. through § 347-50. (Reserved)
§ 347-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 347-46
1:667

ARTICLE VII
(Reserved)
§ 347-51. through § 347-60. (Reserved)140
140. Editor's Note: Former Art. VII, Excess Usage Charge System, added 7-12-2010 by Ord. No.
1437-2010, was repealed 9-20-2010 by Ord. No. 1444-2010.
§ 347-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 347-51
1:669

ARTICLE VIII
User Charges for Non-Tax-Exempt Properties
[Added 9-20-2010 by Ord. No. 1444-2010]
§ 347-61. Findings; purpose.
§ 347-62. Compliance with Bergen County Utilities Authority.
The use of all sanitary sewers of the Borough shall be in compliance with
the rules and regulations enacted by the Bergen County Utilities Authority.
§ 347-63. Systems adopted.
§ 347-64. Copies on file.
Not fewer than three copies of the rules and regulations of the Bergen
County Utilities Authority have been and are filed in the office of the
Clerk of the Borough and are available for public inspection during normal
business hours.
A. The federal government has enacted and amended the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act, now known as the "Federal Clean Water Act" (33
U.S.C. § 1150 et seq.); and
B. The Bergen County Utilities Authority has enacted rules and
regulations, as required by the Federal Clean Water Act, in
incorporating an industrial cost recovery system, a user charge system,
and regulations pertaining to the use of sanitary sewers; and
C. The Borough of Edgewater is within the district serviced by the Bergen
County Utilities Authority and has contracted with the Bergen County
Utilities Authority for the removal and treatment of the wastewater
contained within the sanitary sewers of the Borough of Edgewater; and
D. The Borough of Edgewater desires to assure that the sanitary sewers
operated and maintained by it will conform to the best sanitary
engineering practices and comply with the requirements of the Federal
Clean Water Act.
A. The Borough hereby adopts and enacts the user charge system and
industrial cost recovery system contained in the rules and regulations
of the Bergen County Utilities Authority and authorizes their immediate
implementation by the appropriate municipal official, to be designated
by resolution of the governing body.
B. Nothing contained herein shall preclude the Borough from challenging
any amendments to the rules and regulations which may be hereafter
adopted.
§ 347-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 347-65
1:671
§ 347-65. Copies available for cost.
Copies of the rules and regulations of the Bergen County Utilities Authority
can be obtained from the Bergen County Utilities Authority for the cost of
publication.
§ 347-66. Amount of charges.
The annual user charge shall be computed on the previous calendar year's
amount of water used and the current calendar year's charges imposed
by the Bergen County Utilities Authority upon the Borough of Edgewater,
together with all appropriate administrative costs, capital costs and debt
service attributable to the operation and maintenance of the Edgewater
sewer system.
§ 347-67. Exemption from user charge.
There shall be allowed an exemption from the annual user charge for
all nonresidential usage of less than 300,000 gallons of water, with the
exception of apartments and multifamily houses, for which provision is
made hereinafter. With respect to apartments and multifamily houses, the
exemption shall apply to usage of less than 300,000 gallons of water with
respect to each separate and individual living unit within the apartment
complex.
§ 347-68. Allowances.
A. No allowance shall be made for water which is metered but which does
not enter the sanitary sewer system, unless the owner installs and
maintains, at his expense, a meter approved by the Borough to measure
the water so diverted from the sewer lines.
B. In case of business or industry, where water is lost by evaporation, the
Borough Engineer, with the approval of the Council, may make a proper
allowance for such evaporation.
C. Where sprinkler systems are maintained, a proper credit shall be given
for water contained or passing through such sprinkler system, which
water does not reach a sanitary sewer line.
D. Any owner may install and maintain, at his expense, a sewage flow
meter, approved by the Borough Engineer, to measure the flow into the
sewer lines. Where such a sewage flow is maintained, the owner shall
be billed on the actual reading of such meter at the same rate as
determined hereinabove.
E. In any specific case not contemplated or not clearly defined herein or
where the type of waste will place an extraordinary burden on the
sewage facilities either because of its quantity or its quality, the
Borough Council is hereby authorized, by contract or otherwise, to
establish a specific rate as may be necessary.
§ 347-65 EDGEWATER CODE § 347-69
1:672
§ 347-69. Billing procedures.
§ 347-70. Transitional provisions.
A. All charges shall be due and payable twice annually on the first days of
June and December, respectively, of each year. Payments shall be made
to the Borough Tax Collector.
B. All charges shall be payable to the Borough of Edgewater and shall be
and remain a lien on the real property owned by any user. The Borough
shall have the same remedies for the collection thereof, with interest,
costs and penalties, as it has by law for the collection of real property
taxes.
A. As soon as practical after the passage of this article, the Chief Financial
Officer and the Tax Collector shall attend to the preparation of bills for
the period beginning the first day of the month following final passage
and publication of this article and ending December 31, 2010, such
period being hereinafter referred to as "Billing Year 2010."
B. User charges for Billing Year 2010 shall be equal to the pro-rata amount
of the user charges which would have been imposed upon each user for
the calendar year 2010, under the terms of this article.
C. Bills for Billing Year 2010 shall be mailed by the Tax Collector of the
Borough of Edgewater to the owners of all properties incurring such
charges not later than October 1, 2010.
D. Bills for Billing Year 2010 are due and payable to the Tax Collector on
November 1, 2010. If such charges are not paid in full as of that date,
the unpaid charges shall be deemed delinquent as of that date, and
such unpaid charges shall become a lien upon the properties incurring
them as of that date.
E. Except as modified by § 212-68, user charges for Billing Year 2010 shall
be subject to all of the provisions of this article.
§ 347-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 347-70
1:673
Chapter 353
SHOPPING CARTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 380.
§ 353-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CART — A hand-drawn or -propelled vehicle or wheeled container made of
metal, wood or other material such as is generally provided by merchants
for carting or carrying merchandise or foodstuffs to automobiles or other
places.
CORRAL — A physical barrier, consisting of metal poles embedded in the
ground, or a masonry or other wall or structure, capable of preventing
shopping carts from being removed from the premises.
PERSON — A person of either sex, corporation, partnership, association,
joint-stock company, societies and other entities capable of being sued.
STREET — Includes street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway, boulevard,
concourse, driveway, culvert, crosswalk, sidewalk, parks, parking lots,
parking areas and places used by the general public.
§ 353-2. Corral required; violations and penalties.
§ 353-3. Removal from shopping establishment prohibited;
violations and penalties.
A. No person shall make any shopping cart or carts available for use by
customers for handling or carrying food, goods or other merchandise in
or about any store or other business establishment unless the premises
on which such store or other business establishment is located contains
a corral, certified by the Borough Code Official to be sufficient to
prevent the removal of any such shopping cart from such premises.
B. In the event of a violation of this section, the Borough Code Official
shall issue a notice of violation, which shall require compliance within
10 days. Thereafter, the Borough Code Official shall issue summonses
for violations of this chapter. In the event of conviction, the Municipal
Court shall fine the offender $100 for the first offense; $250 for the
second offense; and $500 for the third and all following offenses.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove a cart, as defined herein,
from the property of any store or other business establishment. Further,
it shall be unlawful for any store or other business establishment to
§ 347-70 EDGEWATER CODE § 353-3
1:674
§ 353-4. Leaving upon street or sidewalk prohibited; violations and
penalties.
§ 353-5. Removal by Borough when found upon street.
permit or allow any person to remove a cart, as defined herein, from
the property of the store or other business establishment.
B. In the event of a conviction of this section, the Municipal Court shall
impose a fine of $25 for the first violation; $50 for the second violation;
and $100 for the third and subsequent violations.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, or such person's agent or employee,
to leave or suffer or permit to be left any cart, either owned by such
person or in such person's possession, custody or control, upon any
sidewalk or street.
B. In the event of a conviction of this section, the Municipal Court shall
impose a fine of $25 for the first violation; $50 for the second violation;
and $100 for the third and subsequent violations.
A. The Borough shall impound or cause to be impounded a cart found upon
any sidewalk or street, that has no sign or notice identifying the owner,
where it shall be held until redeemed, sold or otherwise disposed of as
hereinafter provided.
B. The Borough shall impound or cause to be impounded, when the
following conditions are met, a cart that has a sign or notice identifying
the owner of the cart, or the retailer who has written consent from the
owner to use the cart, and listing a valid telephone number or address
through which the owner or retailer can be contacted:
(1) The cart is located outside the premises or parking area of a retail
mercantile establishment.
(2) The Borough notifies the owner or retailer of the location of the
cart and allows three business days from the date of such
notification for the owner, retailer, or an authorized agent to
retrieve the cart, unless the immediate removal is necessary to
prevent a danger to public safety.
(3) The Borough has notified the owner or retailer upon impoundment
of a cart and includes information as to how the cart may be
retrieved.
(4) The location that an impounded cart is held is reasonably
convenient to the owner, retailer, or authorized agent and is open
for business at least six hours of each business day.
(5) Any fine imposed upon the owner or retailer for an impounded cart
does not exceed $50 for each occurrence for failure to retrieve
§ 353-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 353-5
1:675
§ 353-6. Notice of removal and redemption.
Whenever the Borough impounds or causes to be impounded a cart that has
a sign or notice identifying the owner of the cart, or the retailer who has
written consent from the owner to use the cart, and lists a valid telephone
number or address through which the owner or retailer can be contacted,
without meeting the conditions required in § 353-5 hereof, the Borough
shall:
§ 353-7. Redemption by owner; proof of ownership; defense to
adverse claimant.
After the expiration of five business days as provided in § 353-6 hereof,
a cart may be redeemed by the owner thereof at any time prior to the
sale, dismantling, destruction or disposal thereof, and the owner shall be
entitled to receive such cart upon payment of the sum of $25. No cart
shall be delivered to a person seeking to redeem unless proof is submitted
establishing to the satisfaction of the Borough such person's ownership or
right to possession. Any delivery to a person deemed entitled thereto by
the Borough from the proof submitted shall be an absolute defense of the
Borough against any other person claiming to be entitled thereto.
§ 353-8. Notice of public auction; redemption fee and costs; sale.
When any cart remains in the custody of the Borough for a period of 15 days
after the removal and with respect to which no person has presented to
the Borough proof establishing to its satisfaction such person's ownership
or right to possession, the Borough shall give public notice in its official
newspaper that, at a specified place and time, not less than five days after
such notice is published, such cart will be sold at public auction for not less
than $25, plus the costs of advertising the sale. If, after such notice of sale
is given, any person desires to redeem any cart prior to sale, such person
shall pay to the Borough for redemption the sum of $25, plus the cost of
advertising the sale. A general description of the cart shall be sufficient. The
sale shall be conducted by the Borough Administrator or by such person as
the governing body shall designate.
carts. An occurrence includes all carts impounded in accordance
with this section during a twenty-four-hour period.
(6) The Borough allows the owner or retailer a minimum of five
business days following receipt of notice that a cart has been
impounded to retrieve the cart before it may sell or otherwise
dispose of the cart.
A. Notify the owner or retailer within 24 hours of impounding the cart and
include information on how the cart may be retrieved;
B. Release the cart to the owner, retailer or authorized agent without any
charge or fine whatsoever if the owner, retailer, or authorized agent
attempts to retrieve the cart within five business days of notice.
§ 353-5 EDGEWATER CODE § 353-9
1:676
§ 353-9. Disposition of unsold carts.
If the cart is not sold at public auction, the Borough may offer it again for
sale or may dismantle, destroy or otherwise dispose of such cart.
§ 353-10. No liability to owner upon disposition of cart.
Any disposition of such cart made pursuant to this chapter shall be made
without any liability of the Borough to the owner of such cart or other
person lawfully entitled thereto or having an interest therein.
§ 353-11. Disposition of redemption or sales proceeds.
Upon a redemption or sale of a cart, the proceeds shall be deposited in the
general funds of the Borough.
§ 353-12. Applicability.
This chapter shall not apply to any cart or personal property which may
come into the possession or custody of any department of the Borough
pursuant to any other ordinance, law or regulation.
Chapter 362
SOIL REMOVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Landfill or surcharging operations — See Ch.
235.
Land use and development — See Ch. 240.
§ 362-1. Legislative findings.
The Mayor and Council hereby finds and determines that:
A. The uncontrolled and unregulated disturbance, excavation, filling,
relocation and removal of soil have resulted and will result in conditions
detrimental to the public safety, health and general welfare,
substantially hampering and deterring the efforts of the Borough to
effectuate the general purpose of municipal planning; and
B. Continuation of the unregulated and uncontrolled disturbance,
relocation, filling, excavation and removal of soil will result in serious
and irreparable damage to the public health and welfare by reason of
conseqent erosion by water and wind; inadequate and improper surface
water drainage; decrease in or destruction of the fertility of soil;
removal of lateral support of abutting streets, lands and premises;
creation of dangerous depressions or pits; deterioration of property
values; rendering of lands unfit or unsuitable for the most appropriate
§ 353-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-1
1:677
§ 362-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LOT — Any parcel of land or portion thereof, the boundary lines of which
can be ascertained by reference to maps and records, or either, in the
office of the Borough Tax Assessor or the office of the Bergen County Clerk.
Included herein shall be any contiguous parcels of land under common
ownership, which ownership can be ascertained by reference to maps and
records, or either, in the office of the Tax Assessor or the County Clerk.
MOVE — To dig; to disturb; to excavate; to remove; to deposit; to place;
to fill; to grade, regrade, level or otherwise alter or change the location,
elevation or contour; to transport; to supply; provided, however, that
nothing in this chapter shall be construed to include the plowing, spading,
cultivation or harrowing of soil or any other operation usually or ordinarily
associated with the tilling of soil for agricultural or horticultural purposes.
OWNER — Any person seized in fee simple of any lot or parcel or lessee or
agent of such person or having such other interest or estate therein as will
permit exercise of effective possession thereof or dominion thereover.
PERSON — Includes corporations, companies, associations, societies, firms,
partnerships and joint-stock companies, or the agents or persons acting
under the authority thereof, as well as individuals.
SOIL — Any earth, sand, clay, loam, gravel, humus, rock or dirt, or a
combination of any such substances, without regard to the presence therein
of organic matter.
TOPSOIL — Soil that, in its natural state, constitutes the top layer of earth
and is composed of 2% or more by weight of organic matter and has the
ability to support vegetation.
§ 362-3. Permit required; exceptions.
uses and creation of other factors or elements hampering and deterring
the coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the Borough.
A. No owner of any lot in the Borough or other person shall cause, allow,
permit or suffer any soil in and upon such lot to be moved by any person
until a soil permit may be obtained therefor, in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
B. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in Subsection A of
this section, no soil permit shall be required in connection with the
following:
(1) Where the amount of soil to be moved constitutes a volume of less
than one-hundred-cubic yards and an elevation of two feet or less.
In the event that a person desires to remove soil from the premises
which consists of less than one-hundred-cubic yards in volume,
§ 362-1 EDGEWATER CODE § 362-3
1:678
§ 362-4. Review of applications; issuance of permits.
The Mayor and Council is hereby designated as the referral agency to
review, consider and approve applications for soil permits under this
chapter. Upon approval by the Mayor and Council, the soil permit shall be
issued by the Borough Clerk or Construction Official, as designated by the
Mayor and Council.
§ 362-5. Contents of application.
such person shall follow the procedures set forth in Subsection C
of this section.
(2) Where approval has been granted for the construction or alteration
of a building or structure pursuant to a resolution adopted by a
land use agency of the Borough and/or a permit has been issued
therefor by the Construction Official.
(3) Any movement of soil ordered or contracted for by the Mayor and
Council.
(4) Public improvements, including but not limited to the construction
of public buildings, utilities, streets and drainage facilities.
C. Any person desiring to remove soil from the premises shall apply to the
Construction Official of the Borough of Edgewater for permission for
the removal of same where the amount constitutes a volume of less than
one-hundred-cubic yards. The Construction Official shall consider and
review such application and, in arriving at his decision, shall consider
the factors set forth in § 362-9 of this chapter as to whether approval
may be granted without detriment to the public health, welfare and
public safety. In the event that permission is denied by the Construction
Official, the applicant may appeal such decision, in writing, to the
Mayor and Council and shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
A. Application for a soil permit shall be filed in duplicate with the office of
the Borough Clerk on forms prescribed by the Mayor and Council.
B. The applicant shall set forth the following:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) Description of the lands in question.
(3) The name and address of the owner of the lands.
(4) The purpose or reason for moving the soil.
(5) The kind and quantity in cubic yards of soil to be moved.
(6) In case of removal from the lot, the place to which the soil is to be
removed, the proposed route of the vehicles within the Borough
§ 362-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-5
1:679
§ 362-6. Application to be signed and endorsed.
The application described in § 362-5 shall be signed by the applicant. It shall
also be endorsed by the owner or owners of the land, signifying that such
persons approve of the application, consent to the applicant performing
the proposed work, and consent to the Borough, in the event of the failure
of the applicant to do so, to cause the proposed work to be completed or
terminated in accordance with the purposes or objectives of this chapter.
§ 362-7. Topographical map required.
The application for a soil permit shall be accompanied by at least two prints
of a topographical map of the lot upon which the proposed soil moving
operations are to be conducted and of all surrounding lands within 200 feet
of the perimeter of said lot. The map shall be prepared and certified by a
licensed professional civil engineer or a licensed land surveyor. Said map
shall, both as to the lot and all surrounding land, show the following:
§ 362-8. Permit fee.
along which the soil is to be transported and the kind and quantity
of soil to be moved.
(7) The proposed date of completion of the work and proposed hours of
operation.
(8) The type of measures to be employed in screening the site from
surrounding properties and the type of fencing, if any, to be erected
during the soil movement operation.
A. The dimensions of the lot and the lot and block numbers of the lot and of
each lot in the surrounding lands as shown on the Tax Assessment Map
of the Borough.
B. Present contour lines and contour grades of the land to be shown at
five-foot contour intervals for slopes in excess of 10% and at two-foot
intervals for lands of lesser slope.
C. Proposed contour lines and proposed contour grades resulting from
such intended removal of soil at intervals as set forth in Subsection B of
this section.
D. Grades of all abutting streets, lots and lands.
E. The location of all structures within 200 feet of the property.
F. Such other pertinent data as the Mayor and Council may require.
A. The fee for a permit under this chapter shall accompany the
application. Such fee shall be computed at the rate of $0.05 per cubic
yard multiplied by the number of cubic yards to be moved, as stated in
the application certified on the topographical map. In no event,
however, shall the permit fee be less than $50.
§ 362-5 EDGEWATER CODE § 362-8
1:680
§ 362-9. Criteria for approval.
§ 362-10. Hearing required; service of notice.
B. In addition to the fee set forth in Subsection A above, each applicant for
a soil permit shall pay for all expenses incurred by the Borough for
engineering services and reports, inspection fees and legal fees in
processing the application. Such fees or the estimate thereof shall be
paid prior to the issuance of the soil permit.
A. The Mayor and Council, in considering and reviewing the application
and in arriving at its decision, shall be guided and take into
consideration the public health, safety and general welfare, and
particular consideration shall be given to the following factors:
(1) Soil erosion by water and wind.
(2) Drainage.
(3) Soil fertility.
(4) Lateral support slopes and grades of abutting streets and lands.
(5) Land values and uses.
(6) Public health and safety.
(7) Such other factors as may bear upon or relate to the coordinated
adjusted and harmonious physical development of the Borough.
B. Prior to rendering a decision on the application, the Mayor and Council
may designate the Borough Engineer and/or Construction Official to
make a report concerning site inspection and the effect of the
movement of soil at or from the location.
C. If, after examining the application and the map provided for in § 362-7
and after holding a hearing on the application as required by § 362-10
of this chapter, the Mayor and Council shall be of the opinion that the
proposed soil movement satisfies the criteria of Subsection A of this
section and will not result in the creation of any surface declivities, pits
or depressions, soil erosion or fertility problems, lateral support
problems or other conditions of danger, permission to move the soil may
be granted. Such permit shall be effective for a period of time to be
determined by the Mayor and Council and may contain any special
conditions deemed necessary by the Mayor and Council.
D. In addition to such conditions that the Mayor and Council deem
necessary for the safety and welfare of the Borough, the Mayor and
Council may further condition approval of the application upon the
applicant obtaining, where required, approval by any agency having
jurisdiction.
§ 362-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-10
1:681
§ 362-11. Decision on application.
Within 60 days after receipt of the application for a soil permit, the Mayor
and Council shall complete its review in consideration of the application and
render its decision thereon.
§ 362-12. Bond required; determination of amount.
§ 362-13. Application for amendment of permit.
The holder of a soil permit shall not proceed before the Mayor and Council
for any application for amendment or alteration of the terms and conditions
A. The Mayor and Council shall, within a reasonable time after receipt of
the application, fix a date for a hearing on the application and provide
the applicant notice of the time and place of said hearing.
B. The applicant shall, at least five days prior to the date fixed for hearing,
serve written notice, either in person or by registered or certified mail,
upon such persons as are shown by the assessment rolls of the Borough
to be the owners of such lots that abut the property in question.
C. The applicant shall, at the hearing, present to the Mayor and Council
satisfactory proof, in affidavit form, of the service of said notices.
A. The soil permit shall not be issued unless the applicant posts with the
Borough a cash deposit or performance bond in form and with surety
acceptable to the Borough, in the amount the Mayor and Council
determine, conditioned upon full and faithful performance by the
principal, within the time specified in the application, of all the
proposed work in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and of
the soil permit issued to the principal. In addition, the cash deposit or
bond shall be conditioned upon the repair, at the expense of the owner
or applicant, of any street or streets damaged by the transportation of
soil in connection with the application if, in the judgment of the Mayor
and Council, such repairs are necessary. The term "expense" as used in
this subsection, shall include the cost of supervision by the Borough
Engineer in connection with such repairs.
B. The amount of bond or cash deposit shall be determined at the rate of
not less than $0.10 per cubic yard and not in excess of $0.50 per cubic
yard of the amount of soil to be moved; provided, however, that in no
event shall such bond or deposit be less than the principal amount of
$1,000. In ascertaining the rate upon which to compute the amount of
the deposit or of the bond, the Mayor and Council shall take into
consideration such factors as may bear upon the facility with which the
proposed work may be performed, including but not limited to the type
and character of soil, the extent of the area over which the soil moving
operations are to be conducted, the extent and depth of the various cuts
and fills, the proximity of the proposed operation to streets, buildings,
structures and residences and general drainage conditions.
§ 362-10 EDGEWATER CODE § 362-13
1:682
of an outstanding soil permit unless such person submits to the Mayor
and Council the written consent of the surety on his bond approving said
application for amendment or alteration and consent to extension of the
bond coverage thereto.
§ 362-14. Application for release of bond.
Application for the release of any bond posted in accordance with the
terms of this chapter or a resolution of the Mayor and Council shall be
accompanied by an affidavit stating that the soil moving operation has been
completed in accordance with the application and all plans, maps and other
data filed therewith and in accordance with all resolutions and conditions
therein adopted by the Mayor and Council. The affidavit shall be executed
by a licensed professional or civil engineer of the State of New Jersey.
§ 362-15. Manner of conducting operations.
The holder of a permit under this chapter shall not:
§ 362-16. Topsoil to be saved and replaced.
The owner of the premises or the person in charge of the soil movement
operation, when permission has been duly granted, shall not take away the
top layer of arable soil to a depth of six inches, but such top layer of arable
soil to a depth of six inches shall be set aside for retention on the premises
A. Conduct the operation on the premises so as to cause sharp declivities,
pits or depressions.
B. Fail to cause the area to be properly leveled and graded so as to
conform to the contour lines as approved.
C. Conduct or maintain any soil moving operations without first having
made adequate provision, by means of road oil or otherwise, for the
laying of dust incidental to the use of vehicles, machinery and
equipment on the premises.
D. Neglect to dispose of, on or before the completion date stated in the
application:
(1) Any partially or wholly excavated boulders or other incombustible
debris resulting from the soil moving operations, by burial or
removal.
(2) Any partially or wholly excavated stumps, felled or uprooted trees
or other combustible debris resulting from the soil moving
operations, by combustion or removal from the premises.
E. Conduct any soil moving operations beyond the expiration date as set
forth in the soil permit or extended expiration date as may duly be
granted by the Mayor and Council.
§ 362-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-16
1:683
and shall be uniformly respread over the premises pursuant to the levels
and contour lines approved by the Mayor and Council.
§ 362-17. Soil deposit restrictions.
No owner or other person shall deposit soil upon, fill in or raise the grade
of any lot without making provision for:
§ 362-18. Right of entry.
For the purpose of administering and enforcing this chapter, any duly
authorized officer, agent or employee of the Borough shall have the right
to enter into and upon any lands for which an application has been filed
and upon which soil moving operations are to be conducted, to examine and
inspect such lands.
§ 362-19. Violations and penalties.141
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
Chapter 368
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Demolition regulations — See Ch. 179.
Landfill operations — See Ch. 235.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 314.
Control of waterfront drift and debris — See
Ch. 444, Art. II.
Solid waste disposal — See Ch. 529.
A. The use in said work of soil or such other material as will not result in
deviation from the proposed final grades or the uniformity thereon by
reason of abnormal shrinkage or settlement.
B. Collection and storage upon the lot of the original topsoil so that topsoil
shall not be buried beneath soil or other material of inferior quality, and
the uniform replacement of the topsoils so stored over the eitire area of
the surface of the fill soil or other material so that the final grade or
grades of said replacement topsoil shall be in accordance with the
proposed final grades shown on the topographical map.
141. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 362-16 EDGEWATER CODE § 362-19
1:684
ARTICLE I
Garbage Receptacles
[Adopted 7-5-1904 by Ord. No. 29; readopted 8-1-1967 by Ord. No.
476 (Ch. 158, Art. I, of the 1975 Code)]
§ 368-1. Receptacle required.
It shall be the duty of every owner, householder, tenant, lessee and occupant
of any and every dwelling in the Borough of Edgewater to provide and at
all times hereafter to keep on his premises a receptacle or receptacles for
receiving and holding all the ashes and garbage that may accumulate from
said building.
§ 368-2. Specifications for receptacles.
Every receptacle designed and used to hold garbage shall be made of some
suitable metal and have a proper cover.
§ 368-3. Janitorial services for multiple dwellings required. [Added
5-5-1981 by Ord. No. 688-81]
In every multiple dwelling consisting of three or more dwelling units, the
owner shall provide or designate a superintendent, janitor, caretaker or
housekeeper who shall at all times maintain the premises in compliance
with the provisions of this article and who shall keep the premises free
from garbage, refuse and rubbish and who shall be responsible for the
daily collection of garbage and other refuse from the occupants thereof at
a reasonable time and place the same out for collection. Said person shall
be regularly available on the premises to perform the aforesaid duties. In
the case of any multiple dwelling consisting of 20 or more units, said person
shall reside on the premises. The name of said superintendent, janitor,
caretaker or housekeeper shall be made known to all tenants residing
therein, and in the event that said person is not required to reside on
the premises under the provisions of this section, then and in that event
the owner or operator shall make known his name, address and telephone
number to all tenants and shall register same with the public officer and
shall also inform the tenants and the public officer of the name of another
individual who shall be responsible at all times to perform the aforesaid
duties in the absence of the designated superintendent, janitor, caretaker
or housekeeper. As used herein, the term "public officer" shall mean the
individual or individuals charged with the enforcement of the provisions of
this article. The failure of the person so designated to perform the duties
required to comply with the provisions of this article, even in disobedience
of instructions, shall not relieve the owner or operator of the duties or
responsibilities imposed by this article.
§ 368-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 368-4
1:685
§ 368-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-20-20107 by Ord. No.
1439-2010]
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
§ 368-4 EDGEWATER CODE § 368-4
1:686
ARTICLE II
Construction Debris
[Adopted 10-22-1985 by Ord. No. 831-85 (Ch. 158, Art. II, of the
1975 Code)]
§ 368-5. Permit required.
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall place or
cause to be placed on any property within the Borough of Edgewater
a container, dumpster or receptacle for construction debris without first
obtaining a permit therefor. As used herein, the term "construction debris"
shall mean any scrap lumber, metal, earth, sand, bricks, stone, plaster,
roofing and siding material and any other debris of a similar nature which
accumulates and is incidental to the construction or major renovation of any
type of structure.
§ 368-6. Issuance of permit. [Amended 9-20-2010 by Ord. No.
1439-2010]
A permit under this article shall be obtained from the Construction Official
upon the payment of a fee of $25. An appropriate application shall be filed
by the person, firm, corporation, partnership or other entity seeking such
permit, which shall set forth the length of time such container, dumpster or
receptacle shall be on the applicant's premises.
§ 368-7. Placement of containers.
A. Any container, dumpster or receptacle requiring a permit under this
article shall be located on the applicant's property, if feasible.
B. The container, dumpster or receptacle shall be situated in such a
location or manner as deemed appropriate by the Construction Official
so as to prevent injury to children and other persons. Under no
circumstances may any items other than construction debris be placed
in the receptacle.
C. There shall be placed on every container, dumpster or receptacle
identification setting forth the name, address and telephone number of
the owner of such container, dumpster or receptacle.
D. In the event that an applicant seeks placement of a container, dumpster
or receptacle on public property, such applicant shall first secure the
approval concerning the placement thereof from the Chief of Police
and/or Police Director. Any approval issued by the Chief of Police and/or
Police Director shall be submitted by the applicant, together with the
application, to the Construction Official. [Amended 3-20-2017 by
Ord. No. 1541-2017]
E. Any person obtaining approval for the placement of a container,
dumpster or receptacle on public property shall be required to place
reflectors, cones, flashing lights or other safety equipment on or about
§ 368-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 368-7
1:687
§ 368-8. Duration of permit; nonrenewability.
§ 368-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-20-2010 by Ord. No.
1439-2010]
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article II,
General Penalty. Each and every day a violation of this article shall occur
shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
the container, dumpster or receptacle, as determined by the Chief
of Police and/or Police Director. [Amended 3-20-2017 by Ord. No.
1541-2017]
A. Any permit issued pursuant to § 368-7A of this article shall be valid for a
period of 60 days, in which time the container, dumpster or receptacle
shall be removed from the premises. In order to ensure the removal of
the container, dumpster or receptacle from the property, the applicant
therefor shall post a bond, in a form to be approved by the Borough,
prior to the issuance of such permit.
B. Any permit issued pursuant to § 368-7D of this article shall be valid for
a period of 14 days, in which time the container, dumpster or receptacle
shall be removed from the public property. In order to ensure the
removal of the container, dumpster or receptacle from the property, the
applicant therefor shall post a bond, in the form to be approved by the
Borough, prior to the issuance of such permit.
C. Upon the expiration of the period for which a permit is valid under this
article, such permit shall be nonrenewable.
§ 368-7 EDGEWATER CODE § 368-9
1:688
ARTICLE III
Used Oil
[Adopted 12-20-1988 by Ord. No. 905-88 (Ch. 201, Art. II, of the
1975 Code)]
§ 368-10. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to conserve nonrenewable petroleum
resources, to preserve and enhance the quality of the environment and to
protect the public health and welfare.
§ 368-11. Standards for the management of used oil. [Amended
9-20-2010 by Ord. No. 1439-2010]
The provisions of the New Jersey Administrative Code, Title 7,
"Environmental Protection," Chapter 26A, "Recycling Rules," Subchapter 6,
"Standards for the Management of Used Oil," N.J.A.C. 7:26A-6.1 et seq., are
in effect and shall be enforced in the Borough of Edgewater.142
§ 368-12. Violations and penalties.143
Any person, firm, corporation or other entity who violates or fails to comply
with any provision of this article or any regulation promulgated pursuant
thereto shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided in Chapter
1, Article II, General Penalty.
142. Editor's Note: Former §§ 201-10 through 201-13, containing specific provisions for the
disposal of used oil, which immediately followed this section, were deleted at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
143. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 368-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 368-12
1:689

ARTICLE IV
Recycling
[Adopted 3-16-2009 by Ord. No. 1409-2009 (Ch. 201, Art. III, of the
1975 Code)]
§ 368-13. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH RECYCLING COORDINATOR — The person or persons
appointed by the Mayor and Council and who shall be authorized to, among
other things, enforce the provisions of this article and any rules and
regulations which may be promulgated hereunder.
BOROUGH SOLID WASTE STREAMS — All solid waste generated at
residential, commercial and institutional establishments within the
boundaries of the Borough of Edgewater.
CARDBOARD — Corrugated cardboard, cereal boxes, etc.
CO-MINGLED GOODS — Combined aluminum cans, tin cans, Type 1 and
Type 2 plastic containers, and glass goods.
CO-MINGLING — The combining of nonputrescible source-separated
recyclable materials for the purpose of recycling.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS — Material and debris that
typically results from construction and/or demolition at residential,
commercial and/or industrial sites in the Borough, including concrete,
brick, tree parts, nonferrous/ferrous metal, asphalt, corrugated cardboard,
etc.
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials designated
within the Borough of Edgewater District Solid Waste Management Plan
to be source-separated for the purpose of recycling. This definition shall
include co-mingled goods, white goods, cardboard, mixed paper, leaves,
grass clippings, construction and demolition debris, electronic waste, and
household hazardous waste, all as defined herein.
ELECTRONIC WASTE — A computer central-processing unit and associated
hardware, including keyboards, modems, printers, scanners and fax
machines; a cathode ray tube; a cathode ray tube device; a flat panel display
or similar video display device with a screen that is greater than four inches
measured diagonally and that contains one or more circuit boards, including
a television; and cell phones.
HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE — Paint and other household chemicals
that are not safe to dispose of with solid waste collection due to flammability
and/or danger posed to solid waste collection workers.
LEAVES — Any leaves that fall during leaf season.
MIXED PAPER — Newspaper, magazines, junk mail, high-grade office paper,
etc.
§ 368-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 368-13
1:691
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — Any building or structure, or complex of
buildings in which three or more dwelling units are owner-occupied or
rented or leased, or offered for rental or lease, for residential purposes
and shall include hotels, motels, or other guest houses serving transient or
seasonal guests, as those terms are defined under Subsection (j) of Section
3 of the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law, P.L. 1967, c. 76 (N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1
et seq.).
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Those materials which would otherwise
become solid waste, and which may be collected, separated or processed
and returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or
products.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Recyclable materials
which are separated at the point of generation by the generator thereof
from solid waste for the purposes of recycling.
SOURCE SEPARATION — The process by which recyclable materials are
separated from solid waste at the point of generation by the generator
thereof for the purposes of recycling.
WHITE GOODS — Any metal items, such as refrigerators, ovens, bed
frames, etc., other than materials defined herein as co-mingled goods.
§ 368-14. Source separation; exemption from source-separation
requirements.
A. Mandatory source separation. It shall be mandatory for all persons who
are owners, tenants or occupants of residential and nonresidential
premises, which shall include but not be limited to retail and other
commercial locations, as well as government, schools and other
institutional locations within the Borough of Edgewater, to separate
designated recyclable materials from all solid waste. Designated
recyclable materials shall be deposited separate and apart from other
solid waste generated by the owners, tenants or occupants of such
premises and shall be placed separately at the curb in a manner and on
such days and times as designated herein or as may be hereinafter
established by regulations promulgated by the Edgewater Department
of Public Works.
B. Exemptions. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.16(d), the Mayor and
Council of the Borough may exempt persons occupying commercial or
institutional premises within its Borough boundaries from the sourceseparation
requirements of the article which require persons
generating Borough solid waste within its Borough boundaries to
source-separate from the Borough solid waste stream the specified
recyclable materials if those persons have otherwise provided for the
recycling of all designated recyclable materials. To be eligible for an
exemption pursuant to this article, a commercial or institutional
generator of solid waste shall file an application for exemption with the
Borough Recycling Coordinator on forms to be provided for this
§ 368-13 EDGEWATER CODE § 368-14
1:692
§ 368-15. Collection of recyclable materials; mandatory recycling.
purpose. The form shall include, at a minimum, the following
information:
(1) The name of the commercial or institutional entity;
(2) The street address location and lot and block designation;
(3) The name, official title and phone number of the person making
application on behalf of the commercial or institutional entity;
(4) The name, address, official contact person and telephone number
of the facility which provides the service of recycling those
designated recyclable materials; and
(5) A certification that the designated recyclable materials will be
recycled, and that, at least on an annual basis, said recycling
service provider or commercial/institutional generator shall
provide written documentation to the Borough Recycling
Coordinator of the total number of tons collected and recycled for
each designated material.
A. All containers and brown paper bags containing recyclable materials
shall be placed, prior to collection, between the curb and the sidewalk
or, in the absence of curb and sidewalk, as near to the street as not to
constitute a danger, where such receptacles shall be readily accessible
to the collector without providing obstruction to pedestrians.
Receptacles or other items to be disposed of shall be placed as noted
above any time after 8:00 p.m. of the day immediately preceding the
day of collection, but no later than 7:00 a.m. of the day of collection.
After collection, any containers shall be removed from the curbside by
no later than 7:00 p.m. of the day of collection.
B. The owner or occupant of the premises shall keep all receptacles and
dumpsters clean and maintained in a safe manner and in accordance
with the Health Code of the Borough of Edgewater.144
C. The recycling of the following recyclable materials is mandatory in the
Borough of Edgewater, and collection and/or disposal of these materials
shall be in the manner prescribed as follows, or at times and in the
manner prescribed by regulations adopted by the Edgewater
Department of Public Works.
(1) Cardboard: collected on Mondays for residents, including highrises
and businesses that elect to have cardboard collected; may
also be dropped at the Borough recycling facility at 540 River Road,
Edgewater.
144. Editor's Note: See Ch. 529, Solid Waste Disposal, in Part III, Board of Health Legislation,
of the Code.
§ 368-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 368-15
1:693
§ 368-16. Residential dwelling compliance requirements.
The owner of any property shall be responsible for compliance with this
article. For multifamily units, the management or owner is responsible
for setting up and maintaining the recycling system, including collection
of recyclable materials, in accordance with guidelines or regulations
established by the appropriate Borough office. Violations and penalty
notices will be directed to the owner or management in those instances
where the violator is not easily identifiable. The management shall issue
notification and collection rules to new tenants when they arrive and every
six months during their occupancy.
§ 368-17. Nonresidential establishment compliance requirements.
(2) Mixed paper: collected on Wednesdays, alternating weeks between
areas north and south of Route 5; may also be dropped at the
Borough recycling facility at 540 River Road, Edgewater.
(3) Co-mingled goods: collected on Thursdays, alternating weeks
between areas north and south of Route 5; may also be dropped at
the Borough recycling facility at 540 River Road, Edgewater.
(4) White goods and ferrous scrap metals: collected on Fridays by
appointment only; may also be dropped at the Borough recycling
facility at 540 River Road, Edgewater.
(5) Electronic goods: collected on Fridays by appointment only; may
also be dropped at the Borough recycling facility at 540 River Road,
Edgewater.
(6) Leaves: collected between approximately October 15 and
December 31, as Borough schedule permits.
(7) Grass clippings: collected on normal garbage collection days.
(8) Construction and demolition debris: must be collected by private
contractor; arrangements to be made by resident/business.
(9) Batteries: may be dropped at the Borough recycling facility at 540
River Road, Edgewater.
(10) Household hazardous waste: must be taken to county drop-off
location.
A. All commercial and institutional generators of solid waste shall be
required to comply with the provisions of this article.
B. The arrangement for collection of designated recyclables hereunder
shall be the responsibility of the commercial, institutional or industrial
property owner or his/her designee, unless the Borough provides for
the collection of designated recyclable materials. All commercial,
institutional or industrial properties which provide outdoor litter
receptacles and disposal service for their contents shall also provide
§ 368-15 EDGEWATER CODE § 368-17
1:694
§ 368-18. New developments of multifamily residential units or
commercial, institutional or industrial properties.
§ 368-19. Collection of solid waste mixed with recyclable materials
prohibited.
receptacles for designated recyclable materials, for those materials
commonly deposited, in the location of the litter receptacle and shall
provide for separate recycling service for their contents.
C. Every business, institution or industrial facility shall report on an
annual basis to the Recycling Coordinator, on such forms as may be
prescribed, on recycling activities at the premises, including the
amount of recycled material, by material type collected and recycled
and the vendor or vendors providing recycling service.
D. All food service establishments, as defined in the Health Code,145 shall,
in addition to compliance with all other recycling requirements, be
required to recycle grease and/or cooking oil created in the processing
of food or food products, and maintain such records as may be
prescribed for inspection by any code enforcement officer, as detailed in
Article III of this chapter.
A. Any application to the Planning Board of the Borough of Edgewater for
subdivision or site plan approval for the construction of multifamily
dwellings of three or more units; single-family developments of 50 or
more units; or any commercial, institutional or industrial development
for the utilization of 1,000 square feet or more of land, must include a
recycling plan. This plan must contain, at a minimum, the following:
(1) A detailed analysis of the expected composition and amounts of
solid waste and recyclables generated at the proposed
development; and
(2) Locations documented on the application's site plan that provide
for convenient recycling opportunities for all owners, tenants and
occupants. The recycling area shall be of sufficient size, convenient
location and contain other attributes (signage, lighting, fencing,
etc.) as may be determined by the Borough Recycling Coordinator.
B. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the Borough of
Edgewater, the owner of any new multifamily housing or commercial,
institutional or industrial development must supply a copy of a duly
executed contract with a hauling company for the purposes of collection
and recycling of source-separated recyclable materials in those
instances where the Borough does not otherwise provide this service.
C. Provision shall be made for the indoor, or enclosed outdoor, storage and
pickup of solid waste, to be approved by the Borough Engineer.
145. Editor's Note: See Ch. 483, Food and Beverage Handling, in Part III, Board of Health
Legislation, in this Code.
§ 368-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 368-19
1:695
§ 368-20. Enforcement.
The Code Enforcement Official, the Department of Health, the Recycling
Coordinator, the Property Maintenance Official, the Housing Officer, and the
Bergen County Department of Health are hereby individually and severally
empowered to enforce the provisions of this article. An inspection may
consist of sorting through containers and opening of solid waste bags to
detect, by sound or sight, the presence of any recyclable material.
§ 368-21. Violations and penalties.
§ 368-22. Construal.
Nothing herein shall create or be construed to create any obligation on
the part of the Borough of Edgewater to collect any recyclable materials in
the Borough of Edgewater or to collect any recyclable materials more or
less frequently or to more or fewer persons, other than those obligations
pursuant to contract, statute, regulation or ordinance that may exist as of
the date of adoption of this article.
A. It shall be unlawful for solid waste collectors to collect solid waste that
is mixed with, or contains visible signs of, designated recyclable
materials. It is also unlawful for solid waste collectors to remove for
disposal those bags or containers of solid waste which visibly display a
warning notice sticker or some other device indicating that the load of
solid waste contains designated recyclable materials.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the resident or occupant to properly
segregate the uncollected solid waste for proper disposal or recycling.
Allowing such unseparated solid waste and recyclables to accumulate
will be considered a violation of this article and the local sanitary code.
C. Once placed in the location identified by this article or any rules or
regulations promulgated pursuant to this article, no person, other than
those authorized by the Borough, shall tamper with, collect, remove or
otherwise handle designated recyclable materials.
A. Any person, corporation, occupant, or entity that violates or fails to
comply with any provision of this article or any of the rules and
regulations promulgated hereunder shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punishable by a fine not less than $250, nor more than $1,000. Each day
for which a violation of this article occurs shall be considered a
separate offense.
B. Fines levied and collected pursuant to the provisions of this article shall
be immediately deposited into the Borough Recycling Trust Fund (or
equivalent). Monies in the Borough Recycling Trust Fund shall be used
for the expenses of the Borough recycling program, including the cost
of purchasing equipment used for the collection of recyclables.
§ 368-19 EDGEWATER CODE § 368-22
1:696
ARTICLE V
Construction, Renovation and Demolition Debris Recovery
[Adopted during codification (upon enactment, adoption
information will be inserted here)]
§ 368-23. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COVERED PROJECT — A construction, renovation or demolition project for
which a building permit or a demolition permit is required, and for which a
dumpster or roll-off container shall be placed on premises for the purpose
of placement of solid waste materials.
§ 368-24. Construction, renovation, demolition debris recovery
plan.
A debris recovery plan shall be filed with the Borough Recycling
Coordinator prior to the commencement of any activity for which municipal
approval is requested as further identified above. The debris recovery plan
shall identify the types and estimated quantities of construction and
demolition debris to be generated from the project, how each material will
be managed, and the name of each facility or service provider that the
entity will use to manage each material. The plan shall further detail how
the applicant shall ensure that a minimum of 50% of the materials to be
generated will be separated and recycled.
§ 368-25. Review of debris recovery plan.
§ 368-26. Diversion requirement adjustment.
A. Approval: A debris recovery plan shall be reviewed by the Borough
Recycling Coordinator, and approved if it provides for all of the
information required by this article. An approved debris recovery plan
shall be marked "Approved" and returned to the owner of the entity
which submitted the plan.
B. Denial: A debris recovery plan shall not be approved if it does not
provide all of the information required by this article. If a debris
recovery plan is not approved, the owner of the entity which submitted
the plan shall be notified in writing that the plan has been rejected,
including the reasons for the rejection. In order to obtain the building
or demolition permit sought, the owner of the entity which will carry
out the construction, renovation or demolition project shall make the
required changes and resubmit the debris recovery plan to the Borough
Recycling Coordinator.
A. Application: If the owner of an entity carrying out a covered project
experiences circumstances that makes it infeasible to comply with the
diversion requirement cited in this article, the owner of the entity may
§ 368-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 368-26
1:697
§ 368-27. Debris recovery plan reporting requirements.
Upon completion of the covered project, but before the final inspection, the
owner of the entity carrying out a covered project shall submit in person or
by certified mail to the Borough Recycling Coordinator the documentation
required to demonstrate that the applicant has met the diversion
requirement. The required documentation shall include the following:
§ 368-28. Compliance with diversion requirement.
The Borough Recycling Coordinator shall review the information submitted
pursuant to this article and determine whether the owner of the entity
carrying out the covered project has complied, or failed to comply, with
apply for an adjustment. The owner shall indicate in writing why it
is infeasible to divert 50% of the materials being generated from the
covered project and specify what percentage of diversion could be
achieved. Increased costs to the owner of the entity carrying out the
covered project will not be an acceptable justification for an
adjustment.
B. Review: The Borough Recycling Coordinator shall review the
information supplied by the owner. If warranted, the Borough Recycling
Coordinator shall attempt to contact the owner to discuss possible ways
of meeting the diversion requirement.
C. Granting of an adjustment: If the Borough Recycling Coordinator
determines that it is infeasible for the entity carrying out a covered
project to divert 50% of the generated construction, renovation and
demolition debris from the covered project, the percent of diversion
required shall be adjusted. The owner shall be notified in writing of the
adjusted diversion requirement. The owner of the entity carrying out
the covered project shall be required to divert the percent of
construction, renovation and demolition debris required by the
adjustment.
D. Denial of adjustment: If the Borough Recycling Coordinator determines
that it is feasible for the owner of an entity carrying out a covered
project to meet the diversion requirement cited in this article, the
owner shall be notified in writing of the denial of the diversion
requirement adjustment.
A. A completed debris recovery report, signed by the owner of the entity
carrying out a covered project, indicating the quantity of each material
generated during the covered project diverted or disposed;
B. Receipts from all facilities or service providers utilized to divert and
dispose materials generated during the covered project; and
C. Any additional information that the owner of the entity carrying out the
covered project believes is relevant to determining compliance with the
diversion requirement.
§ 368-26 EDGEWATER CODE § 368-28
1:698
the diversion requirement. The determination regarding compliance will be
provided to the owner of the entity carrying out the covered project in
writing.
§ 368-29. Appeal to Construction Official.
An owner of the entity carrying out the covered project may appeal a
determination of failure to comply under this article to the Borough
Construction Official within 30 days of the decision or determination. The
appeal shall be in writing and shall state the facts and basis for the appeal.
A decision by the Construction Official shall be final.
§ 368-30. Enforcement.
The Code Enforcement Official, the Police Department, the Department
of Health, the Borough Recycling Coordinator, the Property Maintenance
Official, and the Housing Officer are hereby individually and severally
empowered to enforce the provisions of this article. The respective
enforcing official may, in his or her discretion, post warning stickers for a
first offense. An inspection may consist of dumping and opening of solid
waste bags of containers to detect, by sound or sight, the presence of any
recyclable material.
§ 368-31. Violations and penalties.
Any person, corporation, occupant or entity that violates or fails to comply
with any provision of this article or any of the rules and regulations
promulgated hereunder shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a
fine not less than $100, nor more than $1,000.
§ 368-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 368-31
1:699
Chapter 374
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Disposal of pet waste; feeding of
wildlife — See Ch. 129.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 210.
Land use and development — See Ch. 240.
Sewers — See Ch. 347.
Soil removal — See Ch. 362.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 380.
§ 368-31 EDGEWATER CODE § 368-31
1:700
ARTICLE I
Major Development
[Amended 6-15-2009 by Ord. No. 1416-2009]
§ 374-1. Scope and purpose.
A. Policy statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and pollutant
reduction through nonstructural or low-impact techniques shall be
explored before relying on structural best management practices
(BMPs). Structural BMPs should be integrated with nonstructural
stormwater management strategies and proper maintenance plans.
Nonstructural strategies include both environmentally sensitive site
design and source controls that prevent pollutants from being placed on
the site or from being exposed to stormwater. Source control plans
should be developed based upon physical site conditions and the origin,
nature, and the anticipated quantity or amount of potential pollutants.
Multiple stormwater management BMPs may be necessary to achieve
the established performance standards for water quality, quantity, and
groundwater recharge.
B. Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for "major
development," as defined in § 374-2.
C. Applicability.
(1) This article shall be applicable to all site plans and subdivisions for
the following major developments that require preliminary or final
site plan or subdivision review:
(a) Nonresidential major developments; and
(b) Aspects of residential major developments that are not
preempted by the Residential Site Improvement Standards at
N.J.A.C. 5:21.
(2) This article shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by the Borough of Edgewater.
D. Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements.
Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans pursuant
to this article are to be considered an integral part of development
approvals under the subdivision and site plan review process and do not
relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or
approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule,
act, or ordinance. In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this article shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. This article
is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other
ordinances, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law, except
that, where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different
§ 374-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 374-1
1:701
§ 374-2. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this article its most reasonable application. The definitions
below are the same as or based on the corresponding definitions in the
Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1 and 7:8-2.
AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT — Land uses normally associated with
the production of food, fiber and livestock for sale.
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses serving
the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and access to
public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the County Board
of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater management plans
and implementing ordinances. The county review agency may either be:
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGNATED CENTER — A State Development and Redevelopment Plan
Center as designated by the State Planning Commission, such as urban,
regional, town, village, or hamlet.
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly licensed
in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, development of project requirements, creation
and development of project design and preparation of drawings and
specifications.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or structure, any mining
excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any building or
other structure, or land or extension of use of land, by any person, for which
permission is required under the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq. In the case of development of agricultural lands, "development"
means: any activity that requires a state permit; any activity reviewed
by the County Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State Agricultural
Development Committee (SADC); and municipal review of any activity not
exempted by the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other
provision of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher standards
shall control.
A. A county planning agency; or
A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A.
58:16A-55.5, if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to
approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinances.
B.
§ 374-1 EDGEWATER CODE § 374-2
1:702
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater,
sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving water body
or to a particular point along a receiving water body.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREA — An area or feature which is of
significant environmental value, including, but not limited to: stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or
threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland forest;
steep slopes; and wellhead protection and groundwater recharge areas.
Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using the
Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Non-game Species Program.
EMPOWERED NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood designated by the
Urban Coordinating Council in consultation and conjunction with the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-59.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer of
material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — The process by which water seeps into the soil from
precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development that provides for ultimately
disturbing one or more acres of land or increasing the impervious area by
1/4 of an acre. "Disturbance," for the purpose of this rule, is the placement
of impervious surface or exposure and/or movement of soil or bedrock or
clearing, cutting, or removing of vegetation.
MUNICIPALITY — Any city, Borough, town, township, or village.
NODE — An area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities which are not organized in a compact
form.
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, Borough of Edgewater or political subdivision of this state
subject to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law,
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive
substance [except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as
amended (42 U.S.C. § 2011 et seq.)], thermal waste, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal, agricultural, and
construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged directly or
indirectly to the land, groundwaters or surface waters of the state, or
§ 374-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 374-2
1:703
to a domestic treatment works. Pollutant includes both hazardous and
nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into
the ground and is not evapotranspired.
REVIEW AGENCY — See "county review agency."
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is
being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or
gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or has
occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
SOLID AND FLOATABLE MATERIALS — Sediment, debris, trash, and other
floating, suspended, or settleable solids.
SOURCE MATERIAL — Any material(s) or machinery, located at an
industrial facility, that is directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities, which could be a source of
pollutants in any industrial stormwater discharge to groundwater.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN
PLANNING AREA (PA1) — An area delineated on the State Plan Policy Map
and adopted by the State Planning Commission that is intended to be the
focus for much of the state's future redevelopment and revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — The geographic application of the State
Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies, and
the official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, or is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities,
or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or embankment
and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A stormwater
management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a detention basin or
infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool (a retention basin), or
be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most constructed stormwater
wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater recharge
of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal nonstormwater discharges into
stormwater conveyances.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or in
storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
§ 374-2 EDGEWATER CODE § 374-2
1:704
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — A flood hazard area, which may be
influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is primarily
caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD
— A neighborhood given priority access to state resources through the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONES — A zone designated by the New Jersey
Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban Enterprise
Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Previously developed portions of
areas:
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams,
wetlands, and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
WETLAND or WETLANDS — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
§ 374-3. Design and performance standards for stormwater
management measures.
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the Metropolitan
Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or Nodes;
A.
B. Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes;
C. Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
D.
A. Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality standards in
§ 374-4. To the maximum extent practicable, these standards shall be
met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater management strategies
into the design. If these strategies alone are not sufficient to meet these
standards, structural stormwater management measures necessary to
meet these standards shall be incorporated into the design.
B. The standards in this article apply only to new major development and
are intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on water
quality and water quantity in receiving water bodies and maintain
groundwater recharge. The standards do not apply to new major
development to the extent that alternative design and performance
standards are applicable under a regional stormwater management
§ 374-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 374-3
1:705
§ 374-4. Requirements for major development.
plan or water quality management plan adopted in accordance with
Department rules.
A. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of a
major development in accordance with § 374-11.
B. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered species as
documented in the Department's Landscape Project or Natural
Heritage Database established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through
15.150, particularly Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/or Clemmys
muhlenbergi (bog turtle).
C. The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater
runoff quality requirements of Subsections F and G:
(1) The construction of an underground utility line, provided that the
disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
(2) The construction of an aboveground utility line, provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
(3) The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk
or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access
is made of permeable material.
D. A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of Subsections F and G may be obtained for the
enlargement of an existing public roadway or railroad, or the
construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access, provided
that the following conditions are met:
(1) The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
(2) The applicant demonstrates, through an alternatives analysis, that
through the use of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management strategies and measures, the option selected
complies with the requirements of Subsections F and G to the
maximum extent practicable;
(3) The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements
of Subsections F and G, existing structures currently in use, such
as homes and buildings, would need to be condemned; and
(4) The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
§ 374-3 EDGEWATER CODE § 374-4
1:706
condemnation lands not falling under Subsection D(3) above within
the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream, that would
provide additional opportunities to mitigate the requirements of
Subsections F and G that were not achievable on-site.
E. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
(1) To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in Subsections F
and G shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies set forth in this subsection into the design.
The applicant shall identify the nonstructural measures
incorporated into the design of the project. If the applicant
contends that it is not feasible for engineering, environmental, or
safety reasons to incorporate any nonstructural stormwater
management strategies identified under Subsection E(2) below into
the design of a particular project, the applicant shall identify the
strategy considered and provide a basis for the contention.
(2) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated
into site design shall:
(a) Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the
flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
(c) Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
(d) Minimize the decrease in the "time of concentration" from
preconstruction to post construction. "Time of concentration"
is defined as the time it takes for runoff to travel from the
hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point
of interest within a watershed;
(e) Minimize land disturbance including clearing and grading;
(f) Minimize soil compaction;
(g) Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides;
(h) Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
(i) Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site, in order to prevent or
minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. Such source controls include, but are not limited to:
§ 374-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 374-4
1:707
[1] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems, including features
that satisfy Subsection E(3) below;
[2] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
[3] Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
[4] When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
(3) Site design features identified under Subsection E(2)(i)[2] above
shall comply with the following standard to control passage of solid
and floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For exemptions
to this standard, see Subsection E(3)(c) below.
(a) Grates.
[1] Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a
storm drain or surface water body under that grate:
[a] The New Jersey Department of Transportation
(NJDOT) bicycle-safe grate, which is described in
Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle Compatible
Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design
Guidelines (April 1996); or
[b] A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven square
inches, or is no greater than 0.5 inch across the
smallest dimension.
[2] Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates
in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer
manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer
bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces
include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields,
open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
(b) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an
§ 374-4 EDGEWATER CODE § 374-4
1:708
area of no more than seven square inches, or be no greater
than two inches across the smallest dimension.
(c) This standard does not apply:
[1] Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
[2] Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in Subsection G(1) are conveyed through any
device (e.g., end-of-pipe netting facility, manufactured
treatment device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed,
at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
[a] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches
wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
[b] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
[3] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars, to
the elevation of the water quality design storm as specified
in Subsection G(1); or
[4] Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register listed historic property.
(4) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in Subsections F and
G shall meet one of the following requirements:
(a) Be dedicated to a government agency as approved by the
appropriate reviewing agency; or
(b) Be subject to a conservation restriction filed with the Bergen
County Clerk's office; or
(c) Be subject to an approved equivalent restriction that ensures
that measure or an equivalent stormwater management
measure approved by the reviewing agency is maintained in
perpetuity.
(5) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
§ 374-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 374-4
1:709
address identified in § 374-8, or found on the Department's website
at www.njstormwater.org.
F. Erosion control, groundwater recharge and runoff quantity standards.
(1) This subsection contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and
groundwater recharge, and control stormwater runoff quantity
impacts of major development.
(a) The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. and
implementing rules.
(b) The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
[1] The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations at § 374-5, either:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater management
measures maintain 100% of the average annual
preconstruction groundwater recharge volume for the
site; or
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff volume
from preconstruction to post construction for the twoyear
storm is infiltrated.
[2] This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to
projects within the urban redevelopment area, or to
projects subject to Subsection F(1)(b)[3] below.
[3] The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
[a] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. High
pollutant loading areas are areas in industrial and
commercial developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored, or
applied; areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded
or stored; areas where hazardous materials are
expected to be present in greater than "reportable
quantities" as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR
302.4; areas where recharge would be inconsistent
with a Department-approved remedial action work
plan or landfill closure plan and areas with high risks
§ 374-4 EDGEWATER CODE § 374-4
1:710
for spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facilities; and
[b] Industrial stormwater exposed to "source material."
Source materials include, but are not limited to, raw
materials; intermediate products; final products;
waste materials; by-products; industrial machinery
and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and detergents
that are related to process, manufacturing, or other
industrial activities that are exposed to stormwater.
[4] The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on
the groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid
adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a
naturally or seasonally high water table so as to cause
surficial ponding, flooding of basements, or interference
with the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal
systems and other subsurface structures in the vicinity or
down gradient of the groundwater recharge area.
(c) In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for
stormwater runoff calculations at § 374-5, complete one of the
following:
[1] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that for stormwater leaving the site, post-construction
runoff hydrographs for the two-, ten-, and one-hundredyear
storm events do not exceed, at any point in time, the
preconstruction runoff hydrographs for the same storm
events;
[2] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that there is no increase, as compared to the
preconstruction condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the two-, ten-, and onehundred-
year storm events and that the increased volume
or change in timing of stormwater runoff will not increase
flood damage at or downstream of the site. This analysis
shall include the analysis of impacts of existing land uses
and projected land uses assuming full development under
existing zoning and land use ordinances in the drainage
area;
[3] Design stormwater management measures so that the
post-construction peak runoff rates for the two-, ten-, and
one-hundred-year storm events are 50%, 75% and 80%,
respectively, of the preconstruction peak runoff rates. The
percentages apply only to the post-construction
stormwater runoff that is attributable to the portion of the
§ 374-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 374-4
1:711
site on which the proposed development or project is to
be constructed. The percentages shall not be applied to
post-construction stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard
areas if the increased volume of stormwater runoff will not
increase flood damages below the point of discharge; or
[4] In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity
analysis in accordance with Subsection F(1)(c)[1], [2] and
[3] above shall only be applied if the increased volume of
stormwater runoff could increase flood damages below the
point of discharge.
(2) Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the
definition of major development at Section 2 shall be submitted to
the appropriate Soil Conservation District for review and approval
in accordance with the requirements of this section and any
applicable Soil Conservation District guidelines for stormwater
runoff quantity and erosion control. Such uses do not include the
development of land for the processing or sale of food and the
manufacturing of agriculturally related products.
G. Stormwater runoff quality standards.
(1) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
post-construction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in
stormwater runoff by 80% of the anticipated load from the
developed site, expressed as an annual average. Stormwater
management measures shall only be required for water quality
control if an additional 1/4 acre of impervious surface is being
proposed on a development site. The requirement to reduce TSS
does not apply to any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated
under a numeric effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the New
Jersey Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules,
N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in a discharge specifically exempt under a
NJPDES permit from this requirement. The water quality design
storm is 1.25 inches of rainfall in two hours. Water quality
calculations shall take into account the distribution of rain from the
water quality design storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation
of the volume of runoff may take into account the implementation
of nonstructural and structural stormwater management measures.
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
§ 374-4 EDGEWATER CODE § 374-4
1:712
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
(2) For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in
accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 374-8, or found on the Department's website
at www.njstormwater.org. The BMP Manual and other sources of
technical guidance are listed in § 374-8. TSS reduction shall be
calculated based on the removal rates for the BMPs in Table 2
below. Alternative removal rates and methods of calculating
removal rates may be used if the design engineer provides
documentation demonstrating the capability of these alternative
rates and methods to the review agency. A copy of any approved
alternative rate or method of calculating the removal rate shall be
provided to the Department at the following address: Division of
Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, P.O. Box 418 Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0418.
(3) If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required
eighty-percent TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize
the following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B - (A x B)/100
Where:
R = total TSS percent load removal from application of
both BMPs
A = TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first BMP
B = TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second
BMP
§ 374-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 374-4
1:713
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice
TSS Percent Removal
Rate
Bioretention systems 90%
Constructed stormwater wetland 90%
Extended detention basin 40% to 60%
Infiltration structure 80%
Manufactured treatment device See § 374-6C
Sand filter 80%
Vegetative filter strip 60% to 80%
Wet pond 50% to 90%
(4) If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the eighty-percent
TSS removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the
runoff from the subareas converge on site, in which case the
removal rate can be demonstrated through a calculation using a
weighted average.
(5) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the post-construction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm.
In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible,
the design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the performance standards in Subsections F and G.
(6) Additional information and examples of stormwater quality BMPs
are contained in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual, which may be obtained from the address
identified in § 374-8.
(7) In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent
any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FW1.
(8) Special water resource protection areas shall be established along
all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and perennial
or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the
County Soil Surveys, within the associated HUC14 drainage area.
These areas shall be established for the protection of water quality,
aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance, exceptional
recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance,
and exceptional fisheries significance of those established Category
One waters. These areas shall be designated and protected as
follows:
§ 374-4 EDGEWATER CODE § 374-4
1:714
(a) The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
[1] A three-hundred-foot special water resource protection
area shall be provided on each side of the waterway,
measured perpendicular to the waterway from the top of
the bank outwards or from the center line of the waterway
where the bank is not defined, consisting of existing
vegetation or vegetation allowed to follow natural
succession.
[2] Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under Subsection G(8)(a)[1]
above shall only be allowed where previous development
or disturbance has occurred (for example, active
agricultural use, parking area or maintained lawn area).
The encroachment shall only be allowed where applicant
demonstrates that the functional value and overall
condition of the special water resource protection area will
be maintained to the maximum extent practicable. In no
case shall the remaining special water resource protection
area be reduced to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the top of bank of the waterway or center
line of the waterway where the bank is undefined. All
encroachments proposed under this subsection shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(b) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through
the special water resource protection area and shall comply
with the Standard for Off-Site Stability in the Standards For
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey, established
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq.
(c) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
Standard For Off-Site Stability in the Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey, established under
the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et
seq., then the stabilization measures in accordance with the
requirements of the above standards may be placed within the
special water resource protection area, provided that:
[1] Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet
of the Category One waterway;
[2] Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this
subsection shall achieve a 95% TSS post-construction
removal rate;
§ 374-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 374-4
1:715
§ 374-5. Calculation of stormwater runoff and groundwater
recharge.
[3] Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on
the receiving waterway;
[4] The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable;
[5] A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and Soil Conservation
District staff to identify necessary stabilization measures;
and
[6] All encroachments proposed under this subsection shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(d) A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as an
element of a regional stormwater management plan, or by a
municipality through an adopted municipal stormwater
management plan. If a stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to Subsection G(8) has been approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection, then the provisions
of the plan shall be the applicable special water resource
protection area requirements for that waterway. A stream
corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to Subsection
G(8) shall maintain or enhance the current functional value
and overall condition of the special water resource protection
area as defined in Subsection G(8)(a)[1] above. In no case shall
a stream corridor protection plan allow the reduction of the
special water resource protection area to less than 150 feet as
measured perpendicular to the waterway subject to this
subsection.
(e) Subsection G(8) does not apply to the construction of one
individual single-family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development on a lot receiving preliminary or final subdivision
approval on or before February 2, 2004, provided that the
construction begins on or before February 2, 2009.
A. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
(1) The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
(a) The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS
§ 374-4 EDGEWATER CODE § 374-5
1:716
National Engineering Handbook Section 4 — Hydrology and
Technical Release 55 — Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds
or superseding document; or
(b) The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational
Method for hydrograph computations.
(2) For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater
recharge, there is a presumption that the preconstruction condition
of a site or portion thereof is a wooded land use with good
hydrologic condition. The term "runoff coefficient" applies to both
the NRCS methodology at Subsection A(1)(a) and the Rational and
Modified Rational Methods at Subsection A(1)(b). A runoff
coefficient or a groundwater recharge land cover for an existing
condition may be used on all or a portion of the site if the design
engineer verifies that the hydrologic condition has existed on the
site or portion of the site for at least five years without interruption
prior to the time of application. If more than one land cover has
existed on the site during the five years immediately prior to the
time of application, the land cover with the lowest runoff potential
shall be used for the computations. In addition, there is the
presumption that the site is in good hydrologic condition (if the
land use type is pasture, lawn, or park), with good cover (if the land
use type is woods), or with good hydrologic condition and
conservation treatment (if the land use type is cultivation).
(3) In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows, or
culverts, that may reduce preconstruction stormwater runoff rates
and volumes.
(4) In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design
engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or
volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces separately to
accurately compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff
from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected impervious
cover, urban impervious area modifications as described in the
NRCS Technical Release 55 — Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds and other methods may be employed.
(5) If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management
measure is below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined
at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall take into account the
effects of tailwater in the design of structural stormwater
management measures.
B. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following:
(1) The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32, A Method for
Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
§ 374-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 374-5
1:717
§ 374-6. Standards for structural stormwater management
measures.
incorporated herein by reference, as amended and supplemented.
Information regarding the methodology is available from the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual; at
http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at New Jersey Geological
Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427, Trenton, New Jersey
08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.
A. Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
(1) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
take into account the existing site conditions, including, for
example, environmentally critical areas, wetlands; flood-prone
areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high water table; soil type,
permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns; and
the presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
(2) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and
ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the
intake to the outlet structure as appropriate, and shall have parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars to the elevation of the
water quality design storm. For elevations higher than the water
quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure shall
be spaced no greater than 1/3 the width of the diameter of the
orifice or 1/3 the width of the weir, with a minimum spacing
between bars of one-inch and a maximum spacing between bars of
six inches. In addition, the design of trash racks must comply with
the requirements of § 374-9D.
(3) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and corrosionresistant.
Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions
of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3,
7.4, and 7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement.
(4) At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin,
the orifice size shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in diameter.
(5) Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins at
§ 374-9.
(6) Where tailwater will affect the hydraulic performance of a
stormwater management measure, the design engineer shall
include such effects in the measure's design.
B. Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
§ 374-5 EDGEWATER CODE § 374-6
1:718
§ 374-7. Nonstructural stormwater strategies.
The applicant shall comply with the following nonstructural stormwater
strategies to the greatest extent practicable in accordance with N.J.A.C.
7:8-5.3 and also with the Land Use Ordinance of the Borough of Edgewater,
Chapter 240, to address stormwater management.
stormwater management measures may be utilized, provided the
design engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its
design will accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater
recharge and water quality design and performance standards
established by § 374-4 of this article.
C. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements
of § 374-4 of this article, provided the pollutant removal rates are
verified by the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced Technology and
certified by the Department.
A. Buffers: Buffer areas are required along all lot and street lines
separating residential uses from arterial and collector streets,
separating a nonresidential use from either a residential use or
residential zoning district line, and along all street lines where loading
and storage areas can be seen from the street. The buffer area shall use
native vegetation, which requires less fertilization and watering than
non-native species. Buffer areas may be used for stormwater
management by disconnecting impervious surfaces and treating runoff
from these impervious surfaces. Preservation of natural wood tracts
and limiting land disturbance for new construction must be
incorporated where practical.
B. Curbs and gutters: Curb cuts or flush curbs with curb stops are
encouraged where practical to allow vegetated swales to be used for
stormwater conveyance and to allow the disconnection of impervious
areas where practical.
C. Drainage systems: All streets should be provided with inlets and pipes
where the same are necessary for proper drainage. The use of natural
vegetated swales in lieu of inlets and pipes is encouraged where
practical.
D. Driveways and accessways: The use of pervious paving materials to
minimize stormwater runoff and promote groundwater recharge should
be considered for driveways and accessways where practical.
Consideration should be given for subsurface soil conditions. The use of
crowned driveways is also encouraged to promote disconnectivity
between impervious surfaces and grass areas to promote groundwater
recharge.
E. Natural features: Natural features, such as trees, brooks, swamps,
hilltops, and views, are to be preserved whenever possible, and care
shall be taken to preserve selected trees to enhance soil stability and
§ 374-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 374-7
1:719
landscaped treatment of the area. In addition, forested areas shall be
maintained to ensure that leaf litter and other beneficial aspects of the
forest are maintained in addition to the trees.
F. Nonconforming uses, structures or lots: The applicant/owner of an
existing use may be allowed to propose additions or alterations that
exceed the permitted building and/or lot coverage percentages. The
applicant should mitigate the impact of the additional impervious
surfaces unless the stormwater management plan for the development
provided for these increases in impervious surfaces. This mitigation
effort must address water quality, flooding and groundwater recharge.
G. Off-site and off-tract improvements: Any off-site and off-tract
stormwater management and drainage improvements must conform to
the design and performance standards described.
H. Off-street parking and loading: Parking lots with more than 10 spaces
and all loading areas should allow for flush curb with curb stop, or
curbing with curb cuts to encourage developers to allow for the
discharge of impervious areas into landscaped areas for stormwater
management. The use of natural vegetated swales for the water quality
design storm, with overflow for larger storm events into storm sewers,
should be utilized where practical. A developer may demonstrate that
fewer spaces would be required, provided area is set aside for
additional spaces if necessary. Pervious paving could be provided
overflow parking areas.
I. Performance standards: Pollution source control must be evaluated in
order to prohibit materials or wastes from being deposited upon a lot in
such form or manner that they can be transferred off the lot, directly or
indirectly, by natural forces such as precipitation, evaporation or wind.
Materials and wastes that might create a pollutant or a hazard shall be
enclosed in appropriate containers.
J. Shade trees: A minimum amount of shade trees per lot to be planted in
the front yard may be required. In addition to this subsection, the
Borough may have a Tree Preservation Ordinance146 that restricts and
otherwise controls the removal of mature trees throughout the
Borough. This article should recognize that the preservation of mature
trees and forested areas must be considered in the management of
environmental resources, particularly watershed management, air
quality, and ambient heating and cooling. A "critical disturbance area"
that extends beyond the driveway and building footprint where clearing
of trees cannot occur shall be depicted on the plan minimizing land
disturbance. Identification of forested areas and the percentage of
wooded areas to be protected from disturbance shall also be provided.
146. Editor's Note: See Ch. 421, Trees.
§ 374-7 EDGEWATER CODE § 374-7
1:720
§ 374-8. Sources for technical guidance.
K. Sidewalks: Sidewalks should be designed to discharge stormwater to
neighboring lawns where feasible to disconnect these impervious
surfaces or use permeable paving materials where appropriate.
L. Soil erosion and sediment control: The applicant shall comply with the
New Jersey Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Standards and should
incorporate designs to retain and protect natural vegetation; minimize
and retain water runoff to facilitate groundwater recharge; and install
diversions, sediment basins and similar required structures prior to any
on-site grading or disturbance. Further guidance on the
implementation of these strategies can be found in the NJDEP
Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, April 2004, as
amended.
A. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed at Subsection A(1) and (2) below, which
are available from Maps and Publications, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton,
New Jersey 08625; telephone (609) 777-1038.
(1) Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
as amended. Information is provided on stormwater management
measures such as: bioretention systems, constructed stormwater
wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand
filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
(2) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
B. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures
can be obtained from the following:
(1) The Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey
promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and
incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be
obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee or
any of the Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4.
The location, address, and telephone number of each Soil
Conservation District may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625;
(609) 292-5540;
(2) The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, (732) 932-9306; and
(3) The Bergen County Soil Conservation District can be contacted at
the following:
§ 374-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 374-8
1:721
§ 374-9. Safety standards for stormwater management basins.
Bergen County Soil Conservation District
700 Kinderkamack Road, Suite 106
Oradell, New Jersey 07649
Phone: (201) 261-4407
Fax: (201) 261-7573
A. This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety through
the proper design and operation of stormwater management basins.
This section applies to any new stormwater management basin. The
provisions of this section do not preempt more stringent municipal or
county safety requirements for new or existing stormwater
management basins. Municipal and county stormwater management
plans and ordinances may, pursuant to their authority, require existing
stormwater management basins to be retrofitted to meet one or more of
the safety standards in Subsection B(1), (2) and (3) for trash racks,
overflow grates, and escape provisions at outlet structures.
B. Requirements for trash racks, overflow grates and escape provisions.
(1) A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
(a) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than
six-inch spacing between the bars.
(b) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect
the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
(c) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of stage and
discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of the net
area of opening through the rack.
(d) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion-resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(2) An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
(a) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
be removable for emergencies and maintenance.
§ 374-8 EDGEWATER CODE § 374-9
1:722
(b) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
(c) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion-resistant, and shall be designed
to withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(3) For purposes of this Subsection B(3), "escape provisions" means
the permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or other
features that provide easily accessible means of egress from
stormwater management basins. Stormwater management basins
shall include escape provisions as follows:
(a) If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure.
With the prior approval of the reviewing agency identified in
Subsection C, a freestanding outlet structure may be exempted
from this requirement.
(b) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of
water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety ledges shall be
comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four feet to six feet
in width. One step shall be located approximately 2 1/2 feet
below the permanent water surface, and the second step shall
be located one foot to 1 1/2 feet above the permanent water
surface. See Subsection D for an illustration of safety ledges in
a stormwater management basin.
(c) In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior
slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm shall not be
steeper than three horizontal to one vertical.
C. Variance or exemption from safety standards. A variance or exemption
from the safety standards for stormwater management basins may be
granted only upon a written finding by the appropriate reviewing
agency (municipality, county or Department) that the variance or
exemption will not constitute a threat to public safety.
D. Illustration of safety ledges in a new stormwater management basin.
§ 374-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 374-9
1:723
§ 374-10. Requirements for site development stormwater plan.
A. Submission of site development stormwater plan.
(1) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to this article, the applicant shall submit all of the required
components of the Checklist for the Site Development Stormwater
Plan at Subsection C below as part of the submission of the
applicant's application for subdivision or site plan approval.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this article.
(3) The applicant shall submit 16 copies of the materials listed in the
checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance with
Subsection C of this article.
B. Site development stormwater plan approval. The applicant's site
development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision or
site plan review process by the municipal board or official from which
municipal approval is sought. That municipal board or official shall
§ 374-9 EDGEWATER CODE § 374-10
1:724
§ 374-11. Maintenance and repair.
consult the engineer retained by the Planning and/or Zoning Board (as
appropriate) to determine if all of the checklist requirements have been
satisfied and to determine if the project meets the standards set forth
in this article.
C. Checklist requirements. The following are several checklists required
for development within the Borough of Edgewater.147
A. Applicability. Projects subject to review in § 374-1C of this article shall
comply with the requirements of Subsections B and C.
B. General maintenance.
(1) The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development.
(2) The maintenance plan shall include the following:
(a) Contain specific preventative maintenance tasks and
schedules; and the name, address, and telephone number of
the person or persons responsible for preventative and
corrective maintenance (including replacement).
(b) Maintenance guidelines for stormwater management
measures are available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan
identifies a person other than the developer (for example, a
public agency or homeowners' association) as having the
responsibility for maintenance, the plan shall include
documentation of such person's agreement to assume this
responsibility, or of the developer's obligation to dedicate a
stormwater management facility to such person under an
applicable ordinance or regulation.
(3) Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred
to the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential
development or project, unless such owner or tenant owns or
leases the entire residential development or project.
(4) If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above is not a public agency, the maintenance plan
and any future revisions based on Subsection B(7) below shall be
recorded upon the deed of record for each property on which the
maintenance described in the maintenance plan must be
undertaken.
147. Editor's Note: The checklists are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 374-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 374-11
1:725
(5) Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and
ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
(6) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall maintain a detailed log of all
preventative and corrective maintenance for the structural
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
the development, including a record of all inspections and copies of
all maintenance-related work orders.
(7) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the
maintenance plan at least once per year. Any adjustments to the
management plan or deed shall require notification and approval
from the applicable board prior to the filing of a revised deed.
(8) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall retain and make available, upon
request by any public entity with administrative, health,
environmental, or safety authority over the site, the maintenance
plan and the documentation required by Subsections B(6) and B(7)
above.
(9) The requirements of Subsections B(3) and B(4) do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency.
(10) In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance and
repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the municipal
engineer or his designee. The municipality, in its discretion, may
extend the time allowed for effecting maintenance and repair for
good cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform
such maintenance and repair, the municipality or county may
immediately proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the
responsible person.
C. Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
§ 374-11 EDGEWATER CODE § 374-12
1:726
§ 374-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains, or
uses any building, structure or land in violation of this article shall be
subject to penalties in accordance with Chapter 1, Article II, of the Code of
the Borough of Edgewater.
§ 374-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 374-12
1:727

ARTICLE II
Single- and Two-Family Residential Development
[Added 4-20-2009 by Ord. No. 1408-2009]
§ 374-13. Findings.
§ 374-14. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
A. Development of residential and nonresidential properties within the
Borough of Edgewater generally increases the volume of stormwater
runoff and the peak flow of the same.
B. The Borough of Edgewater's storm sewer collection system is impacted
by the increases in stormwater flows, which if unregulated will severely
impede the operation of the storm sewer system.
C. Stormwater runoff created by development and construction activities
which are not subject to Planning Board review is currently
unregulated.
D. It is in the best interests of the Borough of Edgewater to establish
limitations on stormwater runoff for:
(1) All applications involving the demolition of any single- and twofamily
residential structure for the purposes of constructing a new
single- or two-family residential structure;
(2) Any application for the expansion of an existing single- or twofamily
residential structure;
(3) Any application involving or creating additional impervious
coverage area; or
(4) Grading changes which would increase the quantity or peak rate of
stormwater discharge.
A. Protect human life and health;
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. Minimize damage to public facilities and infrastructure, such as water,
sewer, gas, electric and other utility facilities, streets, bridges and other
public improvements; and
E. Help maintain a stable tax base by avoiding overutilization of municipal
stormwater facilities.
§ 374-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 374-15
1:729
§ 374-15. Applicability.
This article shall apply to:
§ 374-16. Stormwater management requirements.
§ 374-17. Violations and penalties.148
Violators of the provisions of this article shall be subject to penalties in
accordance with Chapter 1, Article II, of the Code of the Borough of
Edgewater.
A. All applications for building permits for construction of a single- or twofamily
residential structure or demolition permits relative to the same;
B. All applications for building permits for enlargement or addition to an
existing single- or two-family residential structure; and
C. Any application whereby additional impervious area is being added, or
the grade of the property is being altered or modified, or which involves
soil movement, including, but not limited to, porches, decks, swimming
pools, retaining walls and other similar site construction items.
A. All applications for a building permit for properties to which this article
applies shall contain a plan or certification providing for a zero increase
in stormwater runoff for the completed project, using one of the
calculation methods described in §374-5 of the Code of the Borough of
Edgewater.
B. The Borough Engineer shall review each application for a building
permit for properties to which this article applies and approve the same
as providing for a zero increase in stormwater runoff for the completed
project.
C. No building permit or other permit shall be issued for any project to
which this article applies when, in the opinion of the Borough Engineer
or the Construction Code Official, the applicant fails to provide for a
zero increase in stormwater runoff.
D. At the time of application for a construction permit for any project to
which this article applies, the applicant shall deposit $500 in escrow to
cover or defray the cost of the Borough Engineer's review of the
application relative to stormwater runoff.
148. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 374-15 EDGEWATER CODE § 374-17
1:730
ARTICLE III
Storm Drains
[Added 6-15-2009 by Ord. No. 1414-2009]
§ 374-18. Purpose.
The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Edgewater have determined
that in order to protect public health, safety and welfare, it is necessary
and advisable to adopt an ordinance requiring the retrofitting of existing
storm drain inlets which are in direct contact with repaving, repairing,
reconstruction, or resurfacing or alterations of facilities on private property,
to prevent the discharge of solids and floatables (such as plastic bottles,
cans, food wrappers and other litter) to the municipal separate storm sewer
system(s) operated by the Borough of Edgewater, and to prescribe penalties
for the failure to comply with such ordinance.
§ 374-19. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of Edgewater or other
public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater. MS4s do not include combined sewer systems, which are sewer
systems that are designed to carry sanitary sewage at all times and to
collect and transport stormwater from streets and other sources.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to collect
stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curbopening
inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or artificial, within
the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction.
§ 374-20. Prohibited conduct.
No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with one
single-family house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the
repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip
§ 374-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 374-20
1:731
sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing
or altering any surface that is in direct contact with an existing storm drain
inlet on that property unless the storm drain inlet either:
§ 374-21. Design standard.
Except as otherwise provided, storm drain inlets identified in § 374-20,
above, shall comply with the following standard to control passage of solid
and floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this
subsection, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment, debris, trash,
and other floating, suspended, or settleable solids.
A. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid
and floatable materials; or
B. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in § 374-21, below, prior
to the completion of the project.
A. Grates.
(1) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever
they use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water
body under that grate:
(a) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJ DOT)
bicycle-safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning
and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
(b) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate
has an area of no more than seven square inches, or is no
greater than 0.5 inch across the smallest dimension.
(2) Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate
inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination
inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates,
and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground
surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open
channels, and stormwater basin floors.
B. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in
that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening
has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than seven
square inches, or be no greater than two inches across the smallest
dimension.
C. This standard does not apply:
(1) Where the municipal engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably
§ 374-20 EDGEWATER CODE § 374-21
1:732
§ 374-22. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department and/or other
municipal officials of the Borough of Edgewater.
§ 374-23. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500 per day for each storm drain
inlet that is not retrofitted to meet the design standard.
be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
(2) Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end-of-pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin
hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all
solid and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the
following:
(a) A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches wide
(this option does not apply for outfall netting facilities); or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
(3) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars; or
(4) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an
undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New Jersey Register listed historic property.
§ 374-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 374-23
1:733

ARTICLE IV
Refuse Containers and Dumpsters
[Added 6-15-2009 by Ord. No. 1415-2009]
§ 374-24. Purpose.
The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Edgewater have determined
that in order to protect public health, safety and welfare, it is necessary
and advisable to adopt an ordinance requiring dumpsters and other refuse
containers that are outdoors or exposed to stormwater to be covered at all
times and prohibits the spilling, dumping, leaking, or otherwise discharge of
liquids, semi-liquids or solids from the containers to the municipal separate
storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough of Edgewater and/or the
waters of the state, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply with
such ordinance.
§ 374-25. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM ("MS4") — A conveyance
or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of Edgewater or other
public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater. MS4s do not include combined sewer systems, which are sewer
systems that are designed to carry sanitary sewage at all times and to
collect and transport stormwater from streets and other sources.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to collect
stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curbopening
inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or artificial, within
the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction.
§ 374-26. Prohibited conduct.
Except as otherwise provided in this article:
§ 374-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 374-26
1:735
§ 374-27. Exceptions.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, the following containers shall
be exempt from the requirements of § 374-26:
§ 374-28. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department and/or other
municipal officials of Borough of Edgewater.
§ 374-29. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500 per day.
A. Any person who controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster is
covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out or
overflowing.
B. Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container or
dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does not leak or
otherwise discharge liquids, semi-liquids or solids to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough of Edgewater.
A. Permitted temporary demolition containers;
B. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers);
C. Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers;
D. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid NJPDES permit; and
E. Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, white
goods placed curbside for pickup).
§ 374-26 EDGEWATER CODE § 374-29
1:736
Chapter 380
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Public Works — See Ch. 87.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 151.
Fire lanes — See Ch. 200.
Land use and development — See Ch. 240.
Minibikes and go-carts — See Ch. 264.
Parking lots — See Ch. 282.
Parking restrictions — See Ch. 287.
Solid waste — See Ch. 368.
Sewers — See Ch. 347.
Trees — See Ch. 421.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 432.
§ 374-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 374-29
1:737

ARTICLE I
Street Regulations
[Adopted 5-12-1908 by Ord. No. 60; readopted 8-1-1967 by Ord. No.
476 (Ch. 221, Art. I, of the 1975 Code); amended in its entirety
6-11-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-009]
§ 380-1. Permit required for encumbrances or obstructions.
No person shall encumber or obstruct the free use of any public right-ofway,
street, sidewalk, road or public place within the Borough with any
article or thing whatsoever required for operations on or connected with his
adjacent premises, without having first obtained a permit therefor as herein
provided.
§ 380-2. Obstructions and dumping of refuse prohibited.
No person shall throw, put or place, or cause or permit to be thrown, put or
placed, into, upon or within any public street, sidewalk, road or highway in
the Borough any substance, matter or thing whatsoever whereby the safe,
free and unobstructed use of the same by the public may be in any way
impeded or interfered with, or whereby the same may be rendered unsightly
in appearance. No person shall put, deposit or leave any rubbish or refuse in
or upon any of the sidewalks, gutters, public streets, roads or places within
the Borough.
§ 380-3. Construction permit required; lines and grades.
No person shall establish, change or construct any culvert, driveway or
approach thereto on any public street or road until a permit shall have been
granted therefor as herein provided. Whenever any person shall desire to
establish, change or construct any culvert, driveway or approach thereto,
the proper lines and grades shall be established by a licensed New Jersey
professional engineer and reviewed by the Borough Engineer, and the work
shall be done in accordance therewith.
§ 380-4. Vehicles on public streets to be movable; exceptions.
No person or persons using the public streets or roads of the Borough shall
chain, tie or block the wheels of any vehicle in any manner so that they will
not revolve; provided, however, that this provision shall not apply when said
roads or streets are covered with snow or ice or both.
§ 380-5. Animal and bicycle regulations.
A. No person shall permit any animal belonging to him to run at large in
any street, road or public place of the Borough, or tie or tether any such
animal in any public place or upon any unenclosed lot in such manner
as to allow the animal to stray or go upon a public road, street or place.
B. No person shall ride any bicycle or similar vehicle within the Borough
unless said person complies with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-10
§ 380-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-5
1:739
§ 380-6. Restrictions on projections from buildings.
No person shall build or construct any bay window, store window or
projection from a building which shall extend more than one foot into
any public street without permission from the Building Department.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, any such bay window, store window or
projection shall be subject to all other applicable regulations of the Borough
of Edgewater, including the provisions of § 240-114D.
§ 380-7. Restrictions on entrance openings into streets.
No person shall build or construct any areaway, cellar opening or entrance
over the line of any public street or sidewalk without providing the same
with an iron covering resting on a level with the street when closed, nor
build nor construct any such areaway, cellar opening or entrance extending
more than three feet over the line of any such street or sidewalk.
§ 380-8. Permit required for excavations.
concerning lights and reflectors. No person shall ride any bicycle or
similar vehicle or drive or pass over or upon any sidewalk within
the Borough with any vehicle, except baby carriages and conveyances
used and occupied by invalids, or children's velocipedes or tricycles
when used by children under 10 years of age, except at driveways
constructed across such sidewalk. In case it should be necessary to
cross said sidewalk at a place other than at a regularly constructed
driveway, the sidewalk and curb shall be protected by planks, boards
or other material so that the sidewalk or curb will not be broken or
injured.
A. No person, persons, firm or corporation, municipal or private, nor any
utility company, public or private, or licensed contractor shall, for any
purpose, open, disturb, excavate, bore, tunnel or drive under or in any
way impair the surface or subsurface within the limits of any Borough
right-of-way, street, road, highway, park or public place, or any
sidewalk, gutter or pavement thereon, for any purpose whatsoever
without first obtaining a road opening permit from the Building
Department of the Borough.
B. Only such persons, firms, corporations, companies or contractors to
whom or to which permits have been granted shall be permitted to
perform such work and then only in the manner herein required and
only as specifically allowed in the permit. Assignment of rights under
any permit issued hereunder is prohibited, and permits purportedly
assigned shall be immediately void. Contracting or subcontracting work
to a person, firm or corporation to whom or to which no permit has been
granted is prohibited.
C. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as requiring the
issuance of a permit for the performance of any work done by the
§ 380-5 EDGEWATER CODE § 380-8
1:740
§ 380-9. Excavation regulations.
§ 380-10. Performance guarantee.
Borough of Edgewater or under a contract with the Borough for the
construction of municipal improvements.
A. Any person, firm, corporation, company or contractor desiring to
excavate or in any way dig up or disturb the surface of any public rightof-
way, street, road, highway, park or public place in the Borough, or
who or which shall desire to encumber or obstruct the free use of any
right-of-way, street, road, highway or public place in the Borough with
any article or thing required for operations on or connected with his
adjacent premises, or who or which shall desire to establish, change or
construct any sidewalk, culvert, gutter, driveway or approach thereto
on any public street or road shall make an application to the Building
Department for a permit therefor and must maintain adequate
protective devices by day, including lights by night, to ensure the safety
of the public. The Construction Official may grant such permit, and in
such case the excavating, digging up or otherwise disturbing of the
location specified shall be in strict accordance with the permit granted.
As a prerequisite to the granting of such permit, the applicant shall give
a satisfactory performance guarantee to the Borough. The applicant
shall comply with the terms of the permit with all reasonable speed and
shall restore the site thereof to a condition equivalent to or better than
that which existed at the time the permit was granted.
B. The applicant shall protect the worksite and any such excavations
without cost to the Borough and shall save the Borough harmless from
all or any loss or damage which may be incurred by reason of the work
done under such permit. The performance guarantee herein provided
for shall remain in force, and the obligor and surety therein mentioned
shall remain liable thereon, until a certificate from the Superintendent
of Public Works certifying that the terms of said guarantee have been
fully complied with has been filed with the Building Department.
Special care must be taken in backfilling and compacting all trenches,
and all paved surfaces or portions of streets removed must be replaced
with new materials. All turf areas shall be restored to a full stand of
grass.
A. The Construction Official shall not issue a permit unless the applicant
has deposited as security for faithful performance a certified check
made payable to the Borough of Edgewater or filed a bond with a surety
satisfactory to the Borough Attorney, the amount thereof to be based
upon the value of the required restoration work as calculated by the
Construction Official.
B. A public utility applicant may, in lieu of the security required above,
deposit an annual corporate bond in the amount of at least $20,000. The
surety bond shall be renewed annually. In the event that a public utility
§ 380-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-10
1:741
§ 380-11. Insurance.
No permit shall be issued until the applicant furnishes the Construction
Official with satisfactory proof that he is insured against injury to persons
and damage to property caused by any act or omission of the applicant,
his agents, employees or subcontractors in the course of the work to be
performed under the permit. The insurance shall cover all hazards likely
to arise in connection with the work, including, but not limited to, collapse
and explosion, and shall also insure against liability arising from completed
operations. The limits of the policy of insurance shall be for injury to any
one person, for injuries to more than one person in the same accident, and
an aggregate for property damage for a single incident. All commercial
limits shall be a minimum of $10,000,000 in coverage. The Construction
Official may waive the requirements of this section for a public utility upon
the presentation of satisfactory proof that it is capable of meeting claims
against it up to the amount of the limits of the insurance policy which would
otherwise be required. The minimum graduated limits for residential road
opening are hereby established:
Number of Units Insurance
1 to 10 $2,000,000
11 to 50 $3,000,000
51 to 100 $5,000,000
applicant applies for a permit for road opening and/or road openings
and the required security deposit fee exceeds the $20,000, the public
utility applicant shall file a surety bond in an amount equal to the
difference between the $20,000 and the required security deposit.
For all non-public-utility applicants, the surety bond shall be at least
$1,000. A certified check for a lesser amount may be deposited,
however, in an amount commensurate to the value of the restoration
work to be performed as calculated by the Construction Official.
C. Upon satisfactory completion of all work permitted or required under
the permit, a maintenance guarantee will be posted with the Borough.
If the security deposit is $2,000 or less, the Borough of Edgewater will
retain 100% of the security deposit as security for maintenance of the
work for a period not to exceed one year from the date of completion,
provided that if the security deposit is in the form of a certified check,
the permittee may deposit a surety bond of $2,000 satisfactory to the
Borough Attorney to replace the certified check. If the security deposit
is greater than $2,000, then the Borough will release or refund the
security deposit with the approval of the Construction Official, upon the
posting of a surety maintenance bond in the amount of 15% of the
security deposit but not less than $2,000. All bonds posted for
maintenance guaranty purposes and certificates of insurance shall
contain a provision that the same shall remain in full force and effect for
a period not to exceed one year after the last work under any permit has
been completed and accepted by the Borough.
§ 380-10 EDGEWATER CODE § 380-11
1:742
Number of Units Insurance
100 or more $10,000,000
§ 380-12. Permits for emergency work.
In cases of emergency, such as the opening of drains or the repairing
of drains, sewer, gas or water pipes, when sudden stoppages or breaks
have occurred, the permit herein provided for may be granted by the
Construction Official or Superintendent of Public Works upon such terms
and conditions as herein provided as he may deem proper.
§ 380-13. Permit Seal, information and validity.
All permits granted shall recite by whose order the same are granted and
shall be signed by the Construction Official and shall have the Seal of the
Borough affixed thereto. A record thereof shall be kept by the Building
Department. Each permit shall be numbered and recorded. Each permit
shall specify fully the name and residence or post office address of the
person, firm or corporation to whom it is granted, the place or places at
which the work is to be done or the obstruction placed, the character of
the work or obstruction, and the time within which it is to be completed
or removed. No permit shall be valid except for the place, time and work
specified for therein.
§ 380-14. Permit fee.
The applicant for such permit shall pay a fee of $50 to the Building
Department for preparing and recording each excavation permit granted
hereunder.
A. Each applicant obtaining an excavation permit shall, before its
issuance, pay to the Building Department the sum of $50 per opening.
The Borough shall have the option of billing public utilities on an annual
lump-sum basis based upon the number of openings made by the utility
in the prior calendar year, subject to an adjustment in the current
calendar year based upon the actual number of openings made.
B. In addition, the applicant shall post with the municipality such fees that
are reasonably anticipated to be required to reimburse the Borough for
the cost of plan review and inspections as may be required by the
Construction Official, Superintendent of Public Works or the Borough
Engineer. The amount of such deposit and the scope of such review and
inspection shall be subject to the reasonable discretion of the
Construction Official. All moneys remaining on deposit at the
completion of the work not required for the reimbursement of review
and inspections shall be promptly returned to the applicant.
C. No fee shall be required for any permit to be issued to a municipal
agency.
§ 380-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-15
1:743
§ 380-15. Permit exceptions.
§ 380-16. Application for permit.
All applications for street openings shall be filed with the Construction
Official and shall contain the following information:
A. A tunnel or excavation may be commenced without a permit where an
emergency has arisen which makes it necessary to commence work
immediately, provided that an application for a permit is filed
simultaneously with the commencement of work, together with an
estimate of fees required and the estimated performance guaranty. In
such an emergency, the filing of the application and posting of fees and
estimated performance guaranty may be delayed until the next
business day subsequent to the commencement of work where the
emergency has arisen subsequent to the close of business of the next
previous day. When issued, the permit shall be retroactive to the date
on which work began.
B. The Construction Official may issue permits to other public bodies
without a fee.
C. No permit shall be issued between December 1 and March 15, except
for an emergency.
A. The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
B. The name, address and telephone number of the party to be reached in
case of an emergency.
C. The name of the street where the opening is to be made and the street
number of the abutting property.
D. The Borough Tax Map blocks and lots of properties abutting and lying
adjacent to the portion of the street to be opened.
E. The name, address and telephone number of the property owner for
whose benefit the opening is to be performed.
F. The character and purpose of the proposed work.
G. The nature of the surface in which the opening is to be made.
H. The estimated time when work is to be commenced and completed.
I. Plans and specifications, to be filed in quadruplicate, showing the exact
location and dimensions of all openings.
J. The name and address of the person who is to perform the work.
K. An acknowledgment that the applicant agrees to replace, at its own cost
and expense, the street, curb, gutter, sidewalk and all other disturbed
areas in accordance with the current Borough standards within 45 days
from the date of the commencement of work; provided, however, that,
§ 380-15 EDGEWATER CODE § 380-16
1:744
§ 380-16.1. Denial of permit; appeal.
§ 380-16.2. Issuance of permits; time of validity.
Permits shall be issued under the authority of the Construction Official in
accordance with the provisions of this article and the regulations which
such official may establish in the interest of the public safety and welfare.
The Construction Official shall determine the initial time limit during which
the permit shall be valid.
§ 380-16.3. General construction regulations.
All permits issued under this article shall be subject to the following rules
and regulations:
upon commencement of work and completion of the first day of work,
the areas shall be temporarily restored by the placement of a stabilized
base course or maintained as determined in the reasonable judgment
of the Superintendent of Public Works until the final surface course has
been placed on the area. The placement of the final surface may be
delayed in the event of the winter season to a date no later than April
15.
A. The Construction Official may refuse the issuance of a permit if such is
in the interest of the public safety, convenience, health or welfare.
B. If a permit is refused by the Construction Official, an appeal may be
taken to the Mayor and Council, which, after hearing, may direct the
issuance of a permit or sustain the denial thereof.
A. All excavations shall be kept properly barricaded at all times and during
the hours of darkness shall be provided with proper warning lights. This
regulation shall not excuse the permittee from taking any other
precaution reasonably necessary for the protection of persons or
property.
B. All work shall be done in a manner which causes a minimum of
interference with travel on the street affected. No street shall be closed
to traffic unless the closing is approved by the Chief of Police. The
Police Department shall be informed of all street closings at least 24
hours in advance except where the work is of an emergency nature,
when notice shall be given to the Police Department when work
commences.
C. All refuse and material shall be removed upon completion of each day's
work.
D. All excavations shall be completely backfilled by the permittee and shall
be compacted by tamping or other suitable means in the manner
prescribed by the Superintendent of Public Works. Where the
Superintendent of Public Works determines that the excavated material
is unsuitable for backfill, the permittee shall backfill the excavation
§ 380-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-16.3
1:745
§ 380-16.4. Restoration of street surface.
The permittee shall restore the surface of the street in accordance with the
following rules, regulations, and requirements:
with dense graded aggregate, sand and gravel or other suitable
material, which shall be placed in layers not exceeding six inches
in depth and thoroughly compacted in the manner prescribed by the
Superintendent of Public Works. Upon completion of the work, the
permittee shall remove any excess material and leave the premises in
a clean condition. If the Superintendent of Public Works determines
that a backfilled excavation has settled or caved in, he shall notify the
permittee, who shall promptly repair the deficiencies.
E. All curb installation/repair shall comply with Borough Code § 240-73.
F. All sidewalk installation/repair shall comply with Borough Code
§ 240-74.
G. If tunneling operations are required, the tunnel shall be backfilled with
rammed concrete composed of one part cement to 10 parts sand.
H. If blasting is required to be done in the course of any excavation, it shall
be done in strict compliance with all applicable state laws and
regulations.
I. If the work is not completed within the time specified in the permit or
any extension granted by the Construction Official or is not performed
in accordance with the regulations set forth in this section and any
other regulations that may be established by the Construction Official,
then the Superintendent of Public Works may complete the work or
cause the work to be completed and restore the surface of the street.
The cost of completing the work and restoring the street shall be
charged to the permittee and may be deducted from his deposit or
recovered by an action in any court of competent jurisdiction.
A. The Superintendent of Public Works, at his discretion, will determine if
an infrared heater is to be used in combination with the installation of
the below hot asphalt mix in order to restore the roadbed to a
satisfactory condition.
B. The restoration of a street foundation or surface shall not commence
until the Superintendent of Public Works determines that settlement of
the subsurface is complete and the area properly prepared for
restoration.
C. The foundation shall be restored to a width of 12 inches wider than the
width of the trench, except where deemed unnecessary in the
reasonably exercised judgment of the Superintendent of Public Works.
§ 380-16.3 EDGEWATER CODE § 380-16.4
1:746
§ 380-16.5. Conditions for permits.
D. The street surface pavement shall extend 12 inches wider than the
width of the foundation and six inches longer than the length of the
foundation.
E. In all cases, the foundation shall be constructed of such material and in
such manner as will best serve its intended purpose as deemed
appropriate by the Superintendent of Public Works.
F. Temporary restoration shall consist of a minimum of six inches of hot
mix asphalt, Mix I-5, compacted and brought to grade and shall be
maintained by the permittee to grade.
G. Permanent restoration shall consist of a minimum of eight inches of hot
mix asphalt, Mix I-2, and two inches of hot mix asphalt, Mix I-5, surface
course applied with appropriate tack coat to adjacent pavement
surface.
A. A permit shall apply only to the person to whom it is issued and shall not
be transferable.
B. Work under a permit shall commence within 45 days of the issuance
thereof. If work is not begun within that time, the permit shall
automatically terminate until extended in writing by the Construction
Official.
C. Copy of permit required; revocation.
(1) A copy of the permit, together with a copy of the plan indicating
approval by the responsible municipal official, shall be kept in the
possession of the person actually performing the work.
(2) Revocation.
(a) A permit may be revoked for any of the following reasons:
[1] Violation of any provision of this article or any other
applicable rules, regulations or ordinances.
[2] Violation of any condition of the permit issued.
[3] Performing work under the permit in a manner which
endangers life or property or which creates any condition
which is unhealthy, unsanitary or is otherwise contrary to
the public health, safety concerns or general welfare.
(b) The procedure for revoking a permit shall be the same as for its
issuance, with the initial hearing before the Construction
Official and with a right of appeal to the Mayor and Council;
provided, however, that the responsible municipal official may
provide that the revocation shall not become effective if the
applicant corrects the violation within a definite time period.
§ 380-16.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-16.5
1:747
§ 380-16.6. Miscellaneous provisions.
§ 380-16.7. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be subject
to the penalties in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty. For the purpose of
this article, each day that a violation remains in effect may be considered a
separate violation.
D. The Mayor and Council, Construction Official or Superintendent of
Public Works may impose special conditions when deemed necessary
for the protection of the public health, safety concerns or general
welfare.
A. The Construction Official may make any rules and regulations deemed
necessary for the administration and enforcement of this article,
provided that the same shall not be inconsistent with or alter or amend
any provision of this article. Such regulations shall be effective only
upon approval by the Mayor and Council.
B. Utility companies shall report to the Mayor and Council, the Borough
Engineer, and the Superintendent of Public Works, on an annual basis,
their intentions with regard to prospective work requiring future street
openings in the Borough for the purpose of coordinating such activity
with pavement and resurfacing projects anticipated by the Borough.
C. Except in the case of an emergency, the Borough shall have the right to
schedule street openings with utility companies in a manner which will
create the least disturbance to pavement courses, and particularly
those areas that have been recently resurfaced.
§ 380-16.5 EDGEWATER CODE § 380-16.7
1:748
ARTICLE II
Ice and Snow Removal
[Adopted 3-2-1920 by Ord. No. 134; readopted 8-1-1967 by Ord. No.
476 (Ch. 221, Art. II, of the 1975 Code); amended in its entirety
11-14-2011 by Ord. No. 1462-2011]
§ 380-17. Owner or occupant responsible for removal.
§ 380-18. Deposit of snow and ice on streets prohibited.
A. Every person, partnership, corporation, or other entity in charge or
control of any building or property within the Borough including but not
limited to single-family and multifamily residential and commercial,
whether an owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall remove
and clear away or cause to be removed and cleared away snow and ice
from so much of said sidewalk as is in front of or abuts on said building
or property, along with all walkways, handicapped ramps, staircases
(including steps), driveways and parking areas on said property. Snow
and ice shall also be removed so as to provide access to all fire hydrants
located on the property.
B. All sideways, walkways, handicapped ramps and staircases shall be
cleared to a width of 42 inches or the maximum width of the sidewalk,
walkway, handicapped ramp or staircase, whichever is less, in order to
provide adequate access for handicapped persons.
C. Except as otherwise provided in this article, snow and ice shall be
removed from sidewalks, walkways, handicapped ramps, staircases,
driveways and parking areas within the Borough within 24 hours after
the snowfall, and at all times thereafter said areas shall be kept free
and clear of snow, slush and ice.
D. In the event that snow and ice on a sidewalk, walkway, handicapped
ramp, staircase, driveway or parking area has become so hard that it
cannot be removed without likelihood of damage to the area, the person
or entity responsible for its removal within the time mentioned in this
section shall place sand, ashes, cinders or other approved substance on
the area to make travel thereon reasonably safe and shall then, as soon
thereafter as weather permits, cause said area to be thoroughly cleaned
of all snow and ice.
A. No person, partnership, corporation, or other entity in charge or
control of any building or property within the Borough shall cause or
permit any snow or ice accumulated within the boundaries of the
property to be deposited onto, upon, or in a manner so as to limit access
to any street, sidewalk, cross-walk or other public property in the
Borough, other than such snow and ice that may fall upon that portion
of the property between the street and the sidewalk located on said
property.
§ 380-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-18
1:749
§ 380-19. Violations and penalties; removal by Borough; costs to be
lien.
B. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 39:4-77.3, the commercial operator of any
snowplow, or other snow removal equipment, clearing accumulated
snow on private property shall not deposit, or cause to be deposited,
such snow on any public road, street, or highway in this state or on
public lands. A commercial operator of any snowplow or other snow
removal equipment who fails to comply with the provisions of this
section shall be liable in an amount set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-77.3.
C. Notwithstanding the foregoing, snow and ice shall not be placed so as
to limit or obstruct the visibility or sight distance of motorists or
pedestrians entering or exiting the property.
A. In addition to the penalties provided in Subsection B of this section, any
person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of $50 for
a first offense, $100 for a second offense, and $150 for a third or
subsequent offense. The continuation of any such violation for each
successive day shall constitute a separate offense.
B. In the event that snow or ice is not timely removed or is deposited upon
any street, sidewalk, crosswalk or other public property in violation of
this article, said condition shall be remedied by and under the direction
of the officer in charge of the Department of Public Works, and the cost
thereof, as nearly as can be ascertained, shall be certified to the
Assessor whose duty it is to assess and levy the taxes for said Borough.
Said cost shall thereupon become and be a first and paramount lien
upon said premises and shall be added to, recorded and collected in the
same manner as taxes next to be assessed and levied upon such
premises. The imposition and collection of the fine or fines imposed by
the provisions of this article shall not constitute any bar to the right of
the Borough of Edgewater to collect the costs as certified for the
removal of said snow or ice in the manner herein authorized.
§ 380-18 EDGEWATER CODE § 380-19
1:750
ARTICLE III
Openings and Excavations
[Adopted 7-19-1993 by Ord. No. 1011-93 (Ch. 221, Art. III, of the
1975 Code)]
§ 380-20. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Any human, corporation, proprietorship, partnership, limited
partnership, association, joint venture or other entity.
STREET — Any roadway, highway, public way, public alley, sidewalk,
easement or other right-of-way accepted or maintained by the Borough as a
public street, as well as any state or county road or highway over which the
Borough has acquired jurisdiction by agreement.
§ 380-21. Permit required; exceptions.
§ 380-22. Application for permit.
All applications for street openings shall be filed with the Borough Clerk and
referred to the Construction Official or Borough Engineer and shall contain
the following information:
A. No person shall make an excavation in or tunnel under any street
without first obtaining a permit from the Construction Official or
Borough Engineer.
B. A tunnel or excavation may be commenced without a permit where an
emergency has arisen which makes it necessary to commence work
immediately, provided that an application for a permit is filed
simultaneously with the commencement of work, together with an
estimate of fees required and the estimated performance guaranty. In
such an emergency, the filing of the application and posting of fees and
estimated performance guaranty may be delayed until the next
business day subsequent to the commencement of work where the
emergency has arisen subsequent to the close of business of the next
previous day. When issued, the permit shall be retroactive to the date
on which work began.
C. The Construction Official or Borough Engineer may issue permits to
other public bodies without a fee.
D. No permit shall be issued between December 1 and March 15, except
for an emergency.
A. The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
B. The name, address and telephone number of the party to be reached in
case of an emergency.
§ 380-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-22
1:751
§ 380-23. Denial of permit; appeal.
The Construction Official or Borough Engineer may refuse the issuance of
a permit if such is in the interest of the public safety, convenience, health
or welfare. If a permit is refused by the appropriate municipal official, an
appeal may be taken to the Mayor and Council which, after hearing, may
direct the issuance of a permit or sustain the denial thereof.
§ 380-24. Issuance of permits.
Permits shall be issued under the authority of the Construction Official or
Borough Engineer in accordance with the provisions of this article and the
regulations which such officials may establish in the interest of the public
safety and welfare. The Construction Official or Borough Engineer shall
determine the initial time limit during which the permit shall be valid.
§ 380-25. Fees.
C. The name of the street where the opening is to be made and the street
number of the abutting property.
D. The Borough Tax Map blocks and lots of properties abutting and lying
adjacent to the portion of the street to be opened.
E. The name, address and telephone number of the property owner for
whose benefit the opening is to be performed.
F. The character and purpose of the proposed work.
G. The nature of the surface in which the opening is to be made.
H. The estimated time when work is to be commenced and completed.
I. Plans and specifications, to be filed in quadruplicate, showing the exact
location and dimensions of all openings.
J. The name and address of the person who is to perform the work.
K. An acknowledgment that the applicant agrees to replace, at its own cost
and expense, the street curb, gutter, sidewalk and all other disturbed
areas in accordance with the current Borough standards within 90 days
from the date of the commencement of work; provided, however, that,
upon commencement of work and completion of the first day of work,
the areas shall be temporarily restored by the placement of a stabilized
base course or maintained as determined in the reasonable judgment of
the Construction Official or Borough Engineer until the final surface
course has been placed on the area. The placement of the final surface
may be delayed in the event of the winter season to a date no later than
April 15.
A. Each applicant obtaining a permit shall, before its issuance, pay to the
responsible municipal official the sum of $100 per opening. The
Borough shall have the option of billing public utilities on an annual
§ 380-22 EDGEWATER CODE § 380-25
1:752
§ 380-26. Bond requirements.
lump-sum basis based upon the number of openings made by the utility
in the prior calendar year, subject to an adjustment in the current
calendar year based upon the actual number of openings made.
B. In addition, the applicant shall post with the municipality such fees that
are reasonably anticipated to be required to reimburse the Borough for
the cost of plan review and inspections as may be required by the
Construction Official or the Borough Engineer. The amount of such
deposit and the scope of such review and inspection shall be subject to
the reasonable discretion of the Borough Engineer. All moneys
remaining on deposit at the completion of the work not required for the
reimbursement of review and inspections shall be promptly returned to
the applicant.
C. No fee shall be required for any permit to be issued to a municipal
agency.
A. No permit shall be issued until the applicant files a bond in an amount
determined to be sufficient by the Construction Official or Borough
Engineer. The Construction Official or Borough Engineer may waive the
requirements of this section for a public utility upon the presentation of
satisfactory proof that the utility is capable of meeting any claims
against it up to the amount of the bond that would otherwise be
required. The bond shall be executed by the applicant as principal and a
surety company in good standing, licensed to do business in the State of
New Jersey as surety and shall be conditioned as follows:
(1) To indemnify and hold harmless the Borough from all loss, damage,
claims or expense, including expenses incurred in the defense of
any litigation arising out of injury to any person or property
resulting from any work done by the applicant under the permit.
(2) To indemnify the Borough for any expense incurred in enforcing
any of the provisions of this article.
(3) To indemnify any person who shall sustain personal injuries or
damage to his property as a result of any act or omission of the
applicant, his agents, employees or subcontractors in the course of
any work under the permit.
(4) Upon the applicant's restoring the surface and foundation of the
street for which the permit is granted in a manner acceptable to the
Construction Official or Borough Engineer.
B. A single bond may be accepted to cover a number of excavations by the
applicant. Bonds shall remain in force for a period of six months after
the date the last work is performed to guarantee the integrity of the
street closing or, in lieu thereof, a maintenance bond may be provided
for the period succeeding the completion of the work.
§ 380-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-27
1:753
§ 380-27. Insurance.
No permit shall be issued until the applicant furnishes the Construction
Official or Borough Engineer with satisfactory proof that he is insured
against injury to persons and damage to property caused by any act or
omission of the applicant, his agents, employees or subcontractors in the
course of the work to be performed under the permit. The insurance shall
cover all hazards likely to arise in connection with the work, including but
not limited to collapse and explosion, and shall also insure against liability
arising from completed operations. The limits of the policy of insurance
shall be $100,000 for injury to any one person, $300,000 for injuries to more
than one person in the same accident and an aggregate of $100,000 for
property damage for a single incident. The Construction Official or Borough
Engineer may waive the requirements of this section for a public utility
upon the presentation of satisfactory proof that it is capable of meeting
claims against it up to the amount of the limits of the insurance policy which
would otherwise be required.
§ 380-28. General regulations.
All permits issued under this article shall be subject to the following rules
and regulations:
A. All excavations shall be kept properly barricaded at all times and during
the hours of darkness shall be provided with proper warning lights. This
regulation shall not excuse the permittee from taking any other
precaution reasonably necessary for the protection of persons or
property.
B. All work shall be done in a manner which causes a minimum of
interference with travel on the street affected. No street shall be closed
to traffic unless the closing is approved by the Chief of Police and/or
Police Director. The Police Department shall be informed of all street
closings at least 24 hours in advance except where the work is of an
emergency nature, when notice shall be given to the Police Department
when work commences. [Amended 3-20-2017 by Ord. No.
1541-2017]
C. All refuse and material shall be removed upon completion of each day's
work.
D. All excavations shall be completely backfilled by the permittee and shall
be compacted by tamping or other suitable means in the manner
prescribed by the Construction Official or Borough Engineer. Where the
Construction Official or Borough Engineer determines that the
excavated material is unsuitable for backfill, the permittee shall backfill
the excavation with sand, soft coal, cinders or other suitable material,
which shall be placed in layers not exceeding six inches in depth and
thoroughly compacted in the manner prescribed by the Construction
Official or Borough Engineer. Upon completion of the work, the
permittee shall remove any excess material and leave the premises in a
§ 380-27 EDGEWATER CODE § 380-28
1:754
§ 380-29. Restoration of street surface.
The permittee shall restore the surface of the street in accordance with the
following rules, regulations and requirements:
§ 380-30. Conditions for permits.
clean condition. If the Construction Official or Borough Engineer
determines that a backfilled excavation has settled or caved in, he shall
notify the permittee, who shall promptly continue backfilling until the
Construction Official or Borough Engineer determines that settlement
is complete.
E. If tunneling operations are required, the tunnel shall be backfilled with
rammed concrete composed of one part cement to 10 parts sand.
F. If blasting is required to be done in the course of any excavation, it shall
be done in strict compliance with all applicable state laws and
regulations.
G. If the work is not completed within the time specified in the permit or
any extension granted by the Construction Official or Borough Engineer
or is not performed in accordance with the regulations set forth in this
section and any other regulations that may be established by the
Construction Official or Borough Engineer, then the Construction
Official or Borough Engineer may complete or cause to be completed
the work itself and restore the surface of the street. The cost of
completing the work and restoring the street shall be charged to the
permittee and may be deducted from his deposit or recovered by an
action in any court of competent jurisdiction.
A. The restoration of a street foundation or surface shall not commence
until the Construction Official or Borough Engineer determines that
settlement of the subsurface is complete and the area properly
prepared for restoration.
B. The foundation shall be restored to a width of 12 inches wider than the
width of the trench, except where deemed unnecessary in the
reasonably exercised judgment of the responsible municipal official.
C. The street surface pavement shall extend 12 inches wider than the
width of the foundation and six inches longer than the length of the
foundation.
D. In all cases, the foundation shall be constructed of such material and in
such manner as will best serve its intended purpose as deemed
appropriate by the Construction Official or Borough Engineer.
A. A permit shall apply only to the person to whom it is issued and shall not
be transferable.
§ 380-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-30
1:755
§ 380-31. Miscellaneous provisions.
B. Work under a permit shall commence within 45 days of the issuance
thereof. If work is not begun within that time, the permit shall
automatically terminate until extended in writing by the Construction
Official or Borough Engineer.
C. Copy of permit required; revocation.
(1) A copy of the permit, together with a copy of the plan indicating
approval by the responsible municipal official, shall be kept in the
possession of the person actually performing the work. A permit
may be revoked for any of the following reasons:
(a) Violation of any provision of this article or any other applicable
rules, regulations or ordinances.
(b) Violation of any condition of the permit issued.
(c) Performing work under the permit in a manner which
endangers life or property or which creates any condition
which is unhealthy, unsanitary or is otherwise contrary to the
public health, safety concerns or general welfare.
(2) The procedure for revoking a permit shall be the same as for its
issuance, with the initial hearing before the Construction Official or
Borough Engineer and with a right of appeal to the Mayor and
Council; provided, however, that the responsible municipal official
may provide that the revocation shall not become effective if the
applicant corrects the violation within a definite time period.
D. The Mayor and Council, Construction Official or Borough Engineer may
impose special conditions when deemed necessary for the protection of
the public health, safety concerns or general welfare.
A. The Construction Official or Borough Engineer may make any rules and
regulations deemed necessary for the administration and enforcement
of this article, provided that the same shall not be inconsistent with or
alter or amend any provision of this article. Such regulations shall be
effective only upon approval by the Mayor and Council.
B. Utility companies shall report to the Mayor and Council, on an annual
basis, their intentions with regard to prospective work requiring future
street openings in the Borough for the purpose of coordinating such
activity with pavement and resurfacing projects anticipated by the
Borough.
C. Except in the case of an emergency, the Borough shall have the right to
schedule street openings with utility companies in a manner which will
create the least disturbance to pavement courses, and particularly
those areas that have been recently resurfaced.
§ 380-30 EDGEWATER CODE § 380-32
1:756
§ 380-32. Violations and penalties.149
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be subject
to the penalties in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty. For the purpose of
this article, each day that a violation remains in effect may be considered a
separate violation.
149. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 380-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-32
1:757

ARTICLE IV
Curbs and Sidewalks
[Adopted 9-18-2000 by Ord. No. 1194-2000 (Ch. 221, Art. IV, of the
1975 Code)]
§ 380-33. Maintenance of curbs.150
The Borough will be responsible for the maintenance and repair of all
curbs, except that any person damaging a curb will be responsible for
the replacement thereof, which shall be in the form of a new curb and
constructed with material identical to the curb that was damaged. The
party responsible for the replacement of such curb shall obtain all required
permits from the Borough Building Department.
§ 380-34. Maintenance of sidewalks.
A. The Borough will be responsible only for repair and maintenance of
sidewalks when a sidewalk is damaged by Borough trees existing or
planted in the public right-of-way; provided, however, that any person
damaging a sidewalk will be responsible for the replacement thereof
which shall be in the form of a new sidewalk and constructed with
material identical to the sidewalk that was damaged. The party
responsible for the replacement of such sidewalk shall obtain all
required permits from the Borough Building Department.
B. The Borough will be responsible to repair or replace a sidewalk
constructed with brick pavers if such repair or replacement is
attributable to the initial construction of such sidewalk. Any person
damaging a brick paver sidewalk will be responsible for its
replacement, and it shall be constructed with brick pavers and material
identical to the sidewalk which was damaged. The party responsible for
the replacement of such sidewalk shall obtain all required permits from
the Borough Building Department.
C. Except as provided in Subsections A and B of this section, the
maintenance of all sidewalks shall be the responsibility of the adjoining
property owner, who will be responsible for maintaining the sidewalk in
a safe condition so as to permit use and access by the general public in
a safe and secure manner.
D. If the sidewalk is deemed to be in an unsafe condition, the Borough will
give notice to the adjoining property owner, who will then have a period
of 30 business days within which to repair the sidewalk. Such property
owner shall be responsible to obtain all necessary permits from the
Borough Building Department. Failure to comply with an order or
directive regarding the repair of a sidewalk will subject the property
owner to the issuance of a summons. In addition, the Borough will have
the right to have the sidewalk repaired and to charge the property
150. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 380-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-34
1:759
§ 380-35. Violations and penalties.151
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
owner for the cost thereof, plus reasonable expenses, which may be
imposed as a lien on the property and enforced in the same manner as
nonpayment of real estate taxes.
151. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 380-34 EDGEWATER CODE § 380-35
1:760
Chapter 386
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 166.
Land use and development — See Ch. 240.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 535.
§ 386-1. Definitions.
The words, terms or phrases listed below for the purposes of this chapter,
except when the context requires a different meaning, shall be defined as
follows:
CONSTRUCTION — Building or installing a new swimming pool or
enlarging an existing swimming pool or any of its facilities.
MUNICIPALITY — Borough of Edgewater in the County of Bergen and State
of New Jersey.
OWNER — The holder or holders of the title to the premises in fee simple,
or having charge, care or control of any dwelling unit as owner or agent of
the owner, or as executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee,
receiver or guardian of the estate, or as mortgagee in possession,
regardless of how such possession was obtained. Any person who is a lessee
subletting or reassigning any part or all of any building shall be deemed to
be a co-owner with the lessor and shall have joint responsibility over the
portion of the premises sublet or assigned by said lessee.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, association, society, firm,
agency or partnership or any other type of entity.
SWIMMING POOL — Any facility used for swimming or bathing, having a
depth of at least 24 inches or having a surface area of 250 or more square
feet; provided, however, that where such facility is permanently equipped
with a water recirculating system or constructed with structural materials,
such facility shall be classified as a pool, notwithstanding that the depth and
area are less than the aforementioned dimensions.152
§ 386-2. Permit required; application.
A. A swimming pool or appurtenances thereto shall not be constructed,
installed, enlarged or altered until a permit has been obtained from the
Construction Official of the municipality. The approval of all municipal,
county and state agencies, if necessary, having jurisdiction over the
swimming pools shall be obtained before applying to the Construction
Official for such permit. Any such approvals required shall be filed with
the application for the permit.
152. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 380-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 386-2
1:761
§ 386-3. Compliance with Zoning Ordinance required.
Any swimming pools hereafter constructed or installed shall comply with all
the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance of the Borough of Edgewater.155
§ 386-4. Safety devices required.
B. Applications for pool permits shall be accompanied by duplicate sets of
the following:
(1) Permit, plan and specifications or proper descriptive voucher.
(2) Proper plans showing dimensions and construction of the pool and
appurtenances and properly establishing distances to lot lines,
buildings, walks and fences or existing houses and structures
thereon abutting streets and properties.
(3) A description of the water supply system, drainage and water
disposal system and the method of water treatment.
C. The Construction Official shall file one set of plans and specifications
with the Board of Health of the municipality prior to the issuance of the
permit.
D. The fees required under this section shall be as set forth in the Uniform
Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23).153
E. The Construction Official shall issue the permit for the construction and
installation of such swimming pool if the same complies with the
regulations set forth in this chapter, as well as the provisions of the
Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23), the provisions of which are
hereby incorporated by reference.154
A. Every person owning land whereon is situated a swimming pool shall
erect and maintain thereon an adequate enclosure either surrounding
the property or pool area sufficient so as to make such body of water
inaccessible to small children. Such enclosure shall be not less than
four feet in height, and all gates or door openings through such
enclosures shall be kept securely closed and shall be equipped with a
self-closing and self-latching device designed at least four feet above
the underlying ground or otherwise made inaccessible to the outside by
small children.
B. A natural barrier or other protective device may be used, subject to the
approval of the Construction Official, so long as the degree of
protection afforded by such natural barrier or other protective device is
no less than the protection afforded by the enclosure, gate and latch
described herein.
153. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
154. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
155. Editor's Note: See Ch. 240, Land Use and Development.
§ 386-2 EDGEWATER CODE § 386-4
1:762
§ 386-5. Water treatment system required.
§ 386-6. Drainage system required.
All swimming pools shall be equipped to be completely emptied of water
and to provide for the discharge thereof in a manner that will not create
a nuisance to adjoining property or any other street or public place. No
private pool drain shall be connected with the Edgewater sanitary sewer
system except upon the approval of the Mayor and Council, which such
approval shall be in writing. Upon application being made for such
approval, the superintendent of the sewer treatment plant of the
municipality or his designated agent shall inspect the premises on which
such pool is planned to be constructed in order to determine the proper
location and type of connection necessary and shall, thereafter, make a
recommendation to the Mayor and Council.
§ 386-7. Inspection.
C. At least one or more means of egress shall be provided from the pool.
The treads of steps or ladders shall have nonslip surfaces and handrails
on both sides, except that handrails may be omitted when there are not
more than four steps.
D. Any access ladders or steps used in connection with the above-surfacetype
swimming pools shall be removed when such pool is not in use.
A. All swimming pools, including the above-surface-type portable
swimming pools, shall be so constructed, installed or maintained so as
to provide for all necessary equipment for the chlorination and other
disinfection and filtering to comply with the approved bacterial
standards as may be promulgated by the Board of Health of the
municipality and the New Jersey State Board of Health.
B. Any pool maintained in the municipality shall furthermore be so
constructed and installed so as to provide a water treatment system of
the kind set forth in the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23).
A. All swimming pools may be inspected by the Health Officer of the
municipality or any agent of the Board of Health of the municipality or
by the Construction Official of the Borough of Edgewater.
B. The owners of any premises having situated thereon a pool shall permit
such agents of the municipality access thereto for the purposes of
inspection to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this chapter at
all reasonable times.
§ 386-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 386-8
1:763
§ 386-8. Violations and penalties.156
A person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be
subject to the penalties in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty. Every day
that such violation continues shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
§ 386-9. Higher standards to prevail.
Whenever the provisions of this chapter impose a higher standard than that
set forth in any other local ordinance or under the laws of the State of
New Jersey or under the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23), then
the standard as set forth herein shall prevail, but if the provisions of this
chapter shall impose a lower standard than the higher standards contained
in any such other ordinance or state law or the Uniform Construction Code,
then the higher standard contained in any other such ordinance, law of the
State of New Jersey or under the Uniform Construction Code shall prevail.
Chapter 397
TAXATION
156. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 386-8 EDGEWATER CODE § 386-9
1:764
ARTICLE I
Exemptions for Improvements to Existing Dwellings
[Adopted 12-20-1993 by Ord. No. 1017-93157 (Ch. 226, Art. I of the
1975 Code)]
§ 397-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide realistic incentives to owners
of residential dwellings to make improvements to such structures to the
benefit of the surrounding neighborhoods in the Borough of Edgewater.
§ 397-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSESSOR — The Assessor of the Borough of Edgewater charged with the
duty of assessing real property for the purpose of general taxation.
COMPLETION — Substantially ready for the use for which it was intended.
DWELLING — Any building or part of a building used, to be used or held
for use as a home or residence, including accessory buildings located on
the same premises, together with the land upon which such building or
buildings are erected and which may be necessary for the fair enjoyment
thereof, but shall not mean any building or part of a building defined as a
"multiple dwelling" pursuant to the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law, P.L.
1967, c. 76 (N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq.). A dwelling shall include individual
residences within a horizontal property regime or a condominium, but shall
not include "general common elements" or "common elements" of such
horizontal property regime or condominium, as defined pursuant to the
Horizontal Property Act, P.L. 1963, c. 168 (N.J.S.A. 46:8A-1 et seq.), or of a
cooperative, if the residential units are owned separately.
HOME IMPROVEMENT — The improvement of a dwelling which does
not change its permitted use, and shall include the modernization,
rehabilitation, renovation, alteration or repair of a dwelling.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Edgewater in the County of Bergen,
State of New Jersey.
§ 397-3. Determination of areas in need of rehabilitation.
It is hereby determined that all areas within the Borough of Edgewater are
in need of rehabilitation.
§ 397-4. Exemption.
The municipality shall regard as exempt from taxation the first $15,000 in
the Assessor's full and true value of home improvements for each dwelling
157. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. I, Exemption for Improvements to
Existing Dwellings, adopted 3-15-1980 by Ord. No. 662-80.
§ 397-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 397-4
1:765
unit primarily and directly affected by a home improvement in any dwelling
more than 20 years old, as not increasing the value of such property for a
period of five years, notwithstanding that the value of the dwelling to which
such improvements are made is increased thereby; provided, however, that
during said period, the assessment on such dwelling shall in no case, except
that of damage through action of the elements sufficient to warrant a
reduction, be less than the assessment thereon existing immediately prior
to such home improvements.
§ 397-5. Exemption for additional improvements.
Any additional home improvements completed during a period in which the
improved property is subject to previously granted exemption privileges
in an amount less than the maximum exemption permissible under this
article shall be qualified for an additional exemption under the terms and
conditions set forth in this article; provided, however, that in no tax year
shall the total exemption for any single property exceed the maximum
amount specified in § 397-4 of this article.
§ 397-6. Application for exemption required; records.
No exemption authorized pursuant to this article shall be granted or
allowed except upon written application therefor filed with and approved
by the Assessor of the Borough of Edgewater. Every such application shall
be on a form prescribed by the Division of Taxation, Department of the
Treasury, and provided for the use of claimants by the governing body and
shall be filed with the Assessor within 30 days, including Saturdays and
Sundays, following the completion of the improvement. Every application
for exemption of one or more improvements which qualify as improvements,
and which is filed within the time specified, shall be approved and allowed
by the Assessor. The granting of such exemption shall be recorded and made
a permanent part of the official tax records of the Borough of Edgewater,
which record shall contain a notice of the termination date of the exemption
and the consequences of transfer of title.
§ 397-7. Transfer of title.
Any exemption granted pursuant to this article shall terminate immediately
upon transfer of title of property with respect to which such exemption was
provided.
§ 397-8. Administration pursuant to standards and guidelines.
The terms and provisions of this article shall be administered pursuant to
the standards and guidelines and the promulgation of rules and regulations
by the Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs.
§ 397-9. Notice to taxpayers.
The municipality shall include in the mailing of annual property tax bills
to each owner of residential property, including multifamily housing, in
§ 397-4 EDGEWATER CODE § 397-9
1:766
the municipality during the first year following the adoption of this article
a notice for taxpayers describing the exemption program and application
procedure therefor. Such notice shall be in the form provided the
municipality by the Department of Community Affairs.
§ 397-10. Applicability.
Nothing contained in this article or any requirement of compliance herewith
shall be deemed to alter, impair or affect the application of the Zoning
Ordinance or zoning laws of the Borough of Edgewater.158
158. Editor's Note: See Ch. 240, Land Use and Development.
§ 397-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 397-10
1:767

ARTICLE II
Hotel and Motel Occupancy Tax
[Adopted 10-20-2003 by Ord. No. 1283-2003 (Ch. 226, Art. II of the
1975 Code)]
§ 397-11. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to implement the provision of P.L. 2003,
c. 114, which authorizes the governing body of a municipality to adopt
an ordinance imposing a tax at a uniform percentage rate not to exceed
1% on charges of rent for every occupancy on or after July 1, 2003, but
before July 1, 2004, and not to exceed 3% on charges of rent for every
occupancy on or after July 1, 2004, of a room or rooms in a hotel subject to
taxation pursuant to Subsection (d) of section 3 of P.L. 1966, c. 40 (N.J.S.A.
54:32B-3), which shall be in addition to any other tax or fee imposed
pursuant to statute or local ordinance or resolution by any governmental
entity upon the occupancy of a hotel room.
§ 397-12. Establishment of hotel and motel room occupancy tax.
There is hereby established a Hotel and Motel Room Occupancy Tax in the
Borough of Edgewater which shall be fixed at a uniform percentage rate of
1% on charges of rent for every occupancy of a hotel or motel room in the
Borough of Edgewater on or after July 1, 2003, but before July 1, 2004, and
3% on charges of rent for every occupancy of a hotel or motel room in the
Borough of Edgewater on or after July 1, 2004, of a room or rooms in a hotel
subject to taxation pursuant to Subsection (d) of Section 3 of P.L. 1966, c.
40, N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3 (sales tax).
§ 397-13. Additional taxes and fees.
The Hotel and Motel Room Occupancy Tax shall be in addition to any other
tax or fee imposed pursuant to statute or local ordinance or resolution by
any governmental entity upon the occupancy of a hotel room.
§ 397-14. Responsibility for payment; violations and penalties.
In accordance with the requirements of P.L. 2003, c. 114:
A. All taxes imposed by this article shall be paid by the purchaser.
B. A vendor shall not assume or absorb any tax imposed by this article.
C. A vendor shall not in any manner advertise or hold out to any person or
to the public in general, in any manner, directly or indirectly, that the
tax will be assumed or absorbed by the vendor, that the tax will not be
separately charged and stated to the customer, or that the tax will be
refunded to the customer.
§ 397-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 397-14
1:769
§ 397-15. Collection of tax.
The tax imposed by this article shall be collected on behalf of the Borough
of Edgewater by the person collecting the rent from the hotel or motel
customer. Each person required to collect the tax herein imposed shall be
personally liable for the tax imposed, collected or required to be collected
hereunder. Any such person shall have the same right in respect to
collecting the tax from a customer as if the tax were a part of the rent
and payable at the same time, providing the Chief Financial Officer of the
Borough of Edgewater shall be joined as a party in any action or proceeding
brought to collect the tax.
§ 397-16. Transmittal of regulations.
A copy of this article shall be transmitted to the State Treasurer and to each
hotel or motel located within the Borough of Edgewater.
D. Each assumption or absorption by a vendor of the tax shall be deemed a
separate offense and each representation or advertisement continues
shall be deemed a separate offense.
E. The penalty for violation of the foregoing provisions shall be as set forth
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Code.159
159. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 397-14 EDGEWATER CODE § 397-16
1:770
Chapter 402
TAXICABS AND LIVERIES
§ 397-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 397-16
1:771

ARTICLE I
Terminology
§ 402-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases and their derivatives, when used in this
chapter, shall have the meanings hereafter ascribed to them:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Edgewater.
DRIVER — Any person who drives a limousine or taxicab within the Borough
of Edgewater and has been properly authorized to do so.
LICENSE — An application for a license to engage in the operation of a
taxicab or livery approved by the Borough if it meets all requirements of
this chapter. The Borough shall issue a certificate of license permitting the
licensee to operate a taxicab or taxi or a livery in the Borough. In addition,
any existing licenses issued by the Borough and effective on the effective
date of this chapter shall be included in the within definition.
LICENSED — Licensed in accordance with the appropriate sections of this
chapter, unless otherwise stated.
LIVERY — Any automobile or motorcar, other than a bus or taxicab, which
is engaged in the business of transporting passengers for hire, other than in
the conduct of a funeral, and operates out of closed premises, and which is
hired by charter or for a particular contract or by the day or hour or other
fixed period, or charges a fare or price agreed upon in advance between the
operator and the passenger.
OPERATION OF A TAXICAB OR LIVERY — Transporting in a taxicab or
livery one or more persons for hire, i.e., accepting a passenger to be
transported for hire from a point of departure within the Borough to a
destination within or without the Borough. The operation of a taxicab or
livery by one other than the owner shall be deemed operation by the
owner as well as by the person actually driving the taxicab or livery. The
transportation of any person, other than the owner or driver, in any motor
vehicle bearing a sign using the words "taxi," "taxicab," "cab," "hack" or
"livery" shall be presumed, in the absence or evidence to the contrary, to be
operation of a taxicab or livery.
OWNER — Any person in whose name title to any taxicab or livery is
registered with the New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles or who appears
in the Division's records as a conditional vendee or lessee or has any other
proprietary interest in a taxicab or livery.
TAXICAB or TAXI — A motor vehicle used to transport passengers for hire
which does not operate over a fixed route and is not hired by the day or
hour.
§ 402-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 402-1
1:773

ARTICLE II
Taxicabs
§ 402-2. Licensing required.
No person shall engage in the operation of a taxicab, hire out or keep or
use for hire or pay, or cause to be kept or used for hire or pay, any taxicab
without first having obtained a license for that purpose from the Borough
Clerk. Each license shall entitle the licensee to operate one taxicab or taxi
in the Borough.
§ 402-3. Application for license.
A. Each application for a license shall be in writing and filed with the
Borough Clerk, in duplicate, on forms provided. The application shall
contain the name and address of the owner; the name and address of
the lessee, if any; the business or trade name, if any, under which the
owner or lessee will operate the taxicab or livery; the serial number,
make, model, year and color of the taxicab or livery; the automobile
registration number issued for said vehicle by the New Jersey Division
of Motor Vehicles; and the maximum number of persons it is to carry.
B. In the event that, after the filing of said application and before the
expiration of the license issued thereunder, any change in
circumstances shall occur with respect to any information submitted on
the application, the applicant shall, no later than 10 days following the
occurrence of such change, give written notice thereof to the Borough
Clerk indicating the nature thereof and the manner in which the
information set forth on the original application should be amended,
modified or corrected to conform to such change in circumstances.
C. Subsequent to the filing of the application with the information
required by this section, the Mayor and Council shall by resolution
approve the application for a license subject to the requirements of this
chapter.
D. Owners of the taxicab license and all persons that will operate the
taxicab are required to fill out an application form and receive a taxicab
card.
E. Every person obtaining a taxi license shall be 18 years of age and a
legal resident of the United States, a holder of a valid driver's license
issued by the Division of Motor Vehicles, State of New Jersey, shall have
a regular business office within the Borough and shall maintain an
operating telephone listed in the Bergen County telephone directory
under the name of the owner.
§ 402-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 402-4
1:775
§ 402-4. Temporary taxicab license. [Amended 3-20-2017 by Ord.
No. 1541-2017]
The Borough Clerk is hereby authorized to issue temporary taxicab licenses
pending the approval by the Borough Council of any application for a
taxicab license submitted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter,
provided that the Chief of Police and/or Police Director of the Borough shall
first certify to the Borough Clerk that, after due investigation, the applicant
is not ineligible under the provisions of § 402-27.
§ 402-5. Oath or affirmation.
Each applicant for a license of any class shall supply the information
requested on the application in full and verify the correctness thereof by his
oath or affirmation and thereafter file the completed application with the
Borough Clerk, together with the full amount of the proper fee hereinafter
fixed therefor.
§ 402-6. Photographs required for taxicab license; physician's
certificate.
§ 402-7. Fingerprinting required.
Each applicant for a taxicab license and anyone driving a taxicab shall be
fingerprinted by the Police Department of the Borough of Edgewater, which
fingerprints shall thereupon become the property of the Borough and be
retained with the application form.
§ 402-8. Registered business office and telephone required for
owner's license.
Each applicant for a taxicab license shall have a regularly registered
business office and shall therein have a telephone operating.
§ 402-9. Insurance required.
No taxicab owner shall be licensed until a policy of insurance shall have
been filed with the Borough Clerk in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 48:16-1. to 48:16-12; inclusive, as now or hereafter amended or
A. Each applicant for a taxicab license shall file with his application two
photographs, each 3 1/2 inches in size, clearly depicting the facial
features of the applicant, both of which photographs shall thereupon
become the property of the Borough and be retained with the
application form unless the application shall be accepted, in which
event one of the photographs shall be permanently affixed to the license
card in a space provided therein.
B. Each applicant for a taxicab license shall file with his initial application
only a physician's certificate certifying that the applicant is in good
health and free from any communicable or contagious disease.
§ 402-4 EDGEWATER CODE § 402-9
1:776
supplemented. Such policy of insurance shall not be filed unless it is
approved by the Mayor and Council.
§ 402-10. Issuance of licenses.
Licenses shall be issued by the Borough Clerk and shall be signed by the
Borough Clerk and in the name of the Borough.
§ 402-11. Limitation on number of licenses.
The Mayor and Council shall be limited to issuing not more than one
license per 1,000 persons or a portion thereof residing within the Borough
of Edgewater. The Mayor and Council shall allow a limit of three taxicab
licenses to be issued in the Borough.
§ 402-12. Taxicab license cards.
§ 402-13. Expiration of license.
All licenses shall expire on December 31 next succeeding the date thereof,
unless sooner suspended or revoked.
§ 402-14. Transfer of license.
Each license may be transferred by the person to whom granted to such
other person or persons subject to the approval of the Mayor and Council,
and an application for such transfer shall be made on a form prepared by
the Borough for such purpose, which application shall be accompanied by
a transfer fee made payable to the Borough of Edgewater in the sum as
determined in the fee ordinance.
§ 402-15. License fees.160
Each holder of a taxicab license shall pay an annual fee of $50 per vehicle.
A. Upon issuance of a license, the Borough Clerk shall issue to the licensee
one card containing the name of the owner, the license number of the
vehicle and year of issue, provided that the licensee has met all
requirements of this chapter. The card shall be inserted in a card rack
or frame provided by the owner and attached on the inside of the
taxicab or taxi on the front dashboard.
B. The Borough Clerk shall issue as many taxicab cards to the owner as
needed. Each driver is required to have an individual card with their
photograph.
160. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 402-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 402-16
1:777
§ 402-16. Record of taxicab passenger trips.
Every licensed taxicab shall record in writing the time and place each
passenger is accepted and the time and place of discharge of the passenger.
Such records shall be kept intact for one year from the date thereof.
Such records shall, in addition, be kept open for inspection at all times
during the one-year period by a duly authorized representative of the Police
Department.
§ 402-17. Regulation concerning display of license card.
No taxicab license card other than that of the licensee actually operating
the taxicab at the time shall be displayed therein.
§ 402-18. Display of rates.
No taxicab shall hereafter be operated in this Borough unless and until
there is prominently displayed in the interior thereof, within the full view
and access of any passengers therein, a complete list of fares, charges or
tariff rates charged for transportation of passengers, which fares, charges
or tariff rates so displayed, and no other, shall be those to be charged any
passenger so transported.
§ 402-19. Refusal of passengers.
Every person so licensed as aforesaid shall not refuse to carry local fares or
passengers.
§ 402-20. Taxicabs licensed outside Borough.
Owners and drivers of taxicabs licensed out of the jurisdiction of this
Borough may be allowed to enter their taxicabs in this Borough, but on
specific call only whether transporting a passenger within this Borough, or
from a point within this Borough to a point outside the Borough limits or
discharging a passenger transported from a point outside of the Borough
limits to a point within the Borough limits, and the name of the passenger so
calling shall be given by the owner or driver when requested by the Borough
police or other lawful person. Such taxicabs shall not be parked in this
Borough, nor shall the drivers thereof cruise on the streets of this Borough
at any time for the purpose of soliciting passengers, nor shall they, in the
nighttime or other periods of darkness, when in this Borough, permit any
advertising lights on the taxicab to remain unlighted; provided, however,
that the same or similar substantial reciprocal rights are granted to owners
and drivers of taxicabs licensed in this Borough by the municipalities in
which the aforesaid owner or drivers are licensed.
§ 402-21. Maintenance of vehicles.
A. All vehicles herein required to be licensed, used or operated for the
carrying of passengers within the scope of this section shall at all times
be kept clean and in good repair and condition. Each vehicle shall be
§ 402-16 EDGEWATER CODE § 402-21
1:778
§ 402-22. Dispute in fare.
§ 402-23. Rates posted; maximum rates.
equipped with an interior ceiling light which shall be activated upon
pickup and discharge of passengers.
B. Each and every taxicab operating in the Borough shall have installed
therein a taximeter, or the equivalent thereof, of standard make, on
which the fare or charge for hire of the taxicab is mechanically and
accurately calculated and registered, and on which taximeter the
charge is plainly indicated. The taximeter is to be so place in the taxicab
that the charge thereof may be plainly seen by the passengers.
C. No person shall use or permit to be used upon any taxicab a taximeter
which shall be in such a condition as to be over 5% incorrect to the
prejudice of any passenger.
D. After sundown the face of every taximeter shall be illuminated by a
suitable light so arranged as to throw a continuous steady light thereon
while in operation and carrying a passenger, so that the meter will be
clearly discernible and can be read by a passenger in the rear seat.
E. Every taxicab shall be equipped with a top light or domelight which
shall be so connected with the taximeter that while the taximeter is in
operation and carrying a passenger the top light or domelight shall be
extinguished.
F. The taximeter shall be sealed, and a colored paster different in color at
each inspection shall be placed on the taximeter after inspection.
G. No person shall use or permit to be used or drive for hire a taxicab
equipped with a taximeter, the case of which is unsealed or the seal
broken.
A. Any dispute as to the fare shall be determined by the officer in charge of
the police station at the time of the dispute.
B. Every driver of a taxicab shall, when requested, give a passenger a
receipt for the fare paid.
C. No person other than the licensed driver of the taxicab shall ride or sit
in the compartment of the taxicab reserved for the driver.
A. Every vehicle licensed hereunder shall have fastened in a conspicuous
place therein a printed card showing the rates provided for in this
chapter in letters and figures of not less than 1/2 inch in height.
B. Every vehicle licensed hereunder shall have posted on both front doors
or both rear doors of the vehicle the rates provided for in this chapter in
figures of not less than 2 1/2 inches in height and letters of not less than
one inch in height.
§ 402-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 402-23
1:779
§ 402-24. Annual certification required for taximeter.
The owner of each taxicab licensed under this chapter shall file with the
Borough Clerk on the annual license renewal date a certification from the
manufacturer of each meter that it has been inspected and that it is in
proper working order. The certification shall be dated not more than 90 days
prior to the renewal date.
§ 402-25. Maintain twenty-four-hour service.
Each taxicab licensee licensed under this chapter shall maintain a twentyfour-
hour telephone service and shall have taxicab service on call on a
twenty-four-hour basis.
§ 402-26. Parking and taxicab stand regulations.
No licensed taxicab may park in any public street or public place in the
Borough except in such place or places as may be designated by ordinance,
resolution or regulation adopted in accordance with law. Only such taxicabs
as are for hire may remain at designated taxicab stands while waiting for
employment. After the first taxicab in line leaves the stand, those behind
shall move forward. Any other taxicab seeking parking space in such stand
shall approach it only from the rear thereof. All taxicabs shall contain
therein a sign or sticker, placed in a location to be within the view of the
passenger, which indicates that passengers are required to be discharged
at curbside.
§ 402-27. Suspension or revocation of license.
The license issued pursuant to this chapter may be suspended or revoked
by the Mayor and Council for any of the following causes, whether arising
out of the operation of a taxicab:
C. The maximum rates which may be charged are as follows:
(1) Two dollars for the first 1/2 of a mile and $0.25 for each additional
1/10 of a mile.
(2) Eighteen dollars per hour for waiting time.
A. A violation of any provision of this chapter, any provision of any other
ordinance of the Borough of Edgewater or any of the laws of the State
of New Jersey.
B. The falsification of any information contained in the application for a
license.
C. Permitting or suffering any taxicab to be used for any illegal or immoral
purpose or purposes.
D. If the vehicle is found to be unsafe or unfit for public patronage.
§ 402-23 EDGEWATER CODE § 402-27
1:780
E. If inspection discloses that the taximeter is not in proper working
condition or is operating inaccurately.
§ 402-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 402-27
1:781

ARTICLE III
Limousines and Liveries
§ 402-28. License required; no limitation on number of licenses.
No person shall engage in the operation of a livery/limousine, hire out or
keep or use for hire or pay, or cause to be kept or used for hire or pay,
any livery without first having obtained a license for that purpose from
the Borough Clerk. Each license shall entitle the licensee to operate one
livery in the Borough. There are no limits to the number of livery/limousine
licenses which may be obtained.
§ 402-29. Application for licenses.
A. Each application for a license shall be in writing and filed with the
Borough Clerk, in duplicate, on forms provided. The application shall
contain the name and address of the owner; the name and address of
the lessee, if any; the business or trade name, if any, under which the
owner or lessee will operate the taxicab or livery; the serial number,
make, model, year and color of the taxicab or livery; the automobile
registration number issued for said vehicle by the New Jersey Division
of Motor Vehicles; and the maximum number of persons it is to carry.
B. Every person obtaining a limousine license shall be 18 years of age and
a legal resident of the United States, a holder of a valid driver's license
issued by the Division of Motor Vehicles, State of New Jersey, shall have
a regular business office within the Borough and shall maintain an
operating telephone listed in the Bergen County telephone directory
under the name of the owner.
C. No limousine license shall be issued until the limousine has been
thoroughly inspected by the Police Department and found to be in a
safe, clean and sanitary condition for the transportation of passengers
and unless said limousine is in accordance with the provisions of this
section.
D. Each applicant for a limousine license shall file with his application two
photographs, each 3 1/2 inches square, clearly depicting the facial
features of the applicant, both of which photographs shall thereupon
become the property of the Borough and be retained with the
application form unless the application shall be issued in which event
one of the photographs shall be permanently affixed to the license card
in a space provided therein.
E. Each applicant for a limousine license shall be fingerprinted by the
Police Department of the Borough, which fingerprints shall thereupon
become the property of the Borough and be retained with the
application form.
F. All changes of residence on the part of the holder of any limousine
license issued under this section shall be reported in writing to the
§ 402-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 402-29
1:783
§ 402-30. Insurance required.
No livery shall be licensed until a policy of insurance shall have been filed
with the Borough Clerk in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:16-1
to 48:16-22, inclusive, as now or hereafter amended or supplemented. Such
policy of insurance shall not be filed unless it is approved by the Mayor and
Council.
§ 402-31. Issuance of licenses.
Licenses shall be issued by the Borough Clerk and shall be signed by the
Borough Clerk and in the name of the Borough.
§ 402-32. License fees.
The fee for a livery license shall be $100 annually.
§ 402-33. Livery/limousine license cards.
Borough Clerk within three days after such change and shall be
directed to the Police Department of the Borough.
G. The Borough Clerk is hereby authorized to issue temporary limousine
licenses pending the approval by the Council of any application for a
limousine driver's license submitted in accordance with the provisions
of this section, provided that the Chief of Police and/or Police Director
of the Borough shall first certify to the Borough Clerk that, after due
investigation, the applicant is not ineligible under the provisions of this
section. [Amended 3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 1541-2017]
H. In the event that, after the filing of said application and before the
expiration of the license issued thereunder, any change in
circumstances shall occur with respect to any information submitted on
the application, the applicant shall, no later than 10 days following the
occurrence of such change, give written notice thereof to the Borough
Clerk indicating the nature thereof and the manner in which the
information set forth on the original application should be amended,
modified or corrected to conform to such change in circumstances.
I. Subsequent to the filing of the application with the information
required by this section, the Mayor and Council shall by resolution
approve the application for a license subject to the requirements of this
chapter.
A. Upon issuance of a license, the Borough Clerk shall issue to the licensee
a card thereafter for each livery, containing the name of the owner or
lessee, the license number of the vehicle and year of issue, provided
that the licensee has met all requirements of this chapter. The card
shall remain in the livery for which it was issued.
B. Such license card shall at all times be prominently displayed and
adequately protected in the interior of any vehicle operated by the
§ 402-29 EDGEWATER CODE § 402-33
1:784
§ 402-34. Expiration of license.
All licenses shall expire on December 31 next succeeding the date thereof,
unless sooner suspended or revoked.
§ 402-35. Transfer of license.
Each license may be transferred by the person to whom granted to such
other person or persons subject to the approval of the Mayor and Council,
and an application for such transfer shall be made on a form prepared by
the Borough for such purpose, which application shall be accompanied by
a transfer fee made payable to the Borough of Edgewater in the sum as
determined in the fee ordinance.
§ 402-36. Operation regulations.
§ 402-37. Type of vehicle specified.
§ 402-38. Insurance requirements.
Notwithstanding the provisions of § 402-30 hereof, no limousine shall be
licensed until an insurance policy or certificate in lieu thereof shall have
licensee so that the face thereof shall be at all times in full view of
and plainly legible to any passenger seated on the rear seat of such
limousine; and said license card shall at all times be and remain the
property of the Borough and on direction of Council shall at once be
surrendered to the Borough Clerk.
C. No limousine license card other than that of the licensee actuary
operating the limousine at the time shall be displayed therein.
A. Drivers of limousines shall not receive or discharge passengers in the
roadway, but shall pull up to the right-hand sidewalk or as nearly as
possible thereto or, in the absence of a sidewalk to the extreme righthand
side of the road, and there receive or discharge passengers,
except upon one-way streets where passengers may be discharged on
either the right or left hand sidewalk or at the side of the roadway in the
absence of a sidewalk.
B. No limousine shall be operated about the streets of the Borough so as to
solicit passengers or to bring the presence of the limousine to the
attention of prospective passengers.
A. All vehicles herein required to be licensed, used or operated for the
carrying of passengers within the scope of this chapter shall be as
defined in § 402-1. Said automobile shall at all times be clean and in
good repair and shall have passed all inspections as required by the
New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles.
B. Not more than one passenger besides the driver may occupy the front
seat of the limousine.
§ 402-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 402-38
1:785
been filed with the Borough Clerk with liability limits of not less than
$100,000 to $300,000 for bodily injury and $10,000 for property damage.
§ 402-39. Minimum rate.
For the purpose of regulating and for the purpose of clearly distinguishing
a limousine from a taxicab, it shall be unlawful for any licensed limousine
owner or licensed limousine driver, as herein defined, to make a charge for
transportation of one or more persons at a minimal charge of less than $15.
No rebates, participating coupons or other inducement calculated to reduce
rates shall be permitted.
§ 402-40. Notification of expiration of license.
Notification shall be sent to the owners of all limousine licenses by the
Borough Clerk by certified mail 30 days prior to the expiration date of
all limousine licenses. If no return receipt is received or the license is
not renewed within 15 days after the expiration date, a second and final
notice shall be sent notifying the limousine company owner of the Borough's
intention to deem abandoned any and all licenses which have not been
renewed within 30 days after the expiration date.
§ 402-41. Livery parking.
No licensed livery may park in any public street or public place in the
Borough except in such place or places as may be designated by ordinance,
resolution or regulation adopted in accordance with law. Only such taxicabs
as are for hire may remain at designated taxicab stands while waiting for
employment. After the first taxicab in line leaves the stand, those behind
shall move forward. Any other taxicab seeking parking space in such stand
shall approach it only from the rear thereof. All taxicabs shall contain
therein a sign or sticker, placed in a location to be within the view of the
passenger, which indicates that passengers are required to be discharged
at curbside.
§ 402-42. Suspension or revocation of license.
The license issued pursuant to this chapter may be suspended or revoked
by the Mayor and Council for any of the following causes, whether arising
out of the operation of a livery:
A. A violation of any provision of this chapter, any provision of any other
ordinance of the Borough of Edgewater or any of the laws of the State
of New Jersey.
B. The falsification of any information contained in the application for a
license.
C. Permitting or suffering any livery to be used for any illegal or immoral
purpose or purposes.
D. If the vehicle is found to be unsafe or unfit for public patronage.
§ 402-38 EDGEWATER CODE § 402-42
1:786
E. If inspection discloses that the taximeter is not in proper working
condition or is operating inaccurately.
§ 402-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 402-42
1:787

ARTICLE IV
Suspension or Revocation; Penalties
§ 402-43. Procedure for suspension or revocation.
§ 402-44. Violations and penalties.
A. No license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be revoked except after
due notice and opportunity for a hearing. Pending such hearing,
licenses may be suspended.
B. Whenever any license issued pursuant to this chapter has been
suspended, it shall be forthwith surrendered to the Borough Clerk and
held by the Borough Clerk until the expiration of the period of
suspension; and whenever any license issued pursuant to this chapter
shall be revoked, said license shall be forthwith surrendered to the
Borough Clerk, who shall cancel the same.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article II,
General Penalty. Each day that a violation shall continue shall give rise
to a separate offense.161
B. The penalty provided for in this section shall be deemed in addition to
the provisions on revocation of licenses set forth in §§ 402-27 and
402-42, both inclusive.
161. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 402-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 402-44
1:789
Chapter 410
TOWING
§ 410-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards, regulations and rates
for police-requested nonpreference towing and storage services without
competitive bidding in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.49 et seq. and
N.J.S.A. 40A:11-5(u) under the supervision of the Edgewater Police
Department.
§ 410-2. Definitions.
The following words and terms shall have the following meanings, unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise:
BASIC TOWING SERVICE — The removal and transportation of an
automobile from a highway, street or other public or private road or a
parking area or from a storage facility, and other services normally incident
thereto, but does not include recovery of an automobile from a position
beyond the right-of-way or berm, or from being impaled upon any other
object within the right-of-way or berm.
INSIDE BUILDING — A vehicle storage facility that is completely indoors,
having one or more openings in the walls for storage and removal of
vehicles, and is secured by a locking device on each opening.
LICENSEE — A towing operator.
OUTSIDE SECURED — An automobile facility that is not indoor and is
secured by a fence, wall or other man-made barrier that is at least six feet
high and is installed with a passive alarm system or a similar on-site security
measure.
OUTSIDE UNSECURED — An automobile facility that is not indoor and
is not secured by a fence, wall or other man-made barrier, and storage
facilities not defined above as inside a building or outside secured.
POLICE — The Borough of Edgewater Police Department, State Police,
County Police or other police department that may have jurisdiction upon
the roadways of the Borough.
STORAGE CHARGES FOR A TWENTY-FOUR-HOUR PERIOD — The
maximum allowable amount to be charged by a storage facility for a twentyfour-
hour period or fraction thereof. A new twenty-four-hour period begins
at 12:01 a.m.
TOW TRUCK — Those vehicles equipped with a boom or booms, winches,
slings, tilt beds, wheel lifts or an under-reach specifically designed by a
manufacturer that is nationally recognized by the towing industry for the
removal or transport of motor vehicles.
§ 402-44 EDGEWATER CODE § 410-2
1:790
TOWING OPERATOR — A person, corporation or other form of business
entity engaged in the business of providing a basic towing service to the
general public and storage facilities for vehicles towed.
TOWING OPERATOR'S BASE OF SERVICE — The towing operator's
principal place of business; where the tow trucks are stationed when not in
use.
§ 410-3. List of approved towing and storage service providers.
The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Edgewater shall establish an
annual alphabetical list of approved persons or firms who shall be utilized
by the Police Department on a rotational basis, to provide towing and
storage services for abandoned, wrecked or impounded vehicles at rates
and charges to be set by the Borough. Said list shall contain the names,
addresses and twenty-four-hour telephone numbers of all approved towing
and storage service providers.
§ 410-4. Storage facility terms and conditions.
§ 410-5. License fees.
A. Towing operator who meets the standards set forth in this chapter may
be issued a license.
B. Each such licensed towing operator shall be put on a rotational list
compiled by the Chief of Police of the Borough and shall be called to
respond to the needs of the police on a rotating basis.
C. The Borough shall have a minimum of four and a maximum of six official
towers. The Borough may have fewer than four official towers if there
are fewer than four qualified applicants who have applied for such a
license from the Borough Clerk.
A. Storage facilities shall be of sufficient size to properly accommodate a
minimum of 15 vehicles for the Borough of Edgewater. Storage facilities
shall be fenced-in and secured, and be located within a two-mile radius
of the Borough of Edgewater, in an area that permits the towing and
storage of vehicles.
B. All land proposed to be used as a storage facility must be level and clear
of debris, and must be clearly marked as having the capacity necessary
to store a minimum of 15 vehicles for the Borough of Edgewater.
A. Each towing operator shall be licensed. The fee for each towing
operator who is listed on the call list under § 410-3 shall be $500. Each
license shall be issued in duplicate. One copy of the license shall be kept
at all times at the location at which the tower is domiciled. Each license
shall be valid from the date of its issue through January 31 of its
issuance. Licenses shall not be transferable.
§ 410-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-5
1:791
§ 410-6. Towing, winching and storage fees.
Fees are as follows:
Cars (light) $50 per hour plus parts
Trucks (medium/heavy) $75 per hour plus parts
Towing - Basic
Light duty: up to 10,000 pounds hookup
$150
Medium duty: 10,001 to 16,000 pounds $250 per hour
Heavy duty: 16,001 and above $500 per hour
Decoupling fee (if tow is not
performed):
half of basic rate
Recovery/Winching (in addition to towing - per truck, including
driver)
Light/medium duty: 10,001 to 16,000
pounds
$350 per hour
Heavy duty: 16,001 and above $600 per hour
Specialized Recovery Equipment
Rotator/crane recovery unit $1,200 per hour
Tractor with landoll trailer or detach
trailer
$450 per hour
Tractor/transport hauler only $250 per hour
Refrigerated trailer with tractor $450 per hour
Box trailer with tractor $400 per hour
B. Any license issued hereunder may be renewed for additional periods of
one-year upon:
(1) Submission to the Borough Clerk of renewal application containing
the same information as required in § 410-7.
(2) Presentation of renewed insurance certificates containing the same
information.
(3) Payment to the Borough Clerk of a renewal fee in the amount of
$500 in accordance with § 410-5A. The Mayor and Council have the
right to deny, within 45 days after the submission of all items
required by the chapter, the renewal of any license if they find that
the applicant no longer demonstrates the ability to comply with the
terms of this chapter, for any reason specified in § 410-8 hereof, or
for other just cause. In the event any renewal of a license is denied,
the applicant shall forthwith be notified in writing, which shall
specify the reason for the denial. After receipt of such notification,
the applicant shall have 10 days in which to make written request
to the Borough Clerk for a hearing before the Mayor and Council.
§ 410-5 EDGEWATER CODE § 410-6
1:792
Air cushion unit $1,000 per hour
Light tower $250 per hour
Pallet jack $200 flat rate
Rollers $200 flat rate
Any other specialized equipment $250 per hour
Loader/backhoe/telescopic handler/
bulldozer/bobcat
$300 per hour each
Forklift $300 per hour
Dump truck/dump trailer with tractor $350 per hour
Roll-off with container $350 per hour plus disposal
Recovery supervisor vehicle $150 per hour
Scene safety equipment,
communication equipment, traffic
management equipment, etc.
$250 per hour each type used
Recovery support vehicle/trailer
additional recovery equipment
$350 per hour
Labor (All labor minimum of 1 hour)
Accident: minor clean-up and disposal
of debris
$75 per hour, one hour minimum,
plus absorbent materials used
Recovery supervisor and/or Level III
recovery specialist
$225 per hour
Certified towing operator $125 per hour per man
Manual laborers $100 per hour per man
Storage - Per Calendar Day (inside rates two times outside rate)
Cars/light trucks ten-foot by twentyfoot
space
$35 per day
Trucks (dual wheels/single axle) $75 per day
Tractor/dump truck/tractor and trailer
combo/trailers
$125 per day
Buses $150 per day
Roll-off $125 per day for each
Cargo/accident debris/load storage/
vehicle components ten-foot by twentyfoot
space
$45 per space used per day
Rental of any tow company supplied
trailer post incident
$500 per day
Additional Services/Notes
Fuel/hazmat/cargo spills clean-up and
disposal
Time and material
Hazmat and trash recovery Surcharged 10%
§ 410-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-6
1:793
Subcontractor mark-up 10%
Administrative charge (Only after third
visit to vehicle)
Cars only - $50
Administration charge Medium/heavy truck: $200
After hours release $75
Notification documentation fee $50
Tarping/wrapping vehicle $90 per car/$250 per truck
Fuel surcharge Reserved for future need
Note: After the first hour, all hourly billable rates will be charged in halfhour
increments.
§ 410-7. Licensing procedure.
A. Except for the occasional solicited towing incident allowed herein, no
towing operator shall operate within the Borough without a license in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Every applicant for a license shall complete, sign and verify a written
application on forms furnished by the Borough Clerk. The application
shall include:
(1) Name, business address, residential address and telephone
numbers (residence and business) of the towing operator and
principal owners thereof.
(2) Locations of outside secured and unsecured storage areas for tow
trucks, towed vehicles and all other vehicles used in the towing
operator's business.
(3) The application shall be accompanied by the following supporting
documentation:
(a) Zoning certification (issued by Municipal Zoning Officer/
Construction Official) and fire subcode certification (issued by
Fire Subcode Official).
(b) Deed of ownership or lease agreement for storage locations.
(c) Roster of tow trucks and other vehicles registered and copies
of registrations and insurance cards.
(d) Roster of employees (by name and address).
(e) Certificates of garage liability insurance, automobile liability
insurance, garagekeepers' insurance, excess umbrella
insurance and workers' compensation insurance.
(f) Affirmative action certification.
(g) Stockholders' certification (if applicable).
§ 410-6 EDGEWATER CODE § 410-7
1:794
C. Licenses shall expire on February 1 of each year, subject to annual
renewal. Applications shall be filed with the Borough Clerk on or after
January 1 and no later than January 31 of each year together with the
appropriate license and application fee, as established by the general
fee ordinance of the Borough of Edgewater. No more than one license
shall be granted per applicant.
D. Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, no towing
service shall be placed on the approved towing list if:
(1) A licensee has interest, direct or indirect, in any other license.
(2) Any individual owning 10% or more of the towing service also owns
10% or more of another towing service already on the approved
list.
(3) The towing service is owned by or owns, in whole or in part,
another towing service already on the approved towing list.
(4) The towing service shares an address or place of business with
another towing service already on the approved list, unless each
business has obtained a separate certificate of occupancy for said
location.
E. Any license, once issued, is not transferable.
F. The Chief of Police of the Borough of Edgewater is charged with the
responsibility of investigating new and renewal licensees on an annual
basis. Upon completion of an investigation, the Chief of Police shall
report his/her recommendations to the Borough Clerk. A
recommendation of approval shall be predicated upon the Police Chief's
determination that:
(1) The applicant is not currently wanted in this or any other state or
jurisdiction for any criminal offense. The applicant shall authorize a
personal background check, commercial, credit and personal
references and such other investigative checks as the Chief of
Police may require.
(2) If a previous licensee, the applicant has met the performance
standards of this chapter, as hereinafter set forth.
(3) The applicant attests to adequacy of equipment and facilities,
availability and adequate response time and the security of the
vehicles towed or stored all as specified in the standards of this
chapter, hereinafter set forth.
G. The Borough Clerk shall issue a license to any applicant recommended
for approval by the Chief of Police.
H. On or about February 1 of each year the Borough Clerk shall furnish the
list of licensees to that year to the Chief of Police and to all applicants
whether approved or not approved.
§ 410-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-7
1:795
§ 410-8. Revocation and suspension of license.
§ 410-9. Tow truck equipment.
I. Any applicant not so approved may appeal to the Borough
Administrator. Any such appeal shall be filed within 10 days after
receipt of the list of licensees from the Borough Clerk. The
Administrator shall undertake a review of the reasons for rejection by
the Borough Clerk and shall make an independent determination based
upon the standards and criteria of this chapter.
A. The Borough Clerk may revoke any license issued under this chapter
for good cause, upon the recommendation of the Chief of Police. As
used herein, "good cause" shall mean that the licensee has, after notice
and the opportunity to cure or otherwise explain the deficiency as
hereinafter set forth:
(1) Failed to meet the performance standards and/or failed to meet
licensing standards relating to equipment, insurance and/or the
general standards of this chapter;
(2) Supplied fraudulent or inaccurate information on the application;
or
(3) Violated municipal or state regulations, which relate specifically to
performance hereunder.
B. Written notice of the pendency of revocation action, together with the
basis thereof, shall be given to the licensee. Within 10 days of receipt of
said notice, the licensee may request a meeting with the Borough of
Administrator who shall thereupon schedule same. Upon good cause
shown, the Administrator may grant the licensee 30 days to cure any
deficiency. If the Administrator, after meeting with the licensee,
determines that the license should be suspended, the licensee shall be
given notice of the final action.
C. Revocation by the Borough Administrator may be appealed to the
Borough Council by written notice to the Borough Clerk within 10 days
of receipt of the licensee of notice of final action of revocation. The
Council shall schedule and conduct a hearing thereon, at which time
the licensee shall be given the opportunity to present and cross
examine witnesses and may be represented by Counsel. The Council
shall decide the appeal no later than 30 days after receipt of notice of
appeal by the Borough Clerk and shall render its decision by a written
resolution, stating its findings and conclusions.
D. If a license has been revoked, the towing operator may be disqualified
from reapplying for two successive licensing periods.
E. The Chief of Police may temporarily suspend a license for just cause,
including conviction of a crime or disorderly person's offense involving
moral turpitude.
§ 410-7 EDGEWATER CODE § 410-9
1:796
A. Minimum vehicle requirements:
(1) Every official tower shall maintain and have available to render
services required by this chapter a minimum of one regular tow
truck, two flatbed tow trucks and one heavy-duty hydraulic wrecker
with under-reach.
(2) Tow truck classes.
(a) Regular tow trucks must be equipped with a boom or winch
assembly mounted on the chassis, a dolly assembly, a towing
sling, wheel lift assembly or under-reach, at least 100 feet of
three-eighths-inch or seven-sixteenths-inch cable attached to a
motor-driven winch.
(b) Flatbed vehicles must be equipped with a winch or
hydraulically operated bed which slides or tilts to
accommodate transporting of vehicles.
(c) Heavy-duty wrecker must be fully hydraulic with under-reach.
(3) Each applicant shall submit, along with its application, proof of
ownership or bona fide lease with a bank or financial institution of
the tow trucks which will be utilized to provide services pursuant to
this chapter.
B. Minimum equipment requirements.
(1) All tow trucks shall have two-way communications capability with
dispatching available on a twenty-four-hour basis.
(2) Every tow truck will be equipped with:
(a) At least one amber rotating beacon or strobe light mounted on
the highest practical location, visible from 360° when in use,
and visible at a minimum distance of 500 feet during daylight
hours.
(b) One snatch block per winch.
(c) Safety tow lights or magnetic tow lights for towing vehicles at
night, amber in color.
(d) Extra chains, cables or tie downs.
(e) At least one heavy-duty broom, a shovel, crowbar or pry bar,
set of jumper cables, flashlights, one two-pound or larger fire
extinguisher of dry chemical type, one dozen flares or similar
devices for placement at the scene of an accident or behind a
disabled vehicle, at least 10 pounds of dry sand or a drying
compound for gasoline and oil spills, and a sufficient quantity
and type of tools to enable the tow truck operator to perform
proper and adequate emergency repair services for the tow.
§ 410-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-9
1:797
§ 410-10. Performance standards.
Licensees shall:
(3) Every tow truck shall comply with any and all state, federal and
local laws, regulations and ordinances pertaining to safety, lighting
and towing equipment requirements and shall be subject to
inspection by the Chief of Police or his designee at any time.
(4) Every tow truck shall display the official towers' license and shall
have the name of the official tower displayed on the tow truck in
such a manner and of such lettering as conforms to the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 39:40-46.
A. When on call, provide towing on a twenty-four hour, seven-day-a-week
basis, including holidays.
B. Dispatch a tow truck or trucks, as circumstances warrant, when
requested by the police to respond in such a manner that the tow truck
arrives at the scene within 30 minutes under normal and reasonable
circumstances. A failure to respond within 30 minutes on more than
three occasions within a year may result in the tower being removed
from the approved list.
C. Maintain and operate all tow trucks in accordance with all existing
traffic regulations and in a safe and prudent manner.
D. Not stop at any accident scene unless directed by the police, except to
notify police of an unattended accident and advise accident victims that
police have contacted the licensee on rotation; and not solicit or
attempt to divert patrons of another towing operator, whether or not
licensed under this section, or solicit prospective patrons of a given
repair service to any other repair service.
E. Not respond to the scene of an accident except upon notification by
police.
F. Not tow vehicles without proper authorization from the police at the
scene or the owner or driver at the scene. Upon such authorization and
if not accompanied by the owner or the driver of the towed vehicle, the
licensee shall disclose in writing the location of the storage facility.
G. Not release any vehicle impounded or confiscated without proper
authorization from the police.
H. Notify the police on a monthly basis of unclaimed vehicles.
I. Be responsible for all vehicles and their contents after towing. If the
vehicle is unattended, the licensee shall make an inventory of any
apparent valuable contents at the accident scene and maintain said
inventory at least until the disposition of the vehicle.
§ 410-9 EDGEWATER CODE § 410-10
1:798
J. Cooperate with other towing operators in the case of emergency
services at the scene of accidents and/or disasters.
K. Comply with police instructions at the scene, even if it means
countermanding towing requests by other drivers of disabled vehicles.
L. Request police assistance during the course of servicing when
negotiating difficult towing operations.
M. Prior to departure from the accident scene, clean and clear streets of
any debris resulting from any accident, and toward that end carry the
necessary equipment to perform such cleaning services.
N. Report any dispute between towing operators and/or persons at the
scene to the police; and report to the police any observed disabled
vehicles, accidents or any other activities that may require police
attention.
O. Not use flashing lights or sirens except as permitted by the police
pursuant to law.
P. Not tow a vehicle for illegal parking on public property unless so
directed by the police.
Q. Immediately notify the police in the event that the licensee is not
operational due to mechanical failure, personnel deficiency or other
incapacitating cause.
R. Maintain written records for at least six years from the date of the
service of all tows performed and all signed acknowledgments of
receipt of vehicles by owners or authorized agents.
S. Post hours of operation on storage facilities so that the public may be
informed as to when the facilities are open for recovery of motor
vehicles.
T. Maintain the public portions of storage facilities as a clean and safe
environment for public invitees.
U. Not park or store an impounded vehicle on any public street or sidewalk
or any outside unsecured area.
V. Not employ any Borough employee or allow any Borough employee to
have a financial interest, direct or indirect, in the towing operator's
business.
W. Clear debris from roadway prior to departure from the scene.
X. If called as a backup tow, the vehicle shall be towed to the yard of the
backup tow.
Y. Disconnect cables from disabled vehicle battery terminals as to avoid
possible fire hazards.
§ 410-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-10
1:799
§ 410-11. Limitations on towing and storage charges.
Z. Display fee cards, conspicuously indicating the maximum rates for
towing and storage charges, in each tow truck, and present a card to
the driver of the disabled vehicle to be towed. Such a fee card shall also
be conspicuously posted at every storage facility and location where the
vehicle is to be retrieved.
AA. Accept at least one major credit card for towing services.
BB. Remit administrative fees to the Borough Clerk monthly.
A. The maximum rates for towing and storage of vehicles shall be
established by resolution of the Borough Council; provided, however,
that no such rates shall exceed those permitted and as same may be
amended or supplanted by state statute or regulation.
B. There shall be no storage charge for the first six-hour period following
towing in the licensee's storage premises. In the event that the person
claiming a towed vehicle reports to the police on a day when, for
whatever reason, licensee cannot release the vehicle, the claimant shall
be given written confirmation of the date from the tour commander. If
the vehicle is then claimed from the licensee on the next regular
business day, no storage charge shall be exacted from the time the
vehicle was first claimed until it is actually picked up.
C. If the owner of an unattended vehicle appears on the scene and the
vehicle does not need to be towed or impounded, the licensee shall not
charge for the service call, unless the vehicle has been hooked up to the
tow truck, in which event 50% of the authorized towing charge may be
assessed against the owner or driver of the vehicle.
D. There shall be no charge for towing, storage or impoundment if it is
determined by the Chief of Police that such vehicles have been towed,
stored or impounded due to an error by the towing operator or the
police. This determination shall be in the sole discretion of the Police
Chief and is binding upon the licensee, who shall make no claims
against the Borough or the owner of the vehicle, and if payment has
already been received, the payer shall be reimbursed.
E. All licensees shall be obligated to tow and to make minor roadside
service repairs to vehicles owned by the Borough of Edgewater in the
event that they become disabled, without charge to the Borough if
towed within the County of Bergen.
F. The Borough of Edgewater shall retain the right to tow abandoned
vehicles to its own land and retain any money realized from the sale of
such vehicles.
G. In the event that the Edgewater Police Department requires a vehicle to
be impounded for possible evidentiary value, the licensed tow operator
§ 410-10 EDGEWATER CODE § 410-11
1:800
§ 410-12. Operation by other tow truck operators.
This chapter shall not prevent the occasional operation at the scene of an
accident, upon the request of an owner or driver of a vehicle, of a tow truck
that is owned by a person not a licensee hereunder.
§ 410-13. Implementation.
Upon the adoption of this chapter, the Borough Clerk shall give 30 days'
public notice by newspaper publication of the necessity of making
application for a license to engage in the business of basic towing service as
a licensee of the Borough. In addition, the Chief of Police shall give notice
to all towing operations known to have engaged in basic towing service in
the Borough for the last year.
§ 410-14. Violations and penalties.
§ 410-15. Dispute resolution and license revocation.
agrees that said tow shall be at no cost to the Borough of Edgewater,
provided that the vehicle is towed to a location within Bergen County.
A. Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than
$500 or to imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both, at the
discretion of the Judge of the Municipal Court.
B. An operator engaged in the removal of motor vehicles, or any employee,
officer or agent thereof, who engages in a pattern of practice of
knowingly violating the fee limits set forth in Section 3 of P.L. 1987 c.
127 (N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.50) may be liable to the municipality for a civil
penalty of not less than $25 nor more than $50 for each motor vehicle
stored with the operator.
A. In the event that a complaint is received by the Borough involving the
improper or unsatisfactory performance of services by an official tower
or excessive charges or damage to a motor vehicle in the custody of the
tower, written notice of same shall be provided by the Borough Clerk to
the official tower involved. The tower shall have the opportunity to
respond, in writing, within five days.
B. Within 14 days of receipt of the tower's response or within 21 days of
receipt of complaint, if no response is received, the Borough Clerk shall
present the matter to the Mayor and Council.
C. The Mayor and Council shall consider the matter at a public hearing
and may request that the complainant and the tower involved appear
and give testimony regarding the complaint.
D. If after considering the matter, the Mayor and Council shall determine
that one of the causes for revocation of the official tower license exists,
§ 410-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-15
1:801
§ 410-16. Fee limits.
§ 410-17. Insurance requirements.
the license shall be revoked and tower shall surrender it to the Borough
Clerk within one day.
E. Failure to surrender the license upon revocation shall constitute a
violation of this chapter.
F. Nothing contained herein shall prevent or limit the right of any person
to commence or maintain an action for damages or any other relief
directly against an official tower in a court of competent jurisdiction.
A. All fees to be paid to an operator by a municipality for the storage of
removed motor vehicles shall not exceed the following:
(1) A limit of $3 per day for the first 30 days storage per vehicle;
(2) A limit of $2 per day for the 31st day of storage and any day
thereafter; and
(3) A limit of $400 per vehicle stored regardless of the duration of the
storage, except that the Division of Local Government Services in
the Department of Community Affairs may grant a waiver for good
cause upon the request of a municipality.
B. An operator engaged in the removal of motor vehicles, or any employee,
officer or agent thereof, who engages in a pattern or practice of
knowingly violating the fee limits set forth in Section 3 of P.L. 1987, c.
127 (N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.50) may be liable to the municipality for a civil
penalty of not less than $500 nor more than $1000 for each motor
vehicle stored with the operator.
A. Indemnity. The applicant shall agree in writing to defend, indemnify and
hold harmless the municipality from any and all claims for bodily injury,
personal injury or property damage against the municipality arising out
of the operation of any towing services or repairs under this agreement.
The applicant shall further defend the municipality in connection with
any claim, demand, suit or action brought against the municipality
arising out of the awarding or operation of any towing, garage or repair
service under this agreement at the applicant's expense.
B. Insurance requirements.
(1) Garage liability insurance. Limit of liability shall not be less than
$3,000,000 combined single limit (bodily injury and property
damage) per occurrence, including premises, operations and
products/completed operations.
(2) Automobile liability insurance. Limit of liability shall not be less
than $3,000,000 combined single limit (bodily injury and property
damage) per occurrence.
§ 410-15 EDGEWATER CODE § 410-17
1:802
§ 410-18. Trespass towing and booting.
The following provisions shall apply to any towing operator and/or booting
service when engaged by the owner or other person in control or possession
of private property to remove therefrom or boot an unauthorized vehicle,
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-56.6 and Chapter 410 of this
Code.
(3) Garagekeepers' insurance. Liability insurance shall be provided for
vehicles in tow, possession of, or storage on property owned or
controlled by the towing operator. Limit of said coverage shall not
be less than $3,000,000.
(4) On all liability policies, the municipality shall be added as an
additional insured, and an insurance certificate shall indicate such
coverage as primary coverage notwithstanding any insurance
carried by the municipality.
(5) Workers' compensation insurance. Statutory coverage, including
liability coverage with a limit of at least
$500,000/$500,000/$500,000.
(6) The contractor shall indemnify the municipality and the public
against any loss due to injuries, accidents or damages of any type
whatsoever where any such damage is the result of an act or
omission of the towing operator, his agents or employees in or due
to the execution of the work under the contract.
(7) The applicant shall provide the municipality with certificates of
insurance, evidencing the coverage required above. Such
certificates shall provide that the municipality shall be given 30
days' prior written notice of any cancellation of, intention not to
renew, or material change in such coverage by certified mail,
return receipt. Certificates must be provided before commencing
work in connection with the contract. Failure to submit this shall
subject to the towing operator to immediate disqualification.
(8) The providing of any insurance required herein does not relieve the
towing operator of any of the responsibilities or obligations
assumed by the towing operator for which the towing operator may
be liable by law or otherwise.
A. No towing operator shall conduct a trespass tow of a Class A vehicle
from a private parking lot for compensation when the point of origin is
within the jurisdictional limits of the Borough of Edgewater, without
complying with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Posting of warning signs.
(1) No vehicle shall be towed from a private parking lot for designated
parking violations unless a sign is conspicuously posted and clearly
§ 410-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-18
1:803
visible from all vehicle and pedestrian entrances to the property,
indicating the following:
(a) A warning that the property is a private tow-away zone and a
vehicle not authorized to park on the property will be towed at
the owner's expense.
(b) The telephone number of the person or entity from whom a
towed vehicle can be recovered.
(c) A statement that the vehicle may be recovered between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. on any day.
(2) A warning sign is not required as a condition precedent to towing a
vehicle blocking a private entrance, exit, driveway, fire lane or
loading area; neither shall this section apply to statutory parking
violations relating to handicapped parking or nonconsensual tows
directed by a governmental enforcement officer.
C. No towing service operating within the Borough of Edgewater shall tow
a vehicle or charge for its services where the registered owner or other
legally authorized person in control of the vehicle arrives at the scene
prior to towing the vehicle from the lot and:
(1) Agrees to immediately remove the vehicle from the lot; and
(2) Provides the towing operator or booting service with his or her
name, address and vehicle information as set forth on the vehicle
registration.
D. No vehicles removed from private property shall be stored on public
property, including public streets.
E. No vehicle shall be removed to a storage facility located at a distance no
greater than two miles from the municipal boundaries of the Borough of
Edgewater.
F. No towing operator engaged by a private party shall charge rates
greater than those authorized by this chapter; nor shall any charge be
made for any service not specifically set forth in this chapter.
G. Whenever a vehicle is towed from private property, the Police
Department of the Borough of Edgewater shall be notified, within five
minutes of the time of removal, as to the reason of the towing; the year,
make and license number of the vehicle; the name and address of the
owner, if known; the name and address of the towing operator; and the
address or location to which the vehicle is being towed.
H. No booting of any vehicle is permitted.
I. Proof of insurance must be provided to the Edgewater Police
Department.
§ 410-18 EDGEWATER CODE § 410-19
1:804
§ 410-19. Severability.
If any provision or portion of this chapter is held to be unconstitutional,
preempted by federal or state law, or otherwise invalid by any court of
competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions of the chapter shall not be
invalidated and shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 410-20. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon final publication as required
by law.
§ 410-21. Repealer.
All ordinances and parts of ordinances which are inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such
inconsistency.
Chapter 416
TRAILERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. II.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 166.
Certificates of continuing occupancy — See
Ch. 157, Art. III.
Land use and development — See Ch. 240.
§ 410-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-21
1:805

ARTICLE I
Parking Prohibitions
[Adopted 5-18-1954 by Ord. No. 362; readopted 8-1-1967 by Ord.
No. 476 (Ch. 229, Art. I, of the 1975 Code); amended in its entirety
6-10-1992 by Ord. No. 987-92]
§ 416-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TRAILER or CAMP CAR — Any vehicle used or intended to be used as a
conveyance upon public streets or highways and duly licensed as such, or
any vehicle utilized for the transportation of goods and materials or used
for storage. This term shall include self-propelled and non-self-propelled
vehicles so designed and constructed and reconstructed or added to by
means of accessories in such manner as to permit the occupancy therein as
a temporary dwelling or sleeping place for one or more persons and having
no foundation other than wheels, jacks or skirtings so arranged as to be
integral with or portable by said trailer or camp car.
§ 416-2. Parking prohibited; exceptions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any trailer or camp car on any
street in the Borough of Edgewater. In addition, it shall be unlawful for any
person to park on any private property within the limits of the Borough of
Edgewater, except for the purpose of repairs or storage. Any such trailer or
camp car undergoing repairs or being stored shall not, during such period
of repairs or storage, be used by any person as a dwelling or sleeping place.
§ 416-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 416-2
1:807

ARTICLE II
House, Business and Commercial Trailers
[Adopted 3-18-1970 by Ord. No. 514-70 (Ch. 229, Art. II, of the 1975
Code)]
§ 416-3. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to regulate house, business and commercial
trailers within the Borough of Edgewater, New Jersey. The Mayor and
Council does hereby declare that this article is adopted in the interest of
public health and safety of the inhabitants of the Borough of Edgewater,
New Jersey, and, further, to prevent nuisances and generally to protect the
welfare of the public.
§ 416-4. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TRAILER — Includes all the forms of housing which are adaptable to
motivation by a power connected thereto, or which may be propelled by a
power within themselves, and which are or can be used as house or living
abode or habitation of one or more persons, or for business, commercial
or office purposes, either temporarily or permanently, and commonly called
and referred to as trailers, and whether affixed to the land on a permanent
foundation, on wheels or jacks or otherwise.
§ 416-5. Use of land for trailers prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use any land
located within the boundaries of Edgewater, New Jersey, as a trailer park or
place for the housing or keeping of trailers as defined in this article.
§ 416-6. License required for business, commercial or office use.
[Amended 9-3-1975 by Ord. No. 581-75]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use a trailer for
business, commercial or office purposes either temporarily or permanently
in the Borough of Edgewater, New Jersey, without having first secured a
license therefor from the Borough Clerk.
§ 416-7. Standing a trailer in public places prohibited.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, no person shall detach
any trailer from its towing vehicle and permit the same to remain standing
in any public street or place.
§ 416-8. Application for license.
Application for such license shall be made to the Borough Clerk upon such
forms as prescribed by him.
§ 416-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 416-9
1:809
§ 416-9. License fee; license year.
The license fee shall be $250 for each trailer for the license year. The license
year shall begin on the first day of January of each year and the license fee
shall be submitted in full with the application.
§ 416-10. Applicability to existing trailers.
This article shall apply to all existing trailers located in the Borough of
Edgewater, New Jersey, at the date of the adoption of this article.
§ 416-9 EDGEWATER CODE § 416-10
1:810
Chapter 421
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Shade Tree Board — See Ch. 6, Art. III.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 293.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 380.
§ 421-1. Permit required for certain activities. [Amended 9-3-1975
by Ord. No. 581-75]
It shall be unlawful within the Borough of Edgewater for any person, firm
or corporation without a written permit from the Shade Tree Board of the
Borough of Edgewater:
§ 421-2. Prohibited activities.
It shall be unlawful within the Borough of Edgewater for any person, firm
or corporation:
A. To cut, break, climb or injure, or to damage or remove any protective
device from, any tree or from a portion of a tree or shrub planted or
growing in any public highway, park or parkway.
B. To kill or remove or cause the death or removal of any tree or shrub
planted or growing in any public highway, park or parkway.
C. To place any stone, cement or other material or substance in such
manner as may obstruct the free access of air and water to the trunk
and roots of any tree or shrub in any public highway, park or parkway.
D. To plant or set out any shade or other tree or shrub in or on any part of
any public highway, park or parkway.
A. To interfere with or obstruct the Shade Tree Board or any of its
employees, agents or servants while engaged in the cultivation,
mulching, pruning, spraying or removal of any tree or shrub in any
public highway, park or parkway. [Amended 9-3-1975 by Ord. No.
581-75]
B. To cause, authorize or permit a wire or other conductor charged with
electricity to come into contact with any tree or shrub in any public
highway, park or parkway in such manner as may abrade or kill such
tree or shrub.
C. To attach or keep attached to any tree or shrub in any public highway,
park or parkway or to the guard or stake intended for the protection of
such tree or shrub any rope, wire or any other device whatsoever.
§ 416-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 421-2
1:811
§ 421-3. Application for permit. [Amended 9-3-1975 by Ord. No.
581-75]
Any person, firm or corporation desiring a permit required under this
chapter shall make written application therefor to the Shade Tree Board.
If it shall appear that the purpose for which the permit shall be required
is necessary and may be accomplished without injury or damage to any
public tree or shrub, the permit shall be issued forthwith. All work must be
performed in strict accordance with the terms of the permit.
§ 421-4. Enforcement. [Amended 9-3-1975 by Ord. No. 581-75]
It shall be the duty of the members of the Police Department of the Borough
of Edgewater to report to the Shade Tree Board each and every violation
of the provision of this chapter which shall come to their attention and to
obtain the names and addresses of the persons guilty of such violation.
§ 421-5. Violations and penalties.162
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
Chapter 427
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking lots — See Ch. 282.
Parking restrictions — See Ch. 287.
Towers and wreckers — See Ch. 410.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 432.
§ 427-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Abandoned Vehicle Ordinance" of
Edgewater.
D. To tie any animal to any tree or shrub in any public highway, park or
parkway or to permit any such animal to injure any such tree or shrub.
E. To conduct building operations in the vicinity of any tree or shrub in any
public highway, park or parkway without providing sufficient guards
and protectors to prevent injury to said tree or shrub.
F. To allow gas, brine, water, oil, liquid dye, gasoline or other substance
deleterious to tree life to come into contact with the soil surrounding
the trunk or roots of any tree or shrub in any public highway, park or
parkway in such manner as to injure or kill such tree or shrub.
162. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 421-2 EDGEWATER CODE § 427-2
1:812
§ 427-2. Findings; legislative intent.
§ 427-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle, including, but not limited
to, automobile, bus, truck, tractor, mobile home, motorcycle, motorbicycle
or snowmobile, stored, left or located on public or private property in the
Borough of Edgewater and which is not registered for operation on the
public highways and which has not been registered for the preceding 12
months or is in an unsafe condition as defined in N.J.S.A. 39:3-44 shall be
defined as an "abandoned vehicle," except that:
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Chief of Police and/or Police Director of
the Borough, unless the Borough Council, by resolution, designates some
other Borough official as enforcement officer or, by resolution, establishes
the position of enforcement officer for the Borough and appoints some
qualified person thereto at a salary specified in such resolution.[Amended
3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 1541-2017]
LEGAL OCCUPANT — Any person who, singularly or together with other
persons, is in possession of real property pursuant to an agreement with
the owner thereof. The term shall include tenants, contract vendors and
licensees.
OPEN STORAGE — Storage other than in a completely windowed structure,
such as a garage constructed of wood, brick and metal.
A. A clean, wholesome, attractive environment is declared to be of
importance to the health and safety and well-being of the inhabitants of
the Borough of Edgewater.
B. Such environment is deemed essential to the economy and general
welfare of its citizens.
C. The unrestrained accumulation of motor vehicles not in operating order
can be a hazard to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the
Borough of Edgewater.
D. It is deemed to be in the best interests of the citizens of the Borough
and for the general welfare that the following regulation restraints are
adopted pursuant to this chapter.
The term "abandoned vehicle" shall expressly exclude vehicles granted
historical registration or "Q Q" license plates.
A.
For the purposes of this chapter, a motor vehicle registered as a farm
vehicle or which is operable and used by the owner on his own property
for the transport of wood, snowplowing or similar uses shall not be
considered an abandoned vehicle.
B.
§ 427-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 427-3
1:813
OWNER — A person owning real property in the Borough. A parcel of real
property owned by more than one person shall be considered as having each
such person being an owner.
PARCEL OF PROPERTY — Real property appearing on the tax rolls of the
Borough as one unit.
PERSON — Includes natural persons, corporations, copartnerships,
unincorporated associates or any other organizations of one or more
persons.
§ 427-4. Open storage restricted.
Open storage of one or more abandoned vehicles shall not be permitted on
private or public property within the Borough, except as permitted by this
chapter.
§ 427-5. Permit required; application; issuance.
A. Any person wishing to store or locate an abandoned vehicle on a parcel
of property must first obtain a no-fee permit from the Borough's
enforcement officer allowing such storage.
B. That permit may be granted after an application has been made
showing:
(1) The make, model and year of the vehicle.
(2) The name and address of the last registered owner and the last
registration plate number as issued by the appropriate Department
of Motor Vehicles.
(3) The vehicle identification number.
(4) The nature of the applicant's ownership or title to such vehicle.
(5) The purpose(s) for which the abandoned vehicle(s) is being stored
or located.
C. Issuance.
(1) Permits shall be issued for:
(a) A restored antique or classic car. A permit will be issued on an
annual basis, renewable for a year at a time.
(b) Restoration. A permit will be issued for a one-year period,
renewable for an additional one-year period. The renewal shall
be granted only if the abandoned vehicle has been
substantially improved since the issuance of the original
permit.
(c) Removal of parts or components. A permit will be issued for a
sixty-day period, renewable for one sixty-day period only.
§ 427-3 EDGEWATER CODE § 427-5
1:814
§ 427-6. Abandonment or storage of vehicles.
Any owner or occupant of a parcel of property in the Borough who shall
abandon, store, locate, leave or allow or condone any other person to
abandon, store, locate or leave an abandoned vehicle upon a parcel of
property owned or occupied by him within said Borough contrary to the
provisions hereof shall be guilty of a violation hereof. Any person, whether
as owner or driver of a vehicle or an operator of a towing vehicle or carrier,
who shall abandon, store, locate or leave an abandoned vehicle upon a
parcel of property in the Borough of which he is not either the owner or
legal occupant, without the written permission of the legal occupant, shall
be guilty of a violation hereof.
§ 427-7. Violations and penalties.
A violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
Article II, General Penalty. A violation of this chapter shall also subject
the violator to a civil penalty of $100 for each violation, less any criminal
monetary fine which may be imposed. Each vehicle abandoned, stored, left
or located in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate violation.
Each week of continuous violation shall constitute a separate and distinct
violation.
§ 427-8. Additional remedies.
In addition to the penalties set forth above, the Borough may commence an
action in its own name against any person in any civil court of competent
jurisdiction to seek an injunction to enforce compliance with this chapter.
Such an action for injunctive relief may be independent of or part of an
action to collect the civil penalties as hereinabove provided.
§ 427-9. Removal.
In addition to any penalty or fine as provided in § 427-7 hereof or the
remedy provided in § 427-8 hereof, any abandoned vehicle may be removed
from the premises upon which it is located by the Borough in the manner
hereinafter provided:
(2) Permits shall not be granted under this chapter for a motor vehicle
junk business or a motor vehicle junkyard. Such dealers must
comply with the Borough ordinance licensing and regulating motor
vehicle junk business and motor vehicle junkyards.
A. The enforcement officer, upon detecting an abandoned vehicle, shall
serve written notice on the person owning the parcel of property on
which the same is located, ordering such person to remove the same or
cause the same to be removed therefrom within 30 days of the date of
such service. Such notice shall contain a description of the parcel of
property, a statement as to the location thereon of an abandoned
vehicle and a reference to this chapter and to the fact that the location
of such abandoned vehicle on such parcel of property is in violation of
§ 427-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 427-9
1:815
§ 427-10. Right of entry.
The Borough's enforcement officer or his designee shall have and is hereby
given the authority to go upon any parcel of real property in the Borough,
public or private, exclusive of enclosed structures or buildings, at any time
during daylight hours, to examine and inspect any vehicles or parts or
components thereof to determine whether a violation of this chapter has
been committed or to determine the condition of any vehicles or parts or
components thereof. The officer shall notify the property owner, in writing,
prior to the entering of such property.
this chapter. If such parcel of property is owned by more than one
person, personal service on any one of such owners shall suffice;
however, as to any owner not personally served with such notice or
if no owner can be located upon whom to make personal service, the
enforcement officer shall mail such notice to the owners not personally
served by registered mail to their or his last known address as shown
on the latest completed assessment roll of the Borough. In addition, the
enforcement officer shall post conspicuously a copy of such notice on
the parcel or property upon which said abandoned vehicle is located.
B. At the expiration of 30 days after the service or mailing and posting of
such notice, if such abandoned vehicle has not been removed, the
Borough may cause such abandoned vehicle to be removed, and the
cost of such removal shall be certified by the enforcement officer to the
Collector of Taxes and shall thereupon become and be a lien upon the
real property from which said abandoned vehicle was removed and
shall be added to and form part of the taxes next to be assessed on said
real property and shall be collected and enforced by the same office and
in the same manner as taxes.
C. Any abandoned vehicle released to the Borough by its owner shall be
disposed of at a public auction to the highest bidder, and the proceeds
shall be added to the general fund of the Borough. Any abandoned
vehicle released to the Borough by the owner or legal occupant of the
parcel of property from which it is removed who is not the owner of the
abandoned vehicle shall be disposed of by the procedure set forth in
Subsections A and B hereof. In the event that the abandoned vehicle is
released to the Borough by the owner or legal occupant of the parcel of
property who is not the owner of the abandoned vehicle, there shall be
no expense for the removal thereof chargeable to the person so
releasing said abandoned vehicle.
§ 427-9 EDGEWATER CODE § 427-10
1:816
Chapter 432
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire lanes — See Ch. 200.
Minibikes and go-carts — See Ch. 264.
Parking lots — See Ch. 282.
Parking restrictions — See Ch. 287.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 380.
Taxicabs and liveries — See Ch. 402.
Towers and wreckers — See Ch. 410.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 427.
Vessel licensing — See Ch. 444, Art. I.
§ 427-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 427-10
1:817

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 7-18-1994 by Ord. No. 1029-94 (Ch. 236, Art. I, of the
1975 Code)]
§ 432-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words shall have the meanings
indicated:
INTERSECTION — The area embraced in the prolongation of the lateral
curblines; or, if none, the lateral building lines of two or more highways
which join one another at an angle, whether or not such highway crosses
the other.
PARKING — The standing or waiting on the street, road or highway in the
Borough of Edgewater of any vehicle not actually engaged in picking up or
discharging passengers or merchandise; provided, however, that this shall
not include the exigencies of traffic.
STREET or AVENUE — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway,
viaduct or other way shown on a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law
or otherwise depicted on the Borough Tax Map,163 including the pavement,
shoulders, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within
the street line.
VEHICLE — Any wheeled conveyance, whether motor-powered, animaldrawn
or self-propelled, and shall include any trailer in tow of any size, kind
or description.
§ 432-2. Prohibited parking locations. [Amended 3-15-2010 by Ord.
No. 1430-2010; 6-16-2014 by Ord. No. 1506-2014; 12-18-2017 by
Ord. No. 1563-2017; 6-11-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-010]
A. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in or on the following streets or
avenues in the Borough of Edgewater within the points described as
follows:
Name of Street Side Location
Adelaide Place West Entire length
Archer Street
[Amended
12-17-2018 by
Ord. No.
2018-020]
South From River Road to Undercliff
Avenue
Arlington Terrace North From a point 215 feet west of
River Road continuing west
Beverly Place East Entire length
163. Editor's Note: The Borough Tax Map is on file in the Borough Clerk's office.
§ 432-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 432-2
1:819
Name of Street Side Location
Burdette Court North Entire length
Casta Lane Both Entire length
Columbia Terrace Both From Undercliff Avenue to
Dempsey Avenue, except for east
side from Dempsey Avenue to a
point 188 feet south thereof
Garden Place North From River Road to Undercliff
Avenue
Glenwood Avenue Both From Undercliff Avenue to River
Road
Hooks Lane Both Entire length
Hudson Avenue North From River Road to Undercliff
Avenue
Hudson Terrace Both From Valley Place to State
Highway No. 5
Leary Lane Both Entire length
Maple Street Both Entire length
Massa Lane South Entire length
Myrtle Avenue East Entire length
North Street North From River Road to Undercliff
Avenue
Oakdene Terrace West Entire length
Old River Road Both From the northerly entrance of
the Shadyside parking to the
intersection of River Road
Old River Road East From the northerly curb of
Thompson Lane to a point 100
feet north thereof
Palisade Terrace North From the northwest corner of
River Road and Palisade Terrace
to a point 72 feet west thereof;
such areas shall be marked as
"Parking for Fire Department
only"
Palisade Terrace South From the intersection of Palisade
Terrace and River Road to a
point 105 feet west; such areas
shall be marked as "Parking for
Fire Department only"
§ 432-2 EDGEWATER CODE § 432-2
1:820
Name of Street Side Location
River Road East Entire length, except for from a
point 198 feet north of Annett
Avenue to a point 495 feet north
of said intersection
River Road East Entire length, except for from a
point 825 feet from State
Highway No. 5 to a point 25 feet
south of southerly entrance of
Veterans Field
River Road West From a point 175 feet north of
Maple Street to the northerly
Borough line
River Road West From Palisade Terrace to a point
67 feet south of Maple Street
River Road West From the southerly-most border
to a point 405 feet north of State
Highway No. 5
River Road West From south entrance of Veterans
Field to Palisade Terrace
Russell Avenue North From a point 200 feet from the
intersection of Russell Avenue
and Undercliff Avenue eastward
to a point 260 feet from said
intersection, which shall be
marked "No Parking Zone"
Russell Avenue
[Amended
12-17-2018 by
Ord. No.
2018-020]
South From River Road to Undercliff
Avenue
Sterling Place
[Amended
12-17-2018 by
Ord. No.
2018-020]
North From River Road to Undercliff
Avenue
Thompson Lane Both Entire length
Undercliff Avenue East From a point 88 feet north of
Glenwood Avenue to Orchard
Street
§ 432-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 432-2
1:821
§ 432-3. Prohibited stopping or standing. [Added 9-29-1997 by Ord.
No. 1102-97; amended 7-16-2012 by Ord. No. 1475-2012; 6-11-2018
by Ord. No. 2018-010]
It shall be unlawful to stop or stand a vehicle in or on the following streets or
avenues in the Borough of Edgewater within the points described as follows:
Name of Street Side Location
Undercliff Avenue East From a point 530 feet south of
Hilliard Avenue to a point 610
feet from said intersection,
except for vehicles in connection
with a funeral or wedding
procession
Undercliff Avenue West From Glenwood Avenue to a
point 80 feet north thereof
Undercliff Avenue West From Glenwood Avenue to a
point 100 feet south thereof
Undercliff Avenue West For a distance of 25 feet to the
north and 25 feet to the south of
the following intersections:
Hilliard Avenue, Columbia
Terrace, Dempsey Avenue,
Hudson Avenue and Valley Place
Undercliff Avenue West From Hudson Avenue north to
Valley Place
Undercliff Avenue West For a distance of 25 feet to the
north and 25 feet to the south of
the following intersections:
North Street, Sterling Place and
Park Street
Undercliff Avenue West From State Highway No. 5 to a
point 98 feet south thereof
Valley Place South 35 feet from the intersection of
Hudson Terrace
Vreeland Terrace Both From River Road to Undercliff
Avenue
Winterburn Place North Entire length
B. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in front of any residential
driveway on any street unless the vehicle parked in front of the
driveway is registered with a residential parking permit provided for in
Chapter 287 for a vehicle registered to that address. Notwithstanding
the above, no vehicle may be parked in front of any residential driveway
on any street where parking is prohibited.
§ 432-2 EDGEWATER CODE § 432-3
1:822
§ 432-4. Time limitations for parking. [Amended 7-16-2001 by Ord.
No. 1217-2001; 6-11-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-010]
Name of
Street Side Time Limit Hours/Days Location
Dempsey
Avenue
North 2 hours 8:00 a.m. to
8:00
p.m./2-hour
parking; 8:00
p.m. to 8:00
a.m./Residents
only
From River Road
to the
intersection of
Panorama Drive
Dempsey
Avenue
South 2 hours 8:00 a.m. to
8:00
p.m./2-hour
parking; 8:00
p.m. to 8:00
a.m./Residents
only
From Columbia
Terrace to River
Road
Hilliard
Avenue
South 2 hours 8:00 a.m. to
5:00
p.m./Monday
through
Saturday
From Edgewater
Place to River
Road
River Road East 2 hours 8:00 a.m. to
11:00
p.m./2-hour
parking; 11:00
p.m. to 8:00
a.m./Residents
only
From a point 198
feet north of
Annette Avenue
to a point 495
feet from said
intersection
A. Along the northern and southern curblines of Glenwood Avenue from
the eastern curbline of River Road to points 80 feet east thereof.
B. Along the northern and southern curblines of Glenwood Avenue from
the western curbline of River Road to points 75 feet west thereof.
C. Along the northern side of Orchard Street from a point 123 feet west of
the westerly curb of River Road to a point 125 feet west thereof,
between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 3:30 p.m., Monday through Friday,
during the school year.
§ 432-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 432-4
1:823
Name of
Street Side Time Limit Hours/Days Location
River Road East 2 hours 8:00 a.m. to
8:00
p.m./2-hour
parking; 8:00
p.m. to 8:00
a.m./Residents
only
From a Point 825
feet north from
State Highway
No. 5 to a point
25 feet south of
the southerly
entrance to
Veterans Field
River Road West 2 hours 8:00 a.m. to
11:00
p.m./2-hour
parking; 11:00
p.m. to 8:00
a.m./Residents
only
From a point 67
feet south of
Maple Street to
a point 150 feet
north of Maple
Street
River Road West 2 hours 8:00 a.m. to
8:00
p.m./2-hour
parking; 8:00
p.m. to 8:00
a.m./Residents
only
From a point 405
feet north from
State Highway
No. 5 to a point
1,200 feet north
of said
intersection
Route NJ 5 Eastbound 2 hours 8:00 a.m. to
8:00
p.m./Monday
through
Saturday; 8:00
p.m. to 8:00
a.m./Residents
only
Beginning at a
point 547 feet
east of the
easterly curbline
of Hudson
Terrace and
extending 145
feet easterly
therefrom
Route NJ 5 Westbound 2 hours 8:00 a.m. to
8:00
p.m./Monday
through
Saturday; 8:00
p.m. to 8:00
a.m./Residents
only
Beginning at a
point 190 feet
west of the
westerly
curbline of River
Road (CR 505)
and extending
360 feet westerly
therefrom
§ 432-4 EDGEWATER CODE § 432-4
1:824
Name of
Street Side Time Limit Hours/Days Location
Route NJ 5 Westbound — Residents only Beginning at a
point 550 feet
west of the
westerly
curbline of River
Road (CR 505)
and extending
390 feet westerly
therefrom
Route NJ 5 Westbound — Residents only Beginning at a
point 1,082 feet
west of the
westerly
curbline of River
Road (CR 505)
and extending
510 feet westerly
therefrom
Route NJ 5 Westbound — No parking;
crosswalk; state
statute
Beginning at a
point 942 feet
west of the
westerly
curbline of River
Road (CR 505)
and extending
140 feet westerly
therefrom
§ 432-5. Parking on one-way streets. [Amended 9-20-2010 by Ord.
No. 1439-2010; 6-11-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-010; 7-17-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-006]
The following streets of the Borough of Edgewater are hereby designated as
one-way streets, and it shall be unlawful for any driver thereon to park any
vehicle except in the direction specified and directed by pavement or road
markings and signs:
A. It shall be unlawful to park, other than official vehicles, any vehicle in
front of any firehouse in the Borough.
B. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in any area designated as a fire
zone or bus stop.
§ 432-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 432-5
1:825
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Location
Columbia Terrace East From Undercliff Avenue to
Dempsey Avenue
Edgewater Place North From Garden Place to Hilliard
Avenue
Garden Place East From Undercliff Avenue to River
Road
Glenwood Avenue East From Undercliff Avenue to River
Road
Hudson Terrace North From Valley Place to State
Highway No. 5
Oakdene Terrace South From Undercliff Avenue to
Undercliff Avenue, entire length
Palisade Terrace West From River Road to Undercliff
Avenue
Park Street West From River Road to Undercliff
Avenue
Sterling Place East From Undercliff Avenue to River
Road
Undercliff Avenue South From Hilliard Avenue to Garden
Place
Undercliff Avenue South From Palisade Terrace to Orchard
Street
Undercliff Avenue South From State Highway No. 5 to
Valley Place
Valley Place East From Undercliff Avenue to Hudson
Terrace
Vreeland Terrace West From River Road to Undercliff
Avenue
§ 432-6. Restrictions on parking of commercial vehicles. [Amended
6-11-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-010]
A. It shall be unlawful to park any commercial vehicle or any school bus,
trailer or step vans on any of the streets, avenues or roadways of the
Borough of Edgewater from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
B. It shall be unlawful to park any recreational vehicle having a length of
more than 20 feet on any of the streets, avenues or roadways of the
Borough of Edgewater from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
§ 432-5 EDGEWATER CODE § 432-6
1:826
§ 432-7. Parking prohibited during certain hours. [Amended
3-15-2004 by Ord. No. 1296-2004; 9-20-2010 by Ord. No.
1439-2010; 7-16-2012 by Ord. No. 1475-2012; 6-16-2014 by Ord.
No. 1506-2014; 12-18-2017 by Ord. No. 1562-2017; 6-11-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-010]
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Edgewater Place East 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon/
Mondays
Entire length
Edgewater Place West 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon/
Fridays
Entire length
Old River Road Both 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m./Mondays
From the intersection of
Gorge Road to the
northerly entrance to the
Shadyside Municipal Lot
Old River Road West 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. and 4:00
p.m. to 7:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday,
during school
year
From the northerly curb
of Thompson Lane to a
point 100 feet north
thereof
Russell Avenue North 7:30 a.m. to 3:30
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From the northwest
corner of Undercliff
Avenue to a point 200
feet east thereof; such
area shall be marked as
"During School hours
Bus Parking Only"
Undercliff
Avenue
East 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon/
Tuesdays
From Dempsey Avenue to
Garden Place
Undercliff
Avenue
East 7:30 a.m. to 3:30
p.m./Monday
through Friday,
during the school
year
From the northerly curb
of Orchard Street to a
point 205 feet north
thereof
C. It shall be unlawful to park a boat or trailer used for the transportation
of a boat which is not properly attached to the towing vehicle on any
street, avenue or roadway at any time.
D. It shall be unlawful to park any truck or commercial vehicle having a
gross weight in excess of 8,000 pounds on any private property in any
residentially zoned district in the Borough of Edgewater.
§ 432-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 432-7
1:827
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Undercliff
Avenue
East 7:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday,
during school
year
From Winterburn Place
to a point 135 feet south
of Winterburn Place
Undercliff
Avenue
West 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon/
Thursdays
From Dempsey Avenue to
Garden Place
§ 432-8. Area designated by signs; emergencies.164 [Amended
3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 1541-2017; 6-11-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-010]
§ 432-9. Removal of vehicles; storage; costs. [Amended 6-11-2018
by Ord. No. 2018-010]
Any vehicle on a roadway which is parked or standing in violation of this
article shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper
regulation of traffic, and any peace officer may provide for the removal
of such vehicle. The owner shall pay the reasonable cost of the removal
and the storage which may result from such removal, before regaining
possession of the vehicle.
§ 432-10. Lane reservations. [Added 9-29-1997 by Ord. No. 1102-97;
amended 6-11-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-010]
The following lane reservations shall be established:
§ 432-11. Turning prohibitions. [Added 9-29-1997 by Ord. No.
1102-97; amended 2-12-2001 by Ord. No. 1210-2001; 4-16-2001 by
Ord. No. 1213-2001; 12-2-2002 by Ord. No. 1260-2002; 3-18-2003
by Ord. No. 1265-2003; 6-11-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-010]
The following turning prohibitions shall be established:
A. The areas above provided wherein parking is regulated shall be marked
with proper signs as prescribed by statute in such case made and
provided.
B. In any emergency, the Mayor or the Chief of Police may designate by
special signs any area within which parking may be prohibited or
permitted for the period of the emergency.
A. The left lane of the western approach of Glenwood Avenue to River
Road shall be for left turns only.
164. Editor's Note: Former § 236-7, Parking in municipal areas, which immediately preceded
this section, was deleted 9-20-2010 by Ord. No. 1439-2010 and added as § 282-3 of the
Code.
§ 432-7 EDGEWATER CODE § 432-11
1:828
§ 432-12. Midblock crosswalks. [Added 7-12-2004 by Ord. No.
1301-2004; amended 6-11-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-010]
The following midblock crosswalks are hereby established:
A. No turn on red from eastbound on Glenwood Avenue to southbound on
River Road.
B. No turn on red from westbound on Glenwood Avenue to southbound on
River Road.
C. No left turn from eastbound on North Street to northbound on River
Road.
D. No left turn from the northerly and southerly exits of 725 River Road,
being also known as "Block 75, Lot 2," and "Block 76, Lot 2," to
southbound River Road.
E. No left turn from the southernmost exit of the Edgewater Town Center,
905 River Road, being also known as "Block 58, Lot 1," to southbound
River Road.
F. No left turn from the southernmost exit of the Edgewater Commons
Mall, 455 River Road, being also known as "Block 84.01, Lot 1.01," to
southbound River Road.
G. No left turn from the southernmost exit of 575 River Road, presently
occupied by the Edgewater Golf Driving Range, being also known as
"Block 82, Lot 1," to southbound River Road.
H. No left or right turn from the southernmost exit of the Mitsuwa Mall,
595 River Road, being also known as "Block 81, Lot 1," to southbound
River Road.
I. No left turn from the northernmost exit of the Mitsuwa Mall, 595 River
Road, being also known as "Block 81, Lot 1," to southbound River Road.
J. Right turn only from eastbound on Hudson Avenue to southbound on
River Road.
K. Right turn only to northbound River Road from all exits on the entire
property of the Mobil Service Station, 955 River Road, being also
known as "Block 38, Lot 1.01."
A. From the easterly to the westerly side of River Road at the location of
an existing driveway between 1111 River Road and 1077 River Road.
B. On Gorge Road from the intersection of Legend Hills Drive to the
easterly side of Gorge Road.
§ 432-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 432-13
1:829
§ 432-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-11-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-010; 12-17-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-020]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute, any
person convicted of a violation of a provision of this article shall be liable
for a penalty of $50.
§ 432-13 EDGEWATER CODE § 432-13
1:830
ARTICLE II
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
[Adopted 11-10-1997 by Ord. No. 1109-97 (Ch. 236, Art. II, of the
1975 Code)]
§ 432-14. Adoption of manual.
§ 432-15. Preconstruction meetings. [Amended 5-6-2002 by Ord.
No. 1233-2002]
It shall be the responsibility of the person, contractor or, in the case of
a public utility as required under the public utility agreement, wishing to
conduct work on, under or above the roadway to contact the Edgewater
Police Chief or his/her designee in order to arrange a preconstruction
meeting to submit plans for the safe movement of traffic during such period
of construction of work. At the preconstruction meeting, it shall be the
responsibility of the person, contractor or utility to provide documentation
to the police that they have obtained all appropriate permits. Any person,
contractor or utility who fails to comply with this section prior to the start of
such work or whose plans are not approved by the Edgewater Police Chief
or designee is in violation of this section.
§ 432-16. Hazardous conditions. [Amended 5-6-2002 by Ord. No.
1233-2002]
The person, contractor or utility shall provide the Edgewater Police Chief or
designee with at least two emergency contact phone numbers to be called in
case of emergency problems at the construction or maintenance site prior
to the start of any work. If for any reason emergency contact cannot be
reached, or if the emergency contact person does not respond to the call
A. The Council hereby finds and declares that problems of traffic control
occur when traffic must be moved through or around street
construction, maintenance operations and utility work above and below
ground which requires blocking the roadway and obstructing the
normal flow of traffic and that such obstructions are or can become
dangerous when not properly controlled. In order to better promote the
public health, safety, peace and welfare, it is necessary to establish
controls and regulations directed to the safe and expeditious movement
of traffic through construction and maintenance zones and to provide
safety for the work force performing these operations.
B. The Borough of Edgewater in the County of Bergen, State of New
Jersey, does hereby adopt the current Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices, hereafter known as MUTCD, except as hereby
supplemented and amended, as it controls and regulates whenever
construction maintenance operations of utility work obstructs the
normal flow of traffic. Any person, contractor or utility who fails to
comply with the provisions of MUTCD while performing such work is in
violation of this article.
§ 432-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 432-16
1:831
from the Police Chief or designee to correct a hazardous condition, the
Borough may respond to correct such hazardous conditions. The reasonable
fees for such emergency service by the Borough shall be charged to the
person, contractor or utility responsible for such conditions.
§ 432-17. Hours and days. [Amended 5-6-2002 by Ord. No.
1233-2002]
§ 432-18. Road closings and detours. [Amended 5-6-2002 by Ord.
No. 1233-2002]
Road closings and/or traffic detours shall not be permitted unless approved
by the Edgewater Police Chief or designee and the person, contractor or
utility has received the appropriate permits, except in cases of emergencies.
§ 432-19. Traffic directors. [Amended 5-6-2002 by Ord. No.
1233-2002]
Traffic directors shall be posted at all construction or maintenance sites
when determined by the Edgewater Police Chief or designee that the same
is necessary to provide for the safe and expeditious movement of traffic.
§ 432-20. Stop work. [Amended 5-6-2002 by Ord. No. 1233-2002]
The Edgewater Police Chief or designee shall have the authority to stop
work, including the removal of equipment and vehicles, stored material
within the street right-of-way, back filling of open excavations and/or other
related work, in order to abate any nuisance and/or safety hazard or for any
violation of this article.
A. Except in cases of emergency, there shall be no construction,
maintenance operations or utility work on any roadway in the Borough
before the hours of 7:30 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m., Monday through
Saturday only. In the case of an emergency, this time limit may be
adjusted to permit work prior to 7:30 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m. by the
Edgewater Police Chief or designee. Nonemergency request to adjust
the work hours must be authorized by the governing body.
B. If it is determined by the Chief that the construction or maintenance
operations prior to 7:30 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m., Monday through
Saturday, would substantially delay traffic or cause a safety or health
hazard, the work shall then be permitted only between 7:30 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
C. Except in cases of emergency, no road closing or construction may
occur on Sundays. Nonemergency request to close a road for
construction on Sunday must be authorized by the governing body.
§ 432-16 EDGEWATER CODE § 432-21
1:832
§ 432-21. Site preparation.
It is to be expressly understood that no materials, vehicles or equipment are
to be placed in the roadway or sidewalk area until all construction signs,
lights, devices and pavement markings are installed.
§ 432-22. Bond requirements. [Amended 5-6-2002 by Ord. No.
1233-2002]
Any person, contractor or utility performing work in, on, under or above
a roadway shall be required to post a bond in such amount which shall
ensure completion of the work and restoration of the area wherein such
work is to occur to the condition which existed prior to the commencement
of such work, with the amount of such bond to be subject to approval by
the Mayor and Council. No work shall commence until proof of such bond
is provided to the Police Chief or designee. In addition, all utility companies
shall be required to post a blanket bond at the beginning of the year in an
amount subject to approval by the Mayor and Council, which bond shall be
applicable to all emergency work to be performed by such utility.
§ 432-23. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-6-2002 by Ord. No.
1233-2002165]
A person, contractor or utility who commits a violation of this article, shall
be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
165. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 432-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 432-23
1:833

ARTICLE III
Valet Parking
[Adopted 5-15-2006 by Ord. No. 1333-2006 (Ch. 236, Art. IV, of the
1975 Code)]
§ 432-24. Valet parking. [Amended 8-14-2006 by Ord. No.
1344-2006]
A valet parking service shall be prohibited from using any street or right-ofway
for parking of vehicles.
§ 432-25. Violation and penalties.
A violation of § 432-24 of this article shall be subject to a fine and penalties
as provided for in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Borough
Code.
§ 432-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 432-25
1:835

ARTICLE IV
Developer Agreements
[Adopted 12-18-2006 by Ord. No. 1354-2006 (Ch. 236, Art.V, of the
1975 Code)]
§ 432-26. Applicability of terms of developer agreements.
Any provision in a developer's agreement containing restrictions on parking
on certain public streets or rights-of-way during the course of construction
of and development of a property shall be required to be adhered to by
operators of motor vehicles and equipment.
§ 432-27. Violations and penalties.
A violation of § 432-26 of this article shall be subject to such fines and
penalties as are provided for in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the
Borough Code.
§ 432-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 432-27
1:837

ARTICLE V
Speed Limits
[Adopted 12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 1380-2007 (Ch. 236, Art. VI, of the
1975 Code)]
§ 432-28. Undercliff Avenue.
A. Speed limits for both directions of travel along Undercliff Avenue in the
Eleanor Van Gelder School Zone shall be established pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 39:4-8(b) under the Borough Engineer's certification, seal and
License Number 41635 as follows: along Undercliff Avenue for both
directions of traffic, 15 miles per hour when passing through the
Eleanor Van Gelder School Zone while "15 MPH When Flashing" signs
are operating during recess, when the presence of children is clearly
visible from the roadway or while children are going to or leaving
school during opening or closing hours.
B. Violations and penalties. Every person convicted of a violation of any
provision of this section or any supplement thereto shall be subject to
penalty or imprisonment as expressly provided by New Jersey statute.
§ 432-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 432-28
1:839

ARTICLE VI
Traffic Control Signal Monitoring Systems
[Adopted 10-17-2011 by Ord. No. 1461-2011]
§ 432-29. Definitions.
As used this in article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACT — P.L. 2007, Chapter 348, codified at N.J.S.A. 39:4-8.12 et seq.
RECORDED IMAGE — A digital image recorded by a traffic control signal
monitoring system.
SUMMONS — A citation alleging a violation of a traffic control signal.
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL — A device, whether manually, electrically,
mechanically or otherwise controlled, by which traffic is alternatively
directed to stop and to proceed, and which has been approved by the
Commissioner of Transportation in accordance with the Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways.
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL MONITORING SYSTEM —
An integrated system or device utilizing a camera, or a multiple-camera
system, and vehicle sensors which work in conjunction with a traffic
control signal and is capable of producing:
High-resolution color digital recorded images that show:
(a) The traffic control signal while it is displaying a red light;
A motor vehicle unlawfully entering and continuing through
the intersection while the traffic control signal is displaying a
red light; and
(b)
A portion of the rear of the motor vehicle unlawfully in the
intersection sufficient to clearly reveal the vehicle's license
plate and the make and model of the vehicle; and
(c)
(1)
A video recording of the violation that shows the violation
occurring.
(2)
A.
A digital camera may be used as part of a traffic control signal
monitoring system, provided the violation images are captured by a
digital camera, or a multiple-camera system, which produces a set of at
least two images for each violation.
At least one of the digital color images shall contain the following:
(a) The scene of the location where the violation occurred;
(b) The violating motor vehicle;
(c) The license plate numbers, letters and issuing jurisdiction;
(1)
B.
§ 432-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 432-29
1:841
§ 432-30. Installation.
§ 432-31. Locations of traffic control signal monitoring systems.
Subject to the approval of the Commissioner of Transportation pursuant
to the Act, traffic control signal monitoring systems may be placed at the
following locations:
(d) The day, month and year of the violation;
(e) The time of the violation in hours, minutes and seconds;
The amount of time that had passed between the time the light
turned red and the violation occurred; and
(f)
(g) The frame sequence code.
This information shall be imprinted along the bottom or top edge of
the image frame so as not to obstruct the violation image.
(2)
A. The Borough of Edgewater hereby determines to install and utilize a
traffic control signal monitoring system ("system") at various
intersections within the Borough of Edgewater with the approval of the
Commissioner of Transportation pursuant to the Act.
B. The system to be installed shall be approved by the governing body by
resolution.
C. The Borough shall have the authority to enter into a contract, following
a lawful procurement process, for the installation of the system. Any
contract that shall contain provisions contrary to the Act shall not be
deemed invalid but rather reformed to conform to the Act.
D. The signs notifying drivers that a system is being utilized shall be
approved by the Municipal Engineer and shall be placed on each street
converging into the affected intersection as required by the Act.
E. The Municipal Engineer shall inspect and certify the system at least
once every six months from the date of its installation.
F. Any vendor with whom the Borough has entered into a contract
concerning the installation and use of a traffic control signal monitoring
system pursuant to the Act shall establish a public awareness campaign
to notify the public of the intersection at which the system will be
installed and of the date on which the system will be activated. The
public awareness campaign shall, at a minimum, utilize electronic and
print media and shall make available electronically on an Internet
website the information required under this subsection.
§ 432-29 EDGEWATER CODE § 432-31
1:842
Roadway Intersection Direction
River Road [Added
6-18-2012 by Ord.
No. 1472-2012]
Archer Street Both
River Road [Added
6-18-2012 by Ord.
No. 1472-2012]
Dempsey Avenue Both
River Road [Added
6-18-2012 by Ord.
No. 1472-2012]
Edgewater Commons Both
River Road [Added
6-18-2012 by Ord.
No. 1472-2012]
Glenwood Avenue Both
River Road [Added
6-18-2012 by Ord.
No. 1472-2012]
Gorge Road Both
River Road Hilliard Avenue Both
River Road [Added
6-18-2012 by Ord.
No. 1472-2012]
NJ Route 5 Both
River Road [Added
6-18-2012 by Ord.
No. 1472-2012]
Old River Road Both
River Road [Added
6-18-2012 by Ord.
No. 1472-2012]
Orchard Street Both
River Road [Added
6-18-2012 by Ord.
No. 1472-2012]
Russell Avenue Both
River Road [Added
6-18-2012 by Ord.
No. 1472-2012]
Thompson Lane Both
§ 432-32. Issuance of summons.
The Police Department of the Borough of Edgewater shall review the
recorded images produced by the system to determine whether sufficient
evidence exists demonstrating that a traffic control signal violation has
occurred and shall issue a summons, when appropriate, in accordance with
the rules of the court.
§ 432-33. Use of recorded images.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the recorded images
produced by the system shall be available for the exclusive use of the
§ 432-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 432-33
1:843
§ 432-34. Owner's liability.
§ 432-35. Violations and penalties.
Police Department consistent with and for the purpose of discharging
his or her duties under P.L. 2007, Chapter 384.
B. Any recorded image or information produced in connection with the
system shall not be deemed a public record under N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et
seq., or common law. The recorded images shall not be:
(1) Discoverable as a public record by any person, entity or
governmental agency, except upon a subpoena issued by a grand
jury or a court order in a criminal matter; or
(2) Offered as evidence in any civil or administrative proceeding not
directly related to a traffic control signal violation.
C. Any recorded image or information collected in connection with a traffic
control signal violation shall not be retained after 60 days following the
collection of any fine or penalty.
D. If a summons is not issued within 90 days following the traffic control
signal violation, all recorded images and any information collected with
respect to the traffic control signal violation shall be removed by the
Police Department within three business days.
E. The Borough of Edgewater shall certify compliance of this section by
filing a report with the Commissioner of Transportation in accordance
with the Act.
A. The liability of the owner and operator of a motor vehicle for a traffic
control signal violation summons pursuant to the system shall be joint,
subject to provisions of the Act.
B. Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, the owner of a
motor vehicle who is a lessor shall not be liable for a traffic control
signal violation summons issued pursuant to this article and the Act
when the motor vehicle is under the control or in the possession of the
lessee, if upon notice of a traffic control signal violation, the owner of
the motor vehicle which was leased at the time of the offense notifies
the clerk of the court where the case is pending by an affidavit of the
name and address of the lessee. The affidavit shall be in a form
prescribed by the Administrative Director of the Courts. After providing
the name and address of the lessee, the owner shall not be required to
attend a hearing of the offense, unless otherwise notified by the court.
A. Any person liable for a traffic control signal violation, pursuant to this
article and the Act, utilizing the system shall be subject to the following
fines:
(1) Violation: $85.
§ 432-33 EDGEWATER CODE § 432-35
1:844
B. In no case shall motor vehicle points or automobile insurance eligibility
points pursuant to Section 26 of P.L. 1990, c. 8 (N.J.S.A. 17:33B-14) be
assessed against any person for a violation occurring under the
provisions of this article.
§ 432-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 432-35
1:845
Chapter 438
VENDING MACHINES
§ 432-35 EDGEWATER CODE § 432-35
1:846
ARTICLE I
Newspaper and Magazine Vending Machines
[Adopted 9-7-1988 by Ord. No. 898-88 (Ch. 240, Art. I, of the 1975
Code)]
§ 438-1. Permit required.
No person, firm or corporation shall install, erect, maintain or operate on
any public street or sidewalk or on any other public way or place within
the Borough of Edgewater any newspaper or magazine vending machine
without first having obtained a permit from the Clerk of the Borough of
Edgewater specifying the exact location of each such vending machine.
§ 438-2. Application; issuance; fee.
§ 438-3. General rules and regulations.
A. Application for a permit to install a newspaper or magazine vending
machine shall be made in writing to the Borough Clerk and upon such
form as shall be provided and shall contain the name and address of the
applicant and the proposed specific location of such vending machine
and shall be signed by the applicant.
B. The application for a permit shall contain a diagram drawn to scale
showing the proposed location of the newspaper or magazine vending
machine in relationship to surrounding curbs, streets, sidewalks, fire
hydrants, bus stops, taxi stands, leading zones and public or private
driveways within a radius of 20 feet.
C. Within 10 days after receipt of a completed application, the Clerk of the
Borough of Edgewater shall issue a permit unless he finds that issuance
thereof would not be in compliance with the rules and regulations
established herein.
D. Such permit shall be valid for a period of one-year commencing January
1 and expiring December 31. An annual permit fee of $15 per vending
machine is required.
A. No newspaper or magazine vending machine shall be installed in such a
manner as to:
(1) Endanger the safety of persons or property.
(2) Unreasonably interfere with the ingress or egress from any
residence or place of business.
(3) Unreasonably interfere with or impede the flow of pedestrians or
vehicular traffic, including any legally parked or stopped vehicle.
(4) Unreasonably interfere with the use of traffic signs or signals,
hydrants or mailboxes permitted at or near said location.
§ 438-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 438-3
1:847
B. No newspaper or magazine vending machine shall be installed in any of
the following locations:
(1) Within any public street, shoulder of any public street, public
parking lot or other public area designated for either the parking or
passage of motor vehicles.
(2) Within three feet of a pedestrian crosswalk.
(3) Within 10 feet of a fire hydrant.
(4) Within five feet of a public or private driveway, fire call box, police
call box or other emergency facility.
(5) Within three feet of a painted line of a parking stall.
(6) Within 10 feet from the side line of an intersecting street.
(7) Within three feet of a barrier-free curb cut.
(8) Adjacent to any portion of the curbline or street or right-of-way
designated as a no-parking or no-stopping or -standing traffic zone.
(9) On any privately owned property without the consent of the
property owner.
(10) In such location as to result in an unobstructed sidewalk area of
less than four feet in width.
C. Subject to the limitations contained in Subsection A above, newspaper
and magazine vending machines shall only be installed within the
public right-of-way in the following locations:
(1) Along streets having curbs, immediately adjacent to the edge of the
curb farthest from the street.
(2) Along streets having no curbs, immediately adjacent to that portion
of the sidewalk nearest the street.
(3) Along public streets having neither curbs nor sidewalks,
immediately adjacent to the public right-of-way.
D. Permittees shall maintain their newspaper or magazine vending
machines in proper working order and free of graffiti.
E. A permittee shall collect and remove all litter which may have
accumulated under, in or about the newspaper or magazine vending
machine whenever it places additional newspapers or magazines in its
newspaper or magazine vending machines.
F. No newspaper or magazine vending machine shall be attached by
chain, bolts or otherwise to any telephone pole, bus shelter, tree, traffic
sign, street sign, sidewalk or pavement or any other structure within
any public street, shoulder of any public street, public parking lot or
other public area.
§ 438-3 EDGEWATER CODE § 438-3
1:848
§ 438-4. Placement next to bus shelters or benches.
A newspaper or magazine vending machine may be installed or placed
immediately along the side of a bus shelter or bench, subject to the
following additional limitations:
G. Newspaper or magazine vending machines permitted herein shall
comply with the following additional standards:
(1) Such vending machines shall not exceed 60 inches in height, 24
inches in width or 20 inches in thickness.
(2) Such vending machines shall not be used for advertising signs or
publicity purposes other than that dealing with the display, sale or
purchase of the newspaper or magazine sold therein.
(3) Each vending machine shall be equipped with a coin-return
mechanism to permit a person using the machine to secure an
immediate refund in the event that he is unable to receive the
publication paid for. The coin-return mechanism shall be
maintained in good working order.
(4) Each vending machine shall have affixed to it in a readily visible
place so as to be seen by anyone using the vending machine a
notice setting forth the name and address of the distributor and the
telephone number of a working telephone service to call to report a
malfunction or to secure a refund in the event of a malfunction of
the coin-return mechanism or to give the notices provided for in
this article.
(5) Each vending machine shall be maintained in a neat and clean
condition and in good repair at all times. Specifically, but without
limiting the generality of the foregoing, each vending machine shall
be served and maintained so that:
(a) It is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked
paint in the visible painted areas thereof.
(b) It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the visible
unpainted metal areas thereon.
(c) The clear plastic or glass parts thereof, if any, through which
the publications therein are viewed are unbroken and
reasonably free of cracks, dents, blemishes and discolorations.
(d) The paper or cardboard parts of inserts thereof, if any, are
reasonably free of tears, peeling or fading.
(e) The structural parts thereof are not broken or unduly
misshapen.
H. No newspaper or magazine vending machine shall contain publications
exploiting nudity or pornographic literature.
§ 438-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 438-4
1:849
§ 438-5. Violations and penalties.
A. Only one vending machine may be installed or placed on either side of
the bus shelter or bench.
B. The vending machine shall not be placed in such a manner as to
interfere with passage from the bus shelter or bench to the curb.
C. Newspaper or magazine delivery vehicle shall not stop, stand or park
within the designated bus stop area.
A. Any newspaper or magazine vending machine installed without a
permit or in violation of any provisions of this article shall be deemed a
public nuisance, and the owner thereof shall forthwith remove such
machine upon notice from the municipality. Except in cases of
emergencies posing an immediate danger to public health, safety and
welfare, such notice shall be provided in writing to the address of the
owner on file with the Borough or as otherwise known. In the event of a
failure or refusal of an owner to remove said vending machine following
the notice, the Borough may cause the vending machine to be removed
and disposed of in accordance with the law.
B. Any person violating any provision of this article shall be subject to the
penalties in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.166
166. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 438-4 EDGEWATER CODE § 438-5
1:850
Chapter 444
WATERFRONT REGULATIONS
§ 438-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 438-5
1:851

ARTICLE I
Vessel Licensing
[Adopted 9-19-1933 by Ord. No. 250; readopted 8-1-1967 by Ord.
No. 476 (Ch. 244 of the 1975 Code)]
§ 444-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANNUAL LICENSE — A license which will remain in force continuously
until the first day of January next succeeding its issuance.
TEMPORARY LICENSE — A license which will remain in force for a limited
time, not exceeding 10 consecutive days.
§ 444-2. License required for placement within Borough;
exceptions. [Amended 12-15-1970 by Ord. No. 524A-70]
No person, firm or corporation, except the Borough of Edgewater, shall
place, store, moor, abandon or maintain any scow, barge or similar vessel
of whatsoever kind, in waters of the Hudson River within the jurisdictional
limit of the Borough of Edgewater, without a license for that purpose first
had and obtained as hereinafter provided. This section shall not apply to
scows, barges or similar vessels which are used solely for the purpose of
making deliveries or pickups incidental to the use on the adjacent property
for a period not to exceed 10 days.
§ 444-3. Types of licenses.
The licenses issued hereunder shall be of two kinds, annual licensee and
temporary licenses.
§ 444-4. Application for annual license; hearing.
Any person desiring an annual license shall file a written application with
the Borough Clerk, setting forth the number, type, age and condition of the
scows, barges or other vessels to be stored, moored or maintained, and
shall also file the deed or other evidence of title to the lands to be occupied
thereby. Upon the filing of any such application, the Mayor and Council shall
give notice of a hearing thereon by advertising at least once a week for two
successive weeks in two newspapers of general circulation in this Borough
and by posting such notice on the premises referred to in such application.
At the time and place fixed for said hearing, all persons interested therein
shall be given an opportunity to be heard. After said hearing the Mayor and
Council, by resolution, may grant such license if in its judgment it is proper
for the good government, order and protection of persons and property and
for the preservation of the public health, welfare and safety of the Borough
of Edgewater and its inhabitants.
§ 444-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 444-5
1:853
§ 444-5. Bond required. [Amended 9-3-1975 by Ord. No. 581-75]
The Mayor and Council may require any person desiring an annual license
to file with the Borough Clerk a satisfactory surety bond in such sum as
shall be determined by the Mayor and Council, but in no event shall said
bond be less than one $1,000, said bond to be continued in force during the
term of said license or any renewal thereof, and to be conditioned for the
prompt removal of any scow, barge or other vessel from the lands described
in said license and the removal therefrom of all obstructions, whether above
or beneath the surface of the water, at or before the expiration of the term
of said license, and in default of said removal, to pay the cost thereof to the
Borough of Edgewater, should it incur expense in causing said removal.
§ 444-6. Annual license renewal. [Amended 9-3-1975 by Ord. No.
581-75]
All annual licenses granted pursuant to this article may be renewed
annually thereafter by resolution of the Mayor and Council, without
readvertising or holding a rehearing thereon, upon the payment of the
necessary license fee; provided, however, that the terms of all renewal
licenses shall conform strictly to the terms of the original licenses.
§ 444-7. Application for temporary license; hearing.
Any person desiring a temporary license shall file a written application with
the Borough Clerk, setting forth the number, type, age and condition of the
scows, barges or vessels to be stored, moored or maintained, the period of
time for which said license is desired, and shall also file the deed or other
evidence of title to the lands to be occupied thereby. Upon the filing of
such application, the Mayor and Council may grant said temporary license
by resolution, without advertising or holding a hearing thereon, if in its
judgment it is proper for the good government, order and protection of
persons and property and for the preservation of the public health, welfare
and safety of the Borough of Edgewater and its inhabitants.
§ 444-8. License fees. [Amended 9-3-1975 by Ord. No. 581-75;
12-5-1994 by Ord. No. 1038-94]
The fee for the granting of an annual license to store, moor or maintain
one scow, barge or other vessel shall be $250, and for each additional scow,
barge or other vessel included in a single annual license, there shall be an
additional fee of $100. The fee for the granting of a temporary license to
store, moor or maintain one scow, barge or other vessel shall be $100 for
each vessel stored.
§ 444-9. Violations and penalties.167
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
167. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 444-5 EDGEWATER CODE § 444-9
1:854
ARTICLE II
Drift and Debris Control
[Adopted 4-5-1983 by Ord. No. 742-83 (Ch. 246 of the 1975 Code)]
§ 444-10. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Waterfront Ordinance."
§ 444-11. Definitions and word usage.
§ 444-12. Purpose.
The general purpose of this article is the elimination of sources of drift and
debris which constitute possible obstacles or hazards to existing navigation
on the navigable waters of this Borough by the removal and disposal of
A. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases
shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Edgewater in the County of Bergen and
State of New Jersey.
DEBRIS — Any loose material not attached to the land or to any
structure and which is capable of becoming drift.
DIRECTOR — An official of the Borough appointed by the Mayor with
the consent of the Borough Council.
DRIFT — Any floatable material which may cause damage to vessels or
craft.
FINAL ORDER — Either the order of the Director after the time to
request a review thereof has lapsed, or the order of the Director issued
as a result of the review requested in § 444-16.
NAVIGABLE WATERS — The waterways which are capable of carrying
interstate commerce, and the tributaries thereto, within the
geographical limits of the Borough.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PREMISES — The land, building, wharf, pier, dolphin, boom, weir,
breakwater, bulkhead, jetty or other structure, and shall include all or
any as may be necessary.
WATERFRONT, SHORE or BANK — That portion of the land which
borders navigable waters and which lies shoreward of the established
harbor lines or low-water mark within the corporate limits of the
Borough.
B. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
shall include the future and words used in the singular shall include the
plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
§ 444-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 444-12
1:855
debris and deteriorated structures on the shores of such waters, and liable
to be washed into such waters.
§ 444-13. Sources of drift; declaration of public nuisance.
Whenever the Director has reasonable grounds to believe that debris placed
or deposited on the banks of any navigable water is liable to be washed into
such navigable water by any cause whatsoever and thereby be or become a
source of drift likely to hinder, impede or otherwise obstruct navigation, or
the condition of any wharf, pier, dolphin, boom, weir, breakwater, bulkhead,
jetty or other structure on or bordering on the shores of any navigable
water is so dilapidated and deteriorated as to be or become a source of
drift or debris liable to be washed into such navigable waters by any cause
whatsoever and thereby likely to hinder, impede or otherwise obstruct
navigation, the Director may declare the same to be a public nuisance and
thereupon order that the same be removed, abated, altered or repaired as
such order may specify.
§ 444-14. Form and content of order.
The order of the Director issued pursuant to § 444-13 of this article shall be
in writing, directed to the occupant, and last known owner of record, if not
such occupant, of the premises which are the subject of the complaint, and
shall specify whether the condition complained of shall be removed, abated,
altered or repaired.
§ 444-15. Service of order.
The order of the Director issued pursuant to § 444-13 shall be served upon
the occupant, and the last known owner of record, if not such occupant, of
the premises which are the subject of the complaint either by personally
delivering a copy of such order to such occupant and last known owner of
record or by registered mail addressed to such persons at their last known
address.
§ 444-16. Appeal to Director.
Within 15 days after service of the order of the Director issued pursuant
to § 444-13 or, under emergency, within such shorter time as the Director
may prescribe, the person to whom such order is directed, or any person
aggrieved thereby, may appeal to the Director to review the same. The
Director, or his agent after such review, at which all interested parties shall
be afforded the opportunity to be heard, may affirm, modify or reverse the
order of the Director as the facts may warrant.
§ 444-17. Appeal to Mayor and Council; hearing.
Within 15 days after service of the order of the Director issued pursuant
to § 444-13, the person to whom such order is directed, or any person
aggrieved thereby, may appeal to the Mayor and Council to review such
determination. The Mayor and Council shall hold a hearing on such appeal
§ 444-12 EDGEWATER CODE § 444-17
1:856
within 30 days after said appeal is filed, at which time all interested parties
shall be afforded the opportunity to be heard. The Mayor and Council may
affirm, modify or reverse the order of the Director as the facts and evidence
presented may warrant. If appeal is not filed within the time period above
set forth, the order of the Director shall be final and conclusive.
§ 444-18. Failure or refusal to comply with order.
In the event that the persons to whom the order of the Director is directed
fail or refuse to comply with the terms of such order within 30 days after
such order has become final, the Director shall, without further notice to
any person, take or cause to be taken the necessary action to remove, abate,
alter or repair the nuisance as specified in the order of the Director. The
costs and expenses incident thereto shall be a personal charge against the
occupant, and last owner of record, if not such occupant, of the premises
affected and all appurtenances thereto.
§ 444-19. Abandonment without permission prohibited.168
No person shall abandon any flat-bottomed boat, barge, scow or raft upon
any public land or waterway to or upon any private property within the
Borough without the prior written permission of the Director of Public
Works, who is hereby designated by the Borough Council to perform this
function. A flat-bottomed boat, barge, scow or raft which has remained
moored, grounded or otherwise attached fastened to or upon any public
land or waterway or any private property without such consent for a period
of more than 20 days shall be prima facie evidence of such abandonment.
§ 444-20. Bond required for barge anchorage of over 10 days.
The owner of any occupied or unoccupied barge, which is to be docked in
or on the banks of any river or navigable waterway within the Borough for
more than 10 consecutive days, shall post a surety bond in the amount of
$25,000 with the Borough Clerk and in favor of the Borough, said bond
being issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the
State of New Jersey.
§ 444-21. Forfeiture of bond.
In the event that a barge bonded in accordance with the preceding section
sinks or otherwise becomes unable to navigate under its own power, the
bond so posted shall be forfeited to the Borough to aid in the removal
of such barge from any river, riverbank or navigable waterway within the
Borough.
168. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 444-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 444-22
1:857
§ 444-22. Bond cancellation.
The surety on a bond issued pursuant to the above shall have the right to
immediately cancel such bond upon the removal of the barge from the rivers
and riverbanks of the Borough.
§ 444-23. Vessels not affected.
This article shall not apply to barges, ships or boats owned or operated by
common carriers engaged in interstate or foreign commerce, nor shall it
apply to pleasure craft used on a seasonal basis.
§ 444-24. Violations and penalties.169
§ 444-25. Removal of abandoned vessels.
In the event that a person shall abandon any flat-bottomed boat, barge,
scow, raft or vessel in contravention of § 444-19 of this article, and the
owner of such vessel is unknown, the Mayor and Council may publish a
notice in a newspaper of general circulation within the Borough, wherein
shall be set forth the approximate date of abandonment of such vessel
and the location thereof, and that unless such vessel is removed from the
confines of the Borough within 60 days after publication of such notice,
the Borough may without further notice have same removed by appropriate
action.
A. Any person who violates § 444-19 by abandoning any flat-bottomed
boat, barge, scow or raft without permission shall be subject to the
penalties prescribed by Chapter 264 of the Laws of 1969 (N.J.S.A.
12:7C-1 et seq.), as amended and supplemented.
B. Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as
provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty.
169. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 444-22 EDGEWATER CODE § 444-25
1:858
Part III: Board of Health Legislation
Chapter 450
GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH
§ 444-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 444-25
1:859

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code by Board of Health
[Adopted 9-27-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-1]
§ 450-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Borough of Edgewater
of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Board of Health of the
Borough of Edgewater, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters
and sections by General Code, and consisting of Chapters 450 through 535,
are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the "Code of the
Borough of Edgewater," hereinafter known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 450-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede Part III of the 1975 Code of
the Borough of Edgewater and all other general and permanent ordinances
enacted by the Board of Health prior to the enactment of Part III of the Code
of the Borough of Edgewater, except such ordinances as are hereinafter
expressly saved from repeal or continued in force.
§ 450-3. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 450-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Borough Clerk and/or Board of Health Secretary and shall remain there
for use and examination by the public until final action is taken on this
ordinance; and, if this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be
certified to by the Clerk and/or Board of Health Secretary of the Borough
of Edgewater by impressing thereon the Seal of the Borough, as provided
by law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk
and/or Board of Health Secretary of the Borough, to be made available to
persons desiring to examine the same during all times while said Code is in
effect.
§ 450-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the Board of
Health to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into Part III of such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Borough
of Edgewater" shall be understood and intended to include such additions
and amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements
to the Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as
provided hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 450-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-6
1:861
§ 450-6. Publication; filing.
The Secretary of the Board of Health of the Borough of Edgewater shall
cause this Adopting Ordinance to be published, in the manner required,
in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. Sufficient copies of
the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk and/or Board of
Health Secretary for inspection by the public at all times during regular
office hours. The enactment and publication of this Adopting Ordinance,
coupled with availability of copies of the Code for inspection by the public,
shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all
provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 450-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk and/or Board of Health Secretary or
someone authorized and directed by the Clerk and/or the Board of Health
Secretary to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the
Code required to be filed in his or her office for the use of the public. All
changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 450-8. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased
from the Clerk and/or Board of Health Secretary, or an authorized agent
of the Clerk and/or Board of Health Secretary, upon the payment of a fee
authorized by the Borough. The Clerk and/or Board of Health Secretary
shall also arrange for procedures for the periodic supplementation of the
Code.
§ 450-9. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Borough of
Edgewater to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or
any part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to the penalties
provided by law.
§ 450-10. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 450-6 EDGEWATER CODE § 450-11
1:862
§ 450-11. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 450-12. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
Adopting Ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 450-13. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-12 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
§ 450-14. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to October 24, 2005.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of said
Board of Health ordinances. It is the intention of the Board of Health
that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the
ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended to read
as such.
B. In addition, the changes, amendments or revisions as set forth in
Schedule A attached hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith,
to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance. (Chapter
and section number references are to the ordinances as they have been
renumbered and appear in the Code.)170
§ 450-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-14
1:863
170. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-14B, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 450, General Provisions, Board of Health, Article I.
During routine supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions
will be replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 9-27-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-1." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in
the Borough offices.
§ 450-14 EDGEWATER CODE § 450-14
1:864
ARTICLE II
General Penalty
[Adopted 6-14-1976 by Ord. No. 76-1; amended in its entirety at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 450, General Provisions, Board of
Health, Art. I)]
§ 450-15. Violations and penalties.
A. Unless another penalty is otherwise provided, any person violating or
failing to comply with any of the provisions of any chapter or article of
this Code adopted by the Board of Health, or any standard code
adopted under such chapter or article and made a part thereof, shall,
upon conviction, be punishable by a fine of not less than $25 nor more
than $500 for each offense.
B. The continuation of such violation for each successive day shall
constitute a separate offense, and the person or person allowing or
permitting the continuation of the violation may be punished as
provided above for each separate offense.
C. The court may cause a person who refuses or neglects to pay the
amount of a judgment rendered against him, and all costs and charges
incident thereto, to be committed to the county jail for a period not
exceeding 90 days.
D. In case a person shall have been twice convicted within the space of six
months of the violation of the same health ordinance or code and due
proof of such fact is made, the court may, in addition to the imposition of
the penalty prescribed by Subsection A of this section, cause said
person to be imprisoned in the county jail or county workhouse, with or
without hard labor, for any number of days not exceeding one for each
dollar of the penalty.
E. Notwithstanding the foregoing, each violation of any provision of the
State Sanitary Code171 shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable by a penalty of not less than $50 nor more than $1,000.
Each such penalty shall be sued for and recovered in a civil action, in
any court of competent jurisdiction, by and in the name of the State
Department of Health or by and in the name of the local board of health
of the municipality in which the violation occurred. Any penalty
recovered in any such action shall be paid to the plaintiff therein. When
the plaintiff is the State Department of Health and Senior Services, the
penalty recovered shall be paid by the Department to the State
Treasurer. When the plaintiff is a local board of health, the penalty
recovered shall be paid by the local board into the treasury of the
municipality within which the local board has jurisdiction.
171. Editor's Note: See Title 8 of N.J.A.C.
§ 450-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-15
1:865
Chapter 454
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Establishment of Board of Health — See Ch.
6, Art. I.
Animals — See Ch. 129.
Board of Health penalties — See Ch. 450, Art.
II.
Pet shops, kennels, shelters and
pounds — See Ch. 512.
§ 450-15 EDGEWATER CODE § 450-15
1:866
ARTICLE I
Permit for Keeping Certain Animals
[Adopted 1-14-1974 by Ord. No. 73-1 (Ch. 267 of the 1975 Code);
amended in its entirety 3-14-1983 by Ord. No. 83-1]
§ 454-1. Permit required to keep certain animals. [Amended
1-16-1989; 6-25-2001 by Ord. No. 2000-7]
It shall be unlawful to raise, keep, harbor or have in any manner whatsoever
any live fowl, pig, cow, horse, beast of burden, sheep, goat or other cattle,
or lion or tiger cub, cheetah or other undomesticated animal, within the
Borough of Edgewater.
§ 454-2. Exemption for existing operations; restrictions.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to those persons who are
raising, keeping, harboring or in possession of any of the animals set forth
in § 454-1 hereof on or before February 14, 1983; this exemption cannot
be transferred or assigned. The number of animals may not be increased
over and above the number existing on or before February 14, 1983. This
exemption shall terminate upon removal from the premises of the person
raising, keeping, harboring or possessing such animals.
§ 454-3. Enclosures required; inspections of premises.
Said persons, firms or corporations exempted from the provisions of this
article, as set forth in § 454-2 above, shall raise, keep, harbor or possess the
animals set forth in § 454-1 within an enclosure upon the premises owned,
possessed or controlled by the persons, firms or corporations maintaining
such animals. The enclosure shall be of such character as shall effectually
prevent such animals from straying upon the streets, roads or avenues
of the Borough and the premises in possession of persons, firms or
corporations other than the keeper of such animals and shall be kept in
a clean and sanitary condition, free from stench and vermin and in such
manner as not to endanger the health and comfort of the citizens of the
Borough. The premises where such animals are kept shall be open at all
reasonable hours to inspection by the police or members of the Board of
Health of the Borough of Edgewater to ascertain whether the provisions of
this article are complied with.
§ 454-4. Enforcement of provisions; when effective.
This article shall be enforced by all personnel of the Board of Health, the
Housing Officer and any other persons so designated by the Board of Health
or the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Edgewater and shall take effect
upon publication after final passage as provided by law.
§ 454-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 454-5
1:867
§ 454-5. Violations and penalties.172
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 450, Article II, General Penalty.
172. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 454-5 EDGEWATER CODE § 454-5
1:868
ARTICLE II
Cat Licensing
[Adopted 4-12-1993 by Ord. No. 93-1 (Ch. 268 of the 1975 Code)]
§ 454-6. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL — For the purpose of this article, "animal" shall mean cat.
ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY — Any person or agency designated or
certified by the State of New Jersey to enforce the provisions of this article.
CAT — Any member of the domestic feline species, male, female or altered.
CAT OF LICENSING AGE — Any cat which has attained the age of seven
months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
CATTERY — Any room or group of rooms, cages or exhibition pen not part
of a kennel, wherein cats for sale are kept or displayed.
LICENSING AUTHORITY — The agency or department of the Borough
of Edgewater or any designated representative thereof charged with
administering the issuance and/or revocation of permits and licenses under
the provisions of this article.
NEUTERED — Rendered permanently incapable of reproduction as certified
by a licensed veterinarian.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a cat, shall include every
person having a right of property (or custody) in such cat and every person
who has such cat in his/her keeping or who harbors or maintains a cat or
knowingly permits a cat to remain on or about any premises occupied by
that person.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, organization or
institution commonly recognized by law as a unit.
§ 454-7. Rabies vaccination.
A. Vaccination and license requirements. No person shall own, keep,
harbor or maintain any cat over seven months of age within the
Borough of Edgewater unless such cat is vaccinated and licensed. The
provisions of this section do not apply to cats held in a cattery or those
held by a state- or federal-licensed research facility, or a veterinary
establishment where cats are received or kept for diagnostic, medical,
surgical or other treatments, or licensed animal shelters, pounds,
kennels or pet shops.
B. Vaccination. All cats shall be vaccinated against rabies by a licensed
veterinarian in accordance with the latest Compendium of Animal
Rabies Vaccines and Recommendations for Immunization published by
the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians, except as
§ 454-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 454-7
1:869
§ 454-8. Application for license; placement of tag; where to apply;
expiration; fees; restriction on cat ownership.
§ 454-9. Violations and penalties.174
Except as otherwise provided in this article, any person who violates or
who fails or refuses to comply with this article shall be liable to a penalty
as set forth in Chapter 450, Article II, General Penalty, to be recovered by
and in the name of the local Board of Health or by and in the name of the
municipality.
provided for in Subsection D below. Vaccination must be good for the
entire licensing period.
C. Vaccination certificate. A certificate of vaccination shall be issued to the
owner of each animal vaccinated, on a form recommended by the state.
D. Exemption. Any cat may be exempted from the requirements of such
vaccination for a specified period of time by the local Board of Health,
upon presentation of a veterinarian's certificate stating that, because of
any infirmity or other physical condition or regimen of therapy, the
inoculation of such cats shall be deemed inadvisable.
A. Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a cat of licensing age shall, in
the month of January, annually, apply for and procure from the Board of
Health Secretary, or other official designated by the governing body
thereof to license cats in the municipality in which he/she resides, a
license and official registration tag with license number or a
registration sleeve for each cat so owned, kept or harbored, and shall
place upon such cat a collar or other device with the license number
securely fastened.
B. The person applying for the license and registration tag for each cat
shall do so at the office of the Board of Health. All licenses and
registrations shall expire on the last day of January of each year. Any
person applying for a license shall pay an annual fee as determined by
the Board of Health and set forth in Code § 479-3. If a license for a cat is
not renewed by March 1, a late charge of $10 will be added to the fee.
[Amended 9-23-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-2173]
C. No more than four cats of licensing age shall be kept, maintained or
harbored at one time in any residential housing unit or on its grounds or
in any business establishment or on its grounds. This restriction shall
not apply to properly licensed pet shops, kennels, shelters and pounds.
173. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 450, General Provisions,
Board of Health, Art. I).
174. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 450, General Provisions,
Board of Health, Art. I)
§ 454-7 EDGEWATER CODE § 454-10
1:870
§ 454-10. Enforcement; when effective.
This article shall be enforced by all personnel of the Board of Health, the
Housing Officer and any other persons so designated by the Board of Health
or the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Edgewater and shall take effect
on January 1, 1994.
§ 454-11. Notification of cats brought into and leaving Borough.
[Added 4-28-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-3]
A. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Borough any
unlicensed cat and shall keep the same or permit the same to be kept
within the Borough for a period of more than two weeks shall
immediately apply for a license and registration tag for such cat.
B. The owner of any licensed cat shall notify the Borough if the licensed
animal shall die, be sold or kept or harbored at a location other than the
location at which it was originally licensed.
§ 454-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 454-11
1:871
Chapter 460
BARBERSHOPS, BEAUTY PARLORS, TANNING SALONS AND
NAIL SALONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health penalties — See Ch. 450, Art.
II.
Fees (BOH) — See Ch. 479.
Board of Health Secretary — See Ch. 507, Art.
II.
§ 460-1. Health certificates required; license.175
No person shall engage as an operator in the business, nor shall any
person employ any other person as an operator in connection with the
business of a barbershop, beauty parlor, tanning salon or nail salon in the
Borough, unless every such person, whether employer or employee, shall
have previously filed with the Secretary of the Board proof of the person
being licensed by the State of New Jersey to conduct the business of a
barbershop, beauty parlor, tanning salon or nail salon.
§ 460-2. Regulations; requirements.
Every person operating or conducting a barbershop, beauty parlor, tanning
salon or nail salon in the Borough and every person employed therein shall
at all time comply with the following requirements:
A. The premises in which the barbershop, beauty parlor, tanning salon or
nail salon is maintained shall be kept in a clean condition.176
B. All mugs, brushes, scissors, razors, combs, tweezers, clippers or similar
instruments shall be sterilized before being used upon any customer by
immersion in boiling water, or a ten-percent solution of formalin, or a
five-percent solution of carbolic acid, or by any other means approved
by the Board.
C. Every such shop or parlor shall be provided with running hot and cold
water.
D. Clean towels and fresh neckbands shall be provided for each customer.
E. Every operator, employee or any person actually engaged in waiting
upon or servicing a customer shall thoroughly cleanse his or her hands
immediately before serving such customer.
175. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 450, General Provisions, Art.
I).
176. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 450, General Provisions, Art.
I).
§ 454-11 EDGEWATER CODE § 460-3
1:872
§ 460-3. Prohibitions.
§ 460-4. License fees. [Amended 3-27-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-3; 178]
The fees for licensure of barbershops, beauty parlors, tanning salons and
nail salons are hereby fixed as set forth in § 479-3. If the fee is not payable at
the beginning of the calendar year in which the license is issued, the license
shall apply only to the balance of the calendar year during which the fee is
so paid or payable.
§ 460-5. Violations and penalties.179
Violations of this chapter shall be punishable as set forth in Chapter 450,
Article II, General Penalty.
Chapter 461
BODY ART ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 461-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
BODY ART — The practice of physical body adornment in permitted
establishments by operations utilizing, but not limited to, the following
techniques: body piercing, tattooing and permanent cosmetics.
BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT — Any place or premises, whether public or
private, temporary or permanent in nature or location, where the practices
of body art, whether or not for profit, are performed.
BODY PIERCING — The puncturing or penetration of the skin of a person
using presterilized single use needles and the insertion of presterilized or
disinfected jewelry or other adornment thereto in the opening.
A. No person shall be served in any barbershop, beauty parlor, tanning
salon or nail salon if such person visibly evidences that he is infected
with ringworm of the scalp or any other communicable disease.177
B. The use of styptic pencils is prohibited.
C. The use of powder puffs and sponges, except for individual use, is
prohibited.
177. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 450, General Provisions, Art.
I).
178. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 450, General Provisions,
Board of Health, Art. I)
179. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 450, General Provisions, Board
of Health, Art. I)
§ 460-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 461-1
1:873
EAR PIERCING — The puncturing of ear lobe and the trailing edge of
the ear using a presterilized, single-use stud-and-clasp ear-piercing system
following manufacturer's instructions.
PRACTITIONER — Any person that performs the act of tattooing,
permanent cosmetics and/or ear and body piercing.
TATTOOING — Any method of placing ink or other inert pigment into or
under the skin or mucosa by the aid of needles or any other instrument
used to puncture the skin, resulting in permanent coloration of the skin or
mucosa. This includes all forms of permanent cosmetics.
§ 461-2. License required.
No person, corporation or entity shall operate any establishment or utilize
any premises in the Borough of Edgewater as or for a body art
establishment unless or until there first has been obtained a license for such
establishment or premises from the Board of Health in accordance with the
terms and provisions of this chapter.
§ 461-3. Application requirements.
Each and every applicant for a license to be used for a body art
establishment shall set forth the following information in writing or on
forms provided by the Board of Health Secretary:
§ 461-4. Fees.
The applicant for a license for a body art establishment or premises shall
pay an annual license fee, which license fee shall become due on the first of
January each year.
§ 461-5. Issuance of license; exceptions.
The Board of Health shall approve the issuance of a body art establishment
license if all requirements for a body art establishment described in this
chapter are met, unless it is found that the operation as proposed by the
applicant, if permitted, would not have complied with all applicable laws,
including, but not limited to, the Building, Health, Housing, Zoning and Fire
Codes of the Borough of Edgewater.
§ 461-6. Suspension or revocation of license.
A. The name and residence address of the applicant and all former
addresses for a period of three years prior to making the application.
B. The address of the establishment or premises to be used in the body art
business and a physical description of the property and facilities if the
applicant desires a license for said establishment or premises.
C. Proof of receipt of a license as a body art/employer from the State of
New Jersey.
§ 461-1 EDGEWATER CODE § 461-6
1:874
§ 461-7. Signs.
A recognizable and legible sign shall be posted at the main entrance to any
building or to the portion of a building used as a body art establishment
identifying the premises as a body art establishment, and recognizable and
legible signs shall be posted in all exits identifying each such exit. All such
signs shall be posted in accordance with all existing municipal ordinances.
§ 461-8. Compliance with regulations required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation or entity to conduct a
body art establishment, as defined in and governed by N.J.A.C. 8:27-1 et
seq., without complying with all of the provisions concerning operation and
maintenance of a body art establishment as set forth therein.
§ 461-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the penalties provided by Chapter 1, Article II,
§ 1-15, entitled "Violations and penalties," of the Code of the Borough of
Edgewater.
Chapter 466
BUILDINGS, HEATING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health (established) — See Ch. 6,
Art. I.
Certificates of continuing occupancy — See
Ch. 157, Art. III.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 166.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 204, Art. II.
Payment of utility bills by Borough — See Ch.
335, Art. II.
Board of Health penalties — See Ch. 450, Art.
II.
Health Officer — See Ch. 507, Art. I.
Water temperature (maintenance of hot water
temperature) — See Ch. 523, Art. I.
A. Any license issued for a body art establishment may be revoked or
suspended by the Board of Health, after a public hearing before the
Board of Health, where it is found that any of the provisions of the
chapter are violated.
B. The Board of Health, before revoking or suspending any license, shall
give the licensee at least 10 days' written notice of the charges against
the licensee and the opportunity for a public hearing before the Board
of Health, at which time the licensee may present evidence bearing
upon the question. In such cases, the charges shall be specific and in
writing.
§ 461-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 461-9
1:875

ARTICLE I
Residential Buildings
[Adopted 9-13-1971 by Ord. No. 71-3 (Ch. 255, Art. I of the 1975
Code)]
§ 466-1. Minimum required temperature; hours. [Amended
9-20-2010 by Ord. No. 1439-2010]
§ 466-2. Duty of owner to maintain temperatures; exception.
The duty to maintain the above-described minimum temperatures shall be
that of the owner of the building, unless the duty to maintain the minimum
temperatures shall have been contracted, either orally or in writing, with
the person or persons who lease or reside or have right to possession of the
premises.
§ 466-3. Duty of owner to maintain temperatures in multiple
dwellings.
In buildings in which two or more families reside, and a central heating
system or boiler is under the control of the owner, lessor or other person in
charge, it shall be the duty of the owner, lessor or person in charge of said
building to maintain the minimum temperatures set forth hereinabove.
A. In all buildings designed to be occupied, or occupied, as residences by
more than two families and when the owners have agreed to supply
heat, from October 1 of each year to the next succeeding May 1, every
unit of dwelling space and every habitable room therein shall be
maintained at least at 68° F. whenever the outside temperature falls
below 55° F. during daytime hours from 6:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. At times
other than those specified, interiors of units of dwelling space shall be
maintained at least at 62° F. whenever the outside temperature falls
below 40° F. [Amended 2-27-2012 by Ord. No. BOH 2012-1]
B. In meeting the aforesaid standards, the owner shall not be responsible
for heat loss and the consequent drop in the interior temperature
arising out of action by the occupants in leaving windows or doors open
to the exterior of the building. The owner shall be obligated to supply
required fuel or energy and maintain the heating system in good
operating condition so that it can supply heat as required herein,
notwithstanding any contractual provision seeking to delegate or shift
responsibility to the occupant or third person, except that the owner
shall not be required to supply fuel or energy for heating purposes to
any unit where the occupant thereof agrees in writing to supply heat to
his own unit of dwelling space and the said unit is served by its own
exclusive heating equipment for which the source of heat can be
separately computed and billed.
§ 466-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 466-4
1:877
§ 466-4. Conversion or replacement of existing heating systems.
[Added 2-9-1981 by Ord. No. 18; 9-20-2010 by Ord. No. 1439-2010]
At no time during the time period specified in § 466-6 of this article shall
any heating system or boiler existing in a building described in § 466-1 of
this article be replaced by or converted to another heating system or boiler
without prior approval of the Edgewater Board of Health.
§ 466-5. Applicability of provisions.
This article shall not apply to any business or commercial premises unless
part of said premises are used for habitation or residence, in which event
the above provisions of this article shall apply to that part used for
habitation or residence.
§ 466-6. Seasonal duration of minimum temperature requirement.
[Amended 9-20-2010 by Ord. No. 1439-2010]
The duty to maintain the above minimum temperatures shall apply during
the period of October 1 to May 1 of the following year.
§ 466-7. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by all personnel of the Board of Health, the
Housing Officer and any other person so designated by the Board of Health
or the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Edgewater.
§ 466-8. Violations and penalties.180
Violations of this article shall be punishable as set forth in Chapter 450,
Article II, General Penalty.
180. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 450, General Provisions, Board
of Health, Art. I)
§ 466-4 EDGEWATER CODE § 466-8
1:878
ARTICLE II
Nonresidential Buildings
[Adopted 5-12-1980 by Ord. No. 17 (Ch. 255, Art. II of the 1975
Code)]
§ 466-9. Applicability.
All buildings which are in whole or in part a place of employment shall be
provided with heating facilities and sufficient fuel capable at all times of
producing the minimum temperatures specified in § 466-10.
§ 466-10. Minimum temperatures to be maintained; exemptions.
§ 466-11. Responsibility for maintenance of temperature.
It shall be the duty of the owner, lessor or person in charge of any said
building or portion of building to maintain the minimum temperatures
set forth hereinabove and to maintain sufficient fuel to provide for said
temperatures.
A. All places of employment shall be kept at the following minimum
temperature when occupied by employees:
(1) Office space; lunchroom; washroom; locker, rest, dressing and
toilet rooms; and all other portions of buildings where employees
are assigned to relatively fixed positions or locations and are not
subject to physical exertion: 68° F.
(2) Other areas of buildings where employees are not restricted to a
relatively fixed position: 55° F., except that where the prudent
practice of business requires that, in order to facilitate the
movement of goods, there be certain open-air loading platforms,
warehouses, storage buildings and other similarly situated
facilities, no minimum temperature shall be required.
B. Exemptions.
(1) An individual or entity may apply for an exemption from the
minimum temperature regulations as set forth hereinabove,
provided that the following conditions have been met:
(a) There are no persons who use the place of employment in
question on a regular basis; or
(b) The maintenance of the above temperatures would be
physically and mechanically impossible, given the
circumstances of the applicant, and a good faith effort was
made to comply with the minimum temperature regulations.
(2) All applications must be in writing and submitted to the Board of
Health at least 45 days prior to the date on which the applicant
would like the exemption to commence.
§ 466-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 466-12
1:879
§ 466-12. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by all personnel of the Board of Health and
any other person so designated by the Board of Health.
§ 466-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person, persons, corporations or entities violating any of the provisions
of §§ 466-9 to 466-11 of this article shall, upon conviction, forfeit and pay
a penalty of not less than $100 nor more than $500. Each day on which a
violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 466-12 EDGEWATER CODE § 466-13
1:880
Chapter 479
FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dogs — See Ch. 129, Art. I.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 386.
Vending machines — See Ch. 438, Art. I.
Animals; cat licensing — See Ch. 454.
Barbershops, beauty parlors, tanning salons
and nail salons — See Ch. 460.
Food handling establishments — See Ch. 483,
Art. I.
Food and beverage vending machines — See
Ch. 483, Art. II.
Vehicles used to handle foods — See Ch. 483,
Art. III.
Laundromats and dry cleaners — See Ch. 490.
Massage operators — See Ch. 494.
Pet shops, kennels, shelters and
pounds — See Ch. 512.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 535.
§ 479-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a fee schedule for establishments,
activities and items monitored or administered by or otherwise within the
purview of the Board of Health.
§ 479-2. Period covered by fees.
All the fees required to be paid, or paid under the terms hereof, are
intended to be annual fees, but, when paid, shall cover only the balance
of the calendar year during which the same are so paid or payable, unless
otherwise herein provided.
§ 479-3. Schedule of fees. [Amended 6-26-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-1;
9-20-2010 by Ord. No. 1439-2010; 6-25-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-2;
5-28-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-7; 10-27-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-1];
3-27-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-1; 3-26-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-1]
The annual fees for licenses referred to in this Code, as issued by the Health
Department, are as follows:
Type Fee
Barbershop $50
Beauty salon $50
Body art establishment $750
Cat license $10
Dog license $10
Dog license (nonspayed or nonneutered) $13
Dry cleaners $50
§ 466-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 479-3
1:881
Type Fee
Food and beverage vending machines $20
Laundromat $100
Massage establishment $750
Mobile food vendor $100
Nail salons $50
Nursery school (nonpublic) $100
Pet shop $100
Plan review $200
Spa/whirlpool $200
Swimming pool $200
Tanning salon $50
Category Fee
Food establishments
Bakery
Meat market
Poultry market
Fish market
Fruit market
Vegetable market
Delicatessen
Grocery store
Public food market (or similar places in
which food or drink is prepared for sale
or for service on the premises or
elsewhere and any other establishment
or operation where food is served,
handled, sold or provided for the public
in either packaged or unpackaged,
prepared or unprepared form, except
for those establishments which are
enumerated under the category
"Restaurants")
$125 for each establishment
with less than 5 employees;
$150, for each establishment
with less than 10 but more
than 4 employees;
$175, for each establishment
with less than 20 but more
than 9 employees;
$300 for each establishment
with less than 25 but more
than 19 employees;
$350 for each establishment
with 25 or more employees;
§ 479-3 EDGEWATER CODE § 479-3
1:882
Category Fee
Restaurants
Restaurant
Coffee shop
Short order cafe
Luncheonettes
Taverns
Sandwich stands
Catering kitchens
Commissaries
$125 for each premises or
establishment with less than
25 persons;
$175 for each premises or
establishment with more than
24 but less than 50 persons;
$300 for each premises or
establishment with capacity
of 50 or more persons
Farmers' market $125
Temporary event $50
Vital statistics
Marriage license $3
Marriage certificate (certified copy,
each)
$15
Birth certificate (certified copy, each) $15
Death certificate (certified copy, each) $15
Corrections to marriage, birth or death
certificates
$20
Certifications of marriage, birth or
death certificates
$10
Removal, burial or transit permits $1
Photocopies, each $0.75
Nonresident adult vaccination program
Per vaccination for single-dose
injections (excluding flu)
$10
Additional vaccination for multidose
vaccines requiring a series of injections
$5
Per vaccination for single-dose
intranasal or oral vaccine
$10
Per vaccination for each additional
multi-dose intranasal or oral dose
vaccine
$5
Per mantoux test for tuberculosis $5
§ 479-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 479-4
1:883
§ 479-4. Late fees. [Added 6-26-2004 by Ord. No. 2006-1]
All licenses listed in § 479-3 must be renewed by January 31 of the licensing
year. For any license received after the 31st of January, a ten-dollar late fee
will be imposed for each month the license renewal is not received.
Chapter 483
FOOD AND BEVERAGE HANDLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Establishment of Board of Health — See Ch.
6, Art. I.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 121.
Health Officer — See Ch. 507, Art. I.
Board of Health penalties — See Ch. 450, Art.
II.
§ 479-4 EDGEWATER CODE § 479-4
1:884
ARTICLE I
Food-Handling Establishments
[Adopted 10-14-1968 by Ord. No. 12 (Ch. 265 of the 1975 Code)]
§ 483-1. Enforcement of state standards. [Amended 11-10-1975 by
Ord. No. 75-2; 9-27-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-1]
The provisions of N.J.A.C. 8:24-1 et seq., Sanitation in Retail Food
Establishments and Food and Beverage Vending Machines, shall be
enforced in the Borough of Edgewater.181
§ 483-2. License and compliance with regulations required.
[Amended 9-27-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-1]
It shall be unlawful for any person or any body corporate to conduct a retail
food establishment, as defined in and governed by N.J.A.C. 8:24-1 et seq.,
without first having procured a license from the Board of Health or without
complying with all of the provisions concerning operation and maintenance
of a retail food establishment as contained in the aforementioned N.J.A.C.
8:24-1 et seq.
§ 483-3. License fees. [Amended 11-10-1975 by Ord. No. 75-2;
1-16-1989; 10-24-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-1]
The fees for licensure of retail food establishments are set forth in § 479-3,
which fees are set on an annual basis.
§ 483-4. Suspension or revocation of license; notice; hearing.
A. Any license issued under the terms and provisions of this article may be
suspended or revoked by the Board of Health for the violation of any
provision of this article or N.J.A.C. 8:24-1 et seq., adopted hereby, or
whenever it shall appear that the business, trade, calling, profession or
occupation of the person, firm or corporation to whom such license was
issued is conducted in a disorderly or improper manner or in violation
of any law of the United States, the State of New Jersey or the County of
Bergen or any ordinance of this municipality, or that the person or
persons conducting the retail food establishment is of an unfit
character to conduct the same, or that the purpose for which the license
was issued is being abused to the detriment of the public or is being
used for a purpose foreign to that for which the license was issued.
B. A license issued under the terms and provisions of this article shall not
be revoked, canceled or suspended until a hearing thereon shall have
been had by the Board of Health. Written notice of the time and place of
such hearing shall be served upon the licensee at least three days prior
to the date set for such hearing. Such notice shall also contain a brief
181. Editor's Note: Former § 265-2, Title of code adopted, and § 265-3, Copies on file, which
immediately followed this section, were deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 483-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 483-4
1:885
§ 483-5. Interpretation of provisions.
No provision of this article shall be applied so as to impose any unlawful
burden on either interstate commerce or any activity of the state or federal
government.
§ 483-6. Expiration of license.
Every license granted or issued pursuant to the terms of this article shall
expire at 12:00 midnight on the 31st of December next succeeding the date
of issue, unless sooner revoked.
§ 483-7. Food handler's course. [Added 12-14-1998 by Ord. No.
98-1]
statement of the grounds to be relied upon for revoking, canceling
or suspending such license. Notice may be given either by personally
delivering it to the one to be notified or by depositing it in the United
States Post Office in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to
such person to be notified at the business address appearing upon the
said license. At the hearing before the Board of Health, the person
aggrieved shall have an opportunity to be heard. Based upon the
evidence presented, the Board may dismiss the complaint or revoke or
suspend the license.
C. If any such license is revoked, neither the holder thereof nor any person
acting for him, directly or indirectly, shall be entitled to another license
to carry on the same business within the municipality unless an
application for such license is first approved by the Board of Health.
A. Food handler's course required. Commencing January 1, 1999, or such
date as may be fixed by the Edgewater Board of Health, each owner,
manager or employee in charge of other employees serving food on
each particular shift shall complete the first available three-hour food
handler's course prior to the Board of Health issuing an annual license
to the retail food establishment. In addition, before a license shall be
issued, the retail food establishment shall pay the appropriate fee in
accordance with this article.
B. If there is no owner, manager or employee in charge of other employees
serving food to others on each particular shift who has satisfactorily
completed the three-hour food handler's course in accordance with this
section, then the retail food establishment shall be issued a summons to
appear before the Edgewater Board of Health to answer to the
violation.
C. Any retail food establishment which receives an unsatisfactory rating
from the appropriate official inspecting the premises shall immediately
cease from serving any food or similar products until the licensee has
received a satisfactory rating from the inspector conducting such
inspections.
§ 483-4 EDGEWATER CODE § 483-7
1:886
§ 483-8. Self-inspections. [Added 10-24-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-1]
D. Any retail food establishment which receives more than two conditional
satisfactory ratings within any one-year period shall have its owner or
manager appear at the next meeting of the Edgewater Board of Health
to show cause why its license shall not be suspended for failing to
operate its premises in accordance with Chapter 24 of the New Jersey
Sanitary Code. The conditional satisfactory shall be posted on the
premises for such time as the Board of Health and/or inspector believes
it is necessary for the preservation of the public health and safety. In
addition, its owner or manager must take and satisfactorily complete
the next available eighteen-hour food manager's certification.
E. In addition to the remedies stated above, the inspector conducting the
inspections shall cause appropriate summons to be issued for the
violation of Chapter 24 of the New Jersey Sanitary Code, the ordinance
of the Borough of Edgewater and applicable statutes of the State of
New Jersey.
F. Violations and penalties. Any person who violates any provision of or
order promulgated under this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be
liable to a penalty as set forth in Chapter 450, Article II, General
Penalty. Each day a particular violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.182
A. All retail food establishments licensed or required to be licensed as
outlined in this article shall be required to conduct biweekly selfinspections
of the establishment on forms designed, approved and
provided by the Board of Health.
B. The owner, highest ranking manager, supervisor, crew chief or
supervisory individual(s) actively involved in the daily operation of the
establishment shall conduct biweekly self-inspections of the
establishment and shall fully complete the self-inspection report as it
pertains to the establishment. Deficiencies noted shall be corrected
immediately.
C. The establishment shall maintain the original copy of each selfinspection
report on the premises for review by the local health
authority for a minimum of one year.
D. Establishments that are licensed as "temporary food establishments"
shall meet all of the aforementioned requirements, with the exception
that the self-inspection shall be conducted and a report completed on a
weekly basis.
E. Violations and penalties. Any person who violates any provision of or
order promulgated under this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be
liable to a penalty as set forth in Chapter 450, Article II, General
182. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 450, General Provisions,
Board of Health, Art. I)
§ 483-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 483-8
1:887
Penalty. Each day a particular violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.183
183. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 450, General Provisions,
Board of Health, Art. I)
§ 483-8 EDGEWATER CODE § 483-8
1:888
ARTICLE II
Vending Machines
[Adopted 10-14-1968 by Ord. No. 13 (Ch. 263 of the 1975 Code)]
§ 483-9. Adoption of code regulations by reference.184
The provisions of N.J.A.C. 8:24-1 et seq., Sanitation in Retail Food
Establishments and Food and Beverage Vending Machines, shall be
enforced in the Borough of Edgewater.185
§ 483-10. Permits and licenses required. [Amended 1-16-1989]
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether as principal or agent, clerk or
employee, either for himself or any other person, or for any body corporate,
or as an officer of any corporation, or otherwise to:
§ 483-11. Fees. [Amended 1-16-1989]
A. Engage in the operation of one or more machines or devices offered for
public use which, upon insertion of a coin, coins or tokens or by other
means dispensing unit servings of food or beverages, either in bulk or
package, without the necessity of replenishing the devices between
each vending operation, without first having applied to and procured a
permit from the Board of Health of Borough of Edgewater so to do or
without complying with any and all of the provisions of N.J.A.C. 8:24-1
et seq., as adopted or amended.186
B. Maintain or permit to be maintained on or in any location in the
Borough of Edgewater, including a boat or vessel of any kind, one or
more machines or devices offered for public use which, upon insertion
of a coin, coins or tokens, or by other means dispenses unit servings of
food or beverages, either in bulk or package, without the necessity of
replenishing the devices between each vending operation, without first
having applied for and procured a license for each such machine or
device from the Board of Health of this municipality or without
complying with any and all of the provisions of N.J.A.C. 8:24-1 et seq., as
adopted or amended.
A. The annual fees for permits and licenses as required by § 483-10 are
hereby fixed as provided in Chapter 479, Fees.187
B. All permits and licenses issued under authority of this article shall
expire on the 31st day of December each year.
184. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 450, General Provisions,
Board of Health, Art. I)
185. Editor's Note: Former § 263-2, Title of code adopted, and § 263-3, Copies on file, which
immediately followed this section, were deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I).
186. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
187. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 450, General Provisions,
Board of Health, Art. I)
§ 483-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 483-11
1:889
§ 483-12. Application; issuance.
§ 483-13. Suspension, revocation or reinstatement.
Permits and licenses issued under authority of this article may be
suspended, revoked or reinstated by the Board of Health of this municipality
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.A.C. 8:24-1 et seq., as adopted or amended
by said Board of Health.
§ 483-14. Interstate commerce.
No provision of this article shall be applied so as to impose any unlawful
burden on either interstate commerce or any activity of the state or federal
government.
§ 483-15. Violations and penalties.188
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as set forth in Chapter 450,
Article II, General Penalty.
C. Permit and license fees shall be paid to the Board of Health.
A. Application for and issuance of the permits and licenses referred to in
§ 483-10 shall be made in conformity with the provisions of N.J.A.C.
8:24-1 et seq., as adopted or amended by the Board of Health of this
municipality. Such permits and licenses are not transferable.
B. No license shall be issued unless the applicant first obtains from the
Board of Health its written certification that the applicant has complied
with all the rules and regulations established by the Board with respect
to the operation of such a machine.
188. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 450, General Provisions,
Board of Health, Art. I)
§ 483-11 EDGEWATER CODE § 483-15
1:890
ARTICLE III
Vehicles Used to Handle Food
[Adopted 6-8-1970 by Ord. No. 70-1; amended in its entirety
3-27-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-1 (Ch. 302 of the 1975 Code).
Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 483-16. License and placard required.
Every motor vehicle licensed by the Board of Health of the Borough of
Edgewater to handle food which solicits and makes retail sales from said
motor vehicle shall obtain a license and placard from the Secretary of the
Board of Health.
§ 483-17. Application for license and placard; fee.189
A person, corporation or organization shall apply for said license and
placard with the Secretary of the Board of Health upon forms approved by
the Board of Health. The fee for said license and placard shall be as set forth
for mobile food vendors in § 479-3.
§ 483-18. Issuance and renewal of license and placard.
The placard shall be issued within 30 days after passage of this article and
thereafter shall be renewed at the same time, and shall run for the same
period as does the license to handle food which covers the same motor
vehicle.
§ 483-19. Display of placard.
The placard issued by the Secretary of the Board of Health shall be
permanently and prominently exhibited on the motor vehicle licensed to
handle food which solicits and makes retail sales from said motor vehicle in
such a manner that it may be observed by a person outside the vehicle at all
times the vehicle is storing, holding, transporting, loading, unloading or in
any way involved with the handling of food.
§ 483-20. Separate placard and license required for each vehicle.
A placard shall be valid only for the vehicle for which it is issued, and if
any person, corporation or organization has more than one motor vehicle
licensed to handle food in the Borough of Edgewater, that person,
corporation or organization shall obtain a separate placard and license for
each vehicle which shall handle food in the Borough of Edgewater.
§ 483-21. Transfer and replacement of placard; fee.
Placards are not transferable unless the motor vehicle for which the placard
is issued is no longer in service. If the motor vehicle for which the placard is
189. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 450, General Provisions,
Board of Health Art. I).
§ 483-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 483-21
1:891
issued is no longer in the service of the licensee, upon proof to the Secretary
of the Board of Health that said placard has been destroyed or returned to
the Secretary of the Board of Health, the Secretary shall issue a placard to
be used solely on the vehicle that is to replace the vehicle that is no longer
in service to the licensee. There shall be a charge of $1 for a replacement
placard.
§ 483-22. Temporary vehicles; notification.
If any motor vehicle to which a placard is issued is temporarily out of
service, another motor vehicle may be utilized by the licensee, provided that
the Secretary of the Board of Health is notified on the first business day
of the fact that the motor vehicle to which the placard was issued is out
of service, the reason for its being out of service and the make and license
number of the temporary vehicle. A temporary vehicle shall not be used for
more than 20 days without obtaining a placard for said replacement vehicle.
§ 483-23. Placard required in addition to food handling license.
The obtaining of a placard does not license a motor vehicle to handle food
and is to be issued at the same time or after the time a license to handle
food is obtained.
§ 483-24. Violations and penalties. [Added 9-27-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-1]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as set forth in Chapter 450,
Article II, General Penalty.
§ 483-21 EDGEWATER CODE § 483-24
1:892
ARTICLE IV
Farmers' Market
[Adopted 3-26-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-2]
§ 483-25. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person and/or vendor to solicit and make sales
from a stand without first having procured a license from the Board of
Health.
§ 483-26. Application for license; fee.
A person, corporation or organization shall apply for said license with the
Secretary of the Board of Health upon forms approved and provided by the
Board of Health. The fee for said license shall be as set forth in § 479-3,
which fees are set on an annual basis.
§ 483-27. Application; issuance of license.
Application for and issuance of the permits and licenses referred to in
§ 483-25 shall be made in conformity with the provisions of N.J.A.C. 8:24-1
et seq., as adopted or amended by the Board of Health of the Borough of
Edgewater. Such permits and licenses are not transferable.
§ 483-28. Display of license.
The license issued by the Secretary of the Board of Health shall be
permanently and prominently exhibited.
§ 483-29. Suspension, revocation or reinstatement.
Licenses issued under authority of this article may be suspended, revoked
or reinstated by the Board of Health of the Borough of Edgewater pursuant
to the provisions of N.J.A.C. 8:24-1 et seq., as adopted or amended by the
Board of Health.
§ 483-30. Violation and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as set forth in Chapter 450,
Article II, General Penalty.
§ 483-31. Severability.
If any provision or portion of this article is held to be unconstitutional,
preempted by federal or state law, or otherwise invalid by any court of
competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions of the article shall not be
invalidated and shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 483-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 483-32
1:893
§ 483-32. Effective date.
This article shall take effect immediately upon final passage and publication
as provided by law.
§ 483-33. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent with the
provisions of this article are hereby repealed to the extent of such
inconsistency.
§ 483-32 EDGEWATER CODE § 483-33
1:894
ARTICLE V
Temporary Food Event
[Adopted 3-26-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-2]
§ 483-34. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person and/or vendor to solicit and make sales
from a stand or booth without first having procured a license from the Board
of Health.
§ 483-35. Application for license; fee.
A person, corporation or organization shall apply for said license with the
Secretary of the Board of Health upon forms approved by the Board of
Health. The fee for said license shall be as set forth in § 479-3, which fees
are set on an annual basis.
§ 483-36. Application; issuance of license.
Application for and issuance of the permits and licenses referred to in
§ 483-31 shall be made in conformity with the provisions of N.J.A.C. 8:24-1
et seq., as adopted or amended by the Board of Health of the Borough of
Edgewater. Such permits and licenses are not transferable.
§ 483-37. Display of license.
The license issued by the Secretary of the Board of Health shall be
permanently and prominently exhibited.
§ 483-38. Violation and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as set forth in Chapter 450,
Article II, General Penalty.
§ 483-39. Severability.
If any provision or portion of this article is held to be unconstitutional,
preempted by federal or state law, or otherwise invalid by any court of
competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions of the article shall not be
invalidated and shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 483-40. Effective date.
This article shall take effect immediately upon final passage and publication
as provided by law.
§ 483-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 483-41
1:895
§ 483-41. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent with the
provisions of this article are hereby repealed to the extent of such
inconsistency.
§ 483-41 EDGEWATER CODE § 483-41
1:896
Chapter 490
LAUNDROMATS AND DRY CLEANERS
§ 490-1. Sanitation.
The owner, tenant, manager and all other persons maintaining, operating,
controlling or otherwise responsible for laundries, laundromats,
launderettes, laundermats and dry cleaners shall, at all times, keep and
maintain each such establishment in a clean and sanitary condition.
Laundries, laundromats, launderettes, laundermats and dry cleaners shall
be open to inspection at any time by the Board of Health, its officers or any
employee of the Board.
§ 490-2. Permit fee.190
The fee for a permit for every laundry, laundromat, launderette, laundermat
and dry cleaner establishment shall be as set forth in § 479-3.
§ 490-3. Violations and penalties.191
Violations of this chapter are punishable as set forth in Chapter 450, Article
II, General Penalty.
Chapter 494
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 494-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
MASSAGE — The administration by any person or method of exerting or
applying pressure, friction, moisture, heat or cold to the human body, or the
rubbing, stroking, kneading, pounding or tapping of the human body by any
physical or mechanical means for any form of consideration.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment or operation wherein
a massage is administered or is permitted to be administered, when such
massage is administered for any form of consideration.192
190. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 450, General Provisions,
Board of Health, Art. I)
191. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 450, General Provisions, Board
of Health, Art. I)
192. Editor's Note: The former definition of "masseuse," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 12-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1486-2012.
§ 483-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 494-2
1:897
§ 494-2. License required for establishments.
No person, firm or corporation shall operate any establishment or utilize
any premises in the Borough of Edgewater in the County of Bergen as or
for a massage establishment unless or until there first has been obtained a
license for such establishment or premises from the Board of Health of the
Borough of Edgewater in accordance with the terms and provisions of this
chapter.
§ 494-3. (Reserved)193
§ 494-4. Application requirements. [Amended 12-17-2012 by Ord.
No. 1486-2012]
Each and every applicant for a license to be used for a massage
establishment shall set forth the following information in writing on forms
provided by the Board of Health Secretary:
§ 494-5. Fees. [Amended 12-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1486-2012]
The applicant for a license for a massage establishment or premises shall
pay an annual license fee of $750, which license fee shall become due on
the first of January in each year.
§ 494-6. Issuance of establishment license; exceptions. [Amended
12-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1486-2012]
The Board of Health shall approve the issuance of a massage establishment
license if all requirements for massage establishment described in this
chapter are met, unless it is found that the operation as proposed by the
applicant, if permitted, would not have complied with all applicable laws,
including, but not limited to, the Building, Health, Housing, Zoning and Fire
Codes of the Borough of Edgewater.
§ 494-7. (Reserved)194
§ 494-8. Suspension or revocation of establishment license.
A. The name and residence address of the applicant and all former
addresses for a period of three years prior to making the application.
B. The address of the establishment or premises to be used in the massage
business and a physical description of the property and facilities if the
applicant desires a license for said establishment or premises.
C. Proof of receipt of a license as a massage and bodywork therapy
business/employer from the State of New Jersey.
193. Editor's Note: Former § 494-3, License required for masseuses, was repealed 12-17-2012
by Ord. No. 1486-2012.
194. Editor's Note: Former § 494-7, Issuance of masseuse license; exceptions, was repealed
12-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1486-2012.
§ 494-2 EDGEWATER CODE § 494-8
1:898
§ 494-9. (Reserved)195
§ 494-10. (Reserved)196
§ 494-11. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to massage or physical therapy
treatments given:
§ 494-12. Signs.
A recognizable and legible sign shall be posted at the main entrance to any
building or to the portion of a building used as a massage establishment
identifying the premises as a massage establishment, and recognizable and
legible signs shall be posted in all exits identifying each such exit. All such
signs shall be posted in accordance with all existing municipal ordinances.
§ 494-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the penalties provided by Chapter 1, Article II,
§ 1-15, entitled "Violations and penalties," of the Code of the Borough of
Edgewater.
A. Any license issued for a massage establishment may be revoked or
suspended by the Board of Health, after a public hearing before the
Board of Health, where it is found that any of the provisions of this
chapter is violated. [Amended 12-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1486-2012]
B. The Board of Health, before revoking or suspending any license, shall
give the licensee at least 10 days' written notice of the charges against
the licensee and the opportunity for a public hearing before the Board
of Health, at which time the licensee may present evidence bearing
upon the question. In such cases, the charges shall be specific and in
writing.
A. In the office of a licensed physician, chiropractor or physical therapist.
B. In a regularly established medical center, hospital or sanatorium having
a staff which includes licensed physicians, chiropractors and/or
physical therapists.
C. By a licensed physician, chiropractor or physical therapist in the
residence of his patient.
D. By an establishment or person having a certificate of certification
issued in accordance with N.J.S.A. 45: 11-53 et seq.
195. Editor's Note: Former § 494-9, Requirements for operator's license, was repealed
12-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1486-2012.
196. Editor's Note: Former § 494-10, Requirements for premises license, was repealed
12-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1486-2012.
§ 494-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 494-13
1:899
Chapter 503
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Establishment of Board of Health — See Ch.
6, Art. I.
Dogs — See Ch. 129, Art. I.
Dangerous buildings — See Ch. 147.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 204.
Minibikes and go-carts — See Ch. 264.
Noise — See Ch. 271.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 305.
Soil removal — See Ch. 362.
Garbage receptacles — See Ch. 368, Art. I.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 427.
Nautical vessels — See Ch. 444, Art. I.
Board of Health penalties — See Ch. 450, Art.
II.
Fowl — See Ch. 454, Art. I.
Heating of buildings — See Ch. 466.
Maintenance of hot water temperature — See
Ch. 523, Art. I.
Solid waste disposal — See Ch. 529.
§ 503-1. Adoption of Code by reference.
A code defining and prohibiting certain matters, things, conditions or acts
and each of them as a nuisance; prohibiting certain noises or sounds;
prohibiting lease or rental of certain buildings; prohibiting spitting in or
upon public buildings, conveyances or sidewalks; authorizing the inspection
of premises by an enforcing official; providing for the removal or abatement
of certain nuisances and recovery of expenses incurred by the Board of
Health in removing or abating such nuisances; and prescribing penalties for
violations is hereby established and adopted pursuant to Chapter 188, Laws
of 1950 (N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 et seq., except Section 3 thereof relating to the
proper heating of apartments. A copy of said code is annexed hereto and
made apart hereof without the inclusion of the text thereof herein.
§ 503-2. Title of code adopted.
The said code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey
(1953)."
§ 503-3. Copies on file.
Three copies of the said "Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey
(1953)" were placed on file in the office of the Secretary of the Board of
Health upon the introduction of this chapter and will remain on file there
for the use and examination of the public.
§ 494-13 EDGEWATER CODE § 503-4
1:900
§ 503-4. Violations and penalties.197
Violations of this chapter shall be punishable as set forth in Chapter 450,
Article II, General Penalty.
Chapter 507
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Establishment of Board of Health — See Ch.
6, Art. I.
197. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 450, General Provisions, Board
of Health, Art. I)
§ 503-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 503-4
1:901

ARTICLE I
Health Officer
[Adopted 4-17-1953 by Ord. No. 6; amended in its entirety
11-10-1975 by Ord. No. 75-2 (Ch. 271 of the 1975 Code)]
§ 507-1. Position created.198
The Board of Health of the Borough of Edgewater hereby creates the
position or office of Health Officer in and for the Borough of Edgewater.
Notwithstanding anything in this article to the contrary, the Health Officer
for the Borough of Edgewater may be an employee of the County of Bergen
with whom the Board of Health has contracted to perform the services
specified in this article.
§ 507-2. Designation as Board of Health enforcement officer.
The Health Officer, during the term of his appointment and subject to the
authority of the local Board of Health, shall be the Board of Health's general
agent for the enforcement of the Board of Health ordinances, rules and
regulations and the sanitary laws of the State of New Jersey within the
Borough of Edgewater.
§ 507-3. Term of office.
The term of office of such Health Officer shall be one year, commencing
January 1 in each year, until his successor is duly appointed and qualified.
§ 507-4. Compensation.
The compensation of the Health Officer shall be as may be determined from
time to time by the Board of Health.199
§ 507-5. Qualifications; license required.
No person shall be appointed as Health Officer unless he holds a proper
license which qualifies him for such a position or office.
198. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 450, General Provisions,
Board of Health, Art. I).
199. Editor's Note: A section establishing the salary of the Plumbing Inspector, was repealed
11-10-1975 by Ord. No. 75-2.
§ 507-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 507-5
1:903

ARTICLE II
Board of Health Secretary
[Adopted 3-8-1955 by Ord. No. 8 (Ch. 290 of the 1975 Code)]
§ 507-6. Position created.
The Board of Health hereby creates the position or office of Secretary of the
Board of Health in and for the Borough of Edgewater.
§ 507-7. Duties.
The Secretary shall attend all meetings of the Board of Health and shall
perform such duties that are assigned to him by the Board of Health.
§ 507-8. Term of office.
The term of office of such Secretary shall be one year, commencing January
1 in each year, until his successor is duly appointed and qualified.
§ 507-9. Compensation. [Amended 11-10-1975 by Ord. No. 75-2]
The compensation of the Secretary of the Board of Health shall be as may
be determined from time to time by the Board of Health.
§ 507-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 507-9
1:905

ARTICLE III
Nurse; Assistant Health Nurse
[Adopted 11-10-1975 by Ord. No. 75-4 (Ch. 280 of the 1975 Code)]
§ 507-10. Position created.
The Board of Health hereby creates the position or office of Board of Health
Nurse in and for the Borough of Edgewater.
§ 507-11. Duties.
The Board of Health Nurse, during the term of her appointment, is subject
to the authority of the local Board of Health, shall perform the duties which
the Board of Health requires from time to time and shall be responsible for
the general duties of a health nurse.
§ 507-12. Term of office.
The term of office of said Nurse shall be one year, commencing January 1 in
each year, until a successor is duly appointed and qualified.
§ 507-13. Compensation.
The compensation of the Board of Health Nurse shall be as may be
determined from time to time by the Board of Health.
§ 507-14. Qualifications; license required.
No person shall be appointed as Board of Health Nurse unless that person
holds a proper certification as a licensed and professional nurse in the State
of New Jersey.
§ 507-15. Position of Assistant Nurse created. [Added 4-12-1993 by
Ord. No. 93-3]
The Borough of Edgewater hereby creates the position or office of Assistant
Board of Health Nurse in and for the Borough of Edgewater.
§ 507-16. Duties of Assistant Nurse. [Added 4-12-1993 by Ord. No.
93-3]
The Assistant Nurse shall perform such duties as determined by the Board
of Health and shall be responsible for general nursing duties and functions.
§ 507-17. Compensation of Assistant Nurse. [Added 4-12-1993 by
Ord. No. 93-3]
The compensation of the Assistant Board of Health Nurse shall be as
determined in the Salary Ordinance of the Borough of Edgewater.200
200. Editor's Note: The Salary Ordinance is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 507-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 507-18
1:907
§ 507-18. Qualifications of Assistant Nurse. [Added 4-12-1993 by
Ord. No. 93-3]
No person shall be appointed as Assistant Board of Health Nurse unless that
person holds a proper certificate as a licensed and professional nurse in the
State of New Jersey.
§ 507-18 EDGEWATER CODE § 507-18
1:908
Chapter 512
PET SHOPS, KENNELS, SHELTERS AND POUNDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dogs — See Ch. 129, Art. I.
Board of Health penalties — See Ch. 450, Art.
II.
Animals — See Ch. 454, Art. I..
Cat licensing — See Ch. 454, Art. II..
§ 512-1. Compliance.
Kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds shall comply with the provisions of
this chapter in the maintenance and care of all animals subject to rabies and
other diseases of dogs, as well as rules, regulations, ordinances enacted by
the appropriate agency or governing body of the municipality wherein they
are located. The term "animal" used in these regulations means any animal
subject to rabies and other diseases of dogs.
§ 512-2. Definitions.201
The following words and terms, as used in this chapter, shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
ADULT DOG OR CAT — A dog or cat over the age of seven months or which
possesses a set of permanent teeth.
ANIMAL — Any animal subject to rabies or other diseases of dogs.
BOARDING — The act of providing food and shelter to dogs, regardless of
whether it involves an overnight stay, for a fee, at the request of the owner
or caretaker.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Health and Senior Services.
DISINFECTION — Any process, chemical or physical, by means of which
pathogenic agents or disease-producing microbes are destroyed, but not
necessarily resistant bacterial spores.
EUTHANASIA — The act of inducing painless death.
FACILITY — Any kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound subject to N.J.S.A.
4:19-15.1 et seq., and this chapter.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that does not permit the absorption
of fluids. Such surfaces are those that can be thoroughly and repeatedly
cleaned and disinfected, which will not retain odors, and from which fluids
bead up and run off or can be removed without being absorbed into the
surface material.
201. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (See Ch. 450, General Provisions, Board
of Health, Art. I).
§ 507-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 512-2
1:909
INFECTIOUS AND ZOONOTIC DISEASE PROGRAM or IZDP — The
Infectious and Zoonotic Disease Program of the Communicable Disease
Service of the Division of Epidemiology, Environmental and Occupational
Health in the Public Health Protection and Emergency Preparedness
Branch of the Department of Health and Senior Services. The mailing
address of the IZDP is P.O. Box 369, Trenton, NJ 08625-0369.
KENNEL — Any establishment wherein or whereupon the business of
boarding or selling dogs or breeding dogs for sale is carried on, except a pet
shop.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a dog, means every person
having a right of property in that dog and every person who has that dog
in his or her keeping, and when applied to the proprietorship of any other
animal, including, but not limited to, a cat, means every person having a
right of property in that animal and every person who has that animal in his
or her keeping.
PET SHOP — Any place of business which is not part of a kennel, wherein
animals, including, but not limited to, dogs, cats, birds, fish, reptiles,
rabbits, hamsters or gerbils, are kept or displayed chiefly for the purpose of
sale to individuals for personal appreciation and companionship rather than
for business or research purposes.
POTABLE WATER — Water suitable for human consumption.
POUND — Any establishment for the confinement of dogs or other animals
seized either under the provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.16 or otherwise.
PRIMARY ENCLOSURE — Any structure used to restrict an animal or
animals to a limited amount of space, such as a room, pen, run, cage or
compartment.
SHELTER — Any establishment where dogs or other animals are received,
housed and distributed.
§ 512-3. Facilities: general.
A. Structural strength. Animal facilities shall be structurally sound and
shall be maintained in good repair to protect the animals from injury, to
contain the animals and to restrict the entrance of other animals; and
location, construction, arrangement and operation shall not constitute a
nuisance.
B. Water and electric power. Reliable and adequate electric power, if
required to comply with other provisions of this chapter, and adequate
potable water shall be available.
C. Storage. Supplies of food and bedding shall be stored in facilities which
adequately protect such supplies against infestation or contamination
by vermin. Refrigeration shall be provided for supplies of perishable
foods.
§ 512-2 EDGEWATER CODE § 512-3
1:910
§ 512-4. Indoor facilities.
D. Waste disposal. Provision shall be made for the removal and disposal of
animal and food wastes, bedding, dead animals and debris. Disposal
facilities shall be so provided and operated as to minimize vermin
infestation, odors and disease hazards.
E. Washrooms and sinks. Facilities, such as washrooms, basins or sinks,
shall be provided to maintain cleanliness among animal caretakers.
F. Housekeeping. Premises (buildings and grounds) shall be kept clean
and in good repair in order to protect the animals from injury and to
facilitate the prescribed husbandry practices set forth in this chapter.
Premises shall remain free of accumulations of trash. Insects,
ectoparasites and avian and mammalian pests shall be controlled
effectively.
A. General. Indoor animal facilities shall be provided for all pet shops,
shelters and pounds. Kennels must also have indoor facilities except for
animals which are acclimated.
B. Heating. Indoor animal housing facilities shall be sufficiently heated
when necessary to protect the animals from cold and to provide for
their health and comfort. In the case of dogs or cats, the ambient
temperature shall not be allowed to fall below 50° F. unless acclimated
to lower temperatures.
C. Ventilation. Indoor housing facilities for animals shall be adequately
ventilated to provide for the health and comfort of the animals at all
times. Such facilities shall be provided with fresh air, either by means of
windows, doors, vents or air conditioning, and shall be ventilated so as
to minimize drafts, odors and moisture condensation. Auxiliary
ventilation, such as exhaust fans and vents or air conditioning, shall be
provided when the ambient temperature is 85° F. or higher.
D. Lighting. Indoor animal housing facilities shall have ample light, by
natural or artificial means, or both, of good quality and well distributed.
Such lighting shall provide uniformly distributed illumination of
sufficient light intensity to permit routine inspection and cleaning
during the entire working period.
E. Interior surfaces. The interior surfaces of indoor housing facilities shall
be constructed and maintained so that they are substantially
impervious to moisture and may be readily cleaned.
F. Drainage. A suitable method shall be provided to drain water from
indoor housing facilities if need is indicated. Drains, when used, shall
be properly constructed and kept in good repair to avoid foul odors
therefrom. Closed drainage systems, when used, shall be equipped with
traps and so installed as to prevent any backup of sewage onto the floor
of the room.
§ 512-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 512-5
1:911
§ 512-5. Outdoor facilities.
§ 512-6. Primary enclosures.
A. Shelter from sunlight. When sunlight is likely to cause overheating or
discomfort, sufficient shade shall be provided to allow animals kept
outdoors to protect themselves from the direct rays of the sun.
B. Shelter from rain or snow. Animals kept outdoors shall be provided with
access to shelter to allow them to remain dry during rain or snow.
C. Shelter from cold weather. Shelter shall be provided for animals kept
outdoors when the atmospheric temperature falls below 50° F.
Sufficient clean bedding material or other means of protection from the
weather elements shall be provided when the ambient temperature falls
below that temperature to which an animal is acclimated.
D. Drainage. A suitable method shall be provided to drain surface water
rapidly.
A. Definition. A "primary enclosure" is any structure used to restrict an
animal or animals to a limited amount of space, such as a room, pen,
run, cage or compartment.
B. Primary enclosure structure. All enclosures shall be constructed and
maintained in such form and manner as to:
(1) Protect animals from injury.
(2) Keep predators out.
(3) Enable animals to remain dry and clean.
(4) Provide sufficient space for each animal to turn about freely and to
stand, sit and lie in a comfortable, normal position with a minimum
footage of floor space equal to the mathematical square of the sum
of the length of the animal in inches, as measured from the tip of
the nose to the base of the tail, plus six inches, expressed in square
feet.
C. Removal of excreta. Excreta shall be removed from primary enclosure
as often as necessary to prevent contamination of the animals
contained therein and to reduce disease hazards and odors. When a
hosing or flushing method is used for cleaning, any animal contained
therein shall be removed from such enclosure during the cleaning
process, and adequate measures shall be taken to protect the animals in
other such enclosures from being contaminated with water and other
wastes.
D. Cleaning of primary enclosures. Primary enclosures for animals shall be
physically cleaned often enough to prevent an accumulation of debris or
excreta and to reduce to a practical minimum agents injurious to the
health of animals or humans.
§ 512-5 EDGEWATER CODE § 512-6
1:912
§ 512-7. Feeding and watering.
§ 512-8. Disease control.
E. Classification and separation by species. Animals housed in the same
primary enclosure shall be maintained in compatible groups, with the
following additional restrictions:
(1) Females in season (estrus) shall not be housed in the same primary
enclosure with males, except for breeding purposes, unless
otherwise requested by the owner.
(2) Any animal exhibiting a vicious disposition shall be housed
individually in a primary enclosure.
(3) Immature animals shall not be housed in the same primary
enclosure with adults other than their mothers except when
permanently maintained in breeding colonies.
(4) Each animal under quarantine or treatment for a communicable
disease shall be separated from other animals in order to minimize
dissemination of such disease.
A. Frequency of feeding. Animals shall be fed at least once each day
except as otherwise might be required to provide adequate care. The
food shall be free from contamination, wholesome, palatable and of
sufficient quantity and nutritive value to meet the normal daily
requirements for the condition and size of the animal. Immature
animals shall be fed in accordance with generally accepted procedures.
B. Food receptacles. Containers of food shall be accessible to animals and
shall be located so as to minimize contamination by excreta. Feeding
pans shall be durable and kept clean. Disposable food receptacles may
be used but must be discarded after each feeding. Self feeders may be
used for the feeding of dry food and they shall be cleaned regularly to
prevent molding, deterioration or caking of feed.
C. Watering. If potable water is not accessible to the animals at all times,
potable liquids or potable water shall be offered to animals at least
twice daily, except as might otherwise be required to provide adequate
care. Receptacles for such purposes shall be kept clean at all times.
A. Veterinary care. Disease control and adequate health care shall be
established and maintained under the supervision and assistance of a
doctor of veterinary medicine.
B. Observation. Each animal shall be observed daily by the animal
caretaker in charge or by someone under his direct supervision. Sick,
diseased, injured, lame or blind animals shall be provided with
veterinary care or humanely disposed of unless such action is
inconsistent with the purposes for which such animal was obtained and
is being held; provided, however, that the provision shall not affect
§ 512-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 512-8
1:913
§ 512-9. Holding and reclaiming of animals.
compliance with N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.16 which requires the holding for
seven days of all stray dogs.
C. Rabies suspects. Any person operating or employed at a kennel, pet
shop, shelter or pound who observes an animal which he suspects of
being rabid shall at once notify, by telephone or telegraph, the
executive officer of the local Board of Health or the State Department of
Health and Senior Services and segregate such animal for a period of
10 days unless examined and released by written statement of a
veterinarian.
A. Protection of the public from rabies infection.
(1) Impounded animals must be kept alive for seven days to give
opportunity for rabies disease surveillance and opportunity for the
owner to reclaim. See § 512-9A(2).202
(2) Animals having bitten humans must be kept alive and observed for
10 days. The bat is the exception to the rule regarding ten-day
confinement of biting animals. Bats may live more than 10 days
after the virus is present in saliva. A ten-day confinement period
may give a false impression that the bat could not have transmitted
rabies at the time of the bite. The biting bat should be delivered to
the State Department of Health and Senior Services laboratory in a
jar or similar container.
(3) Animals brought in for elective destruction may not be killed until
the person in charge of the facility has determined the animal is not
a stray and that the person requesting the animal's destruction is
its owner or a representative of the owner and the animal has not
bitten a human being within 10 days or evidenced other aggressive
tendencies compatible with symptoms suspicious of rabies.
(4) The person in charge of the facility shall keep a record of evidence
submitted in support of Subsection A(3) for a period of one year.
B. Opportunity to reclaim animals. Each shelter or pound shall post a sign
establishing specific hours during which persons will be permitted to
enter the facility to look at animals and records for the purpose of
seeking animals that are missing.
(1) The sign must be clearly visible from the outside.
(2) The hours must be at least one hour each business day.
(3) The person who is searching for a missing animal shall identify
himself by presenting a driver's license or other acceptable
identification document.
202. Editor's Note: See also N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.16.
§ 512-8 EDGEWATER CODE § 512-9
1:914
§ 512-10. Transportation.
(4) The person who is searching for a missing animal shall furnish to
the shelter or pound a written description of the missing animal
and a license for any dog which has attained the age of seven
months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth or a bill of sale
or other proof of ownership of a younger dog or other animal.
(5) The person who is searching for a missing animal shall abide by all
reasonable security measures required by the shelter or pound to
prevent the spread of disease.
A. General. Vehicles used in transporting animals shall be mechanically
sound and equipped to prevent hazard to the health of all animals being
transported.
B. Cargo space. The animal cargo space of all vehicles shall be so
constructed and maintained as to prevent the ingress of exhaust from
the vehicle's engine.
C. Vehicle; primary enclosure.
(1) Each animal in the vehicle has access to sufficient fresh air for
normal breathing.
(2) The openings of such enclosures are easily accessible at all times
for emergency removal of the animals.
(3) The animals are afforded adequate protection from the elements.
The temperatures within such enclosures shall not be allowed to
exceed 85° F. or fall below 45° F. for a period of more than four
hours; provided, however, that at no time may an animal be
transported longer than one hour at a temperature of more than
95° F. or less than 35° F.
D. Species and sex separation. Animals transported in the same primary
enclosure shall be maintained in compatible groups, and any animal
exhibiting a vicious disposition shall be transported individually in a
primary enclosure. Further, any female animal shall not be transported
in the same primary enclosure with any male animal unless otherwise
requested by the owner.
E. Primary enclosure size. Primary enclosures used to transport animals
shall be large enough to ensure that each animal contained therein has
sufficient space to turn about freely, stand erect and to lie in a natural
position.
F. Double-decking. Animals shall not be placed in primary enclosures over
other animals in transit unless each enclosure is fitted with a floor of a
material which prevents animal excreta from entering lower
enclosures.
§ 512-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 512-10
1:915
§ 512-11. Records and administration.
G. Sanitation. Primary enclosures used to transport animals shall be
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
H. Veterinary care. It shall be the responsibility of the attendant or driver
to inspect the animals to determine whether they need emergency
veterinary care and, if so, to obtain such care from a doctor of
veterinary medicine at the earliest opportunity.
A. General. Each person in charge of a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound
shall be responsible for compliance with this chapter by those facilities.
B. Records.
(1) There shall be kept at each kennel, pet shop, shelter and pound a
record of all animals received and/or disposed of. Such records
shall state the date each animal was received, description of
animal, license number, breed, age and sex; name and address of
the person from whom acquired; date killed and method, or name
and address of the person to whom sold or otherwise transferred.
These records shall be kept at the premises for 12 months after the
date the animal is killed or removed from the establishment and
shall be available to any agent of the municipal government, the
local Board of Health or the State Department of Health and Senior
Services.
(2) Except as otherwise provided in Subsection B(3) of this subsection,
no kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall, within one year from
the making thereof, destroy or dispose of any books, records,
documents or other papers required to be maintained under this
chapter.
(3) The records required to be maintained under this chapter shall be
held for such period in excess of the one-year period specified in
Subsection B(2) of this subsection as may be required to comply
with any federal, state or local law. When the local Board of Health,
or local regional health department or the State Department of
Health and Senior Services notifies a kennel, pet shop, shelter or
pound in writing that specified records shall be retained pending
completion of an investigation or proceeding, such facility shall
hold such records until their disposition is authorized by the local
or regional agency or the State Department of Health and Senior
Services.
(4) A licensee shall promptly notify the licensing agency of any change
in his name and address or any change in his operations which may
affect his status.
§ 512-10 EDGEWATER CODE § 512-12
1:916
§ 512-12. License fees.203
The fees for licensure of pet shops, kennels, shelters or pounds are hereby
fixed as set forth in § 479-3 of the Code for each such establishment. If the
fee is not payable at the beginning of the calendar year in which the license
is issued, the license shall apply only to the balance of the calendar year
during which the fee is so paid or payable.
§ 512-13. Violations and penalties.204
Violations of this chapter are punishable as set forth in Chapter 450, Article
II, General Penalty.
Chapter 523
RENTAL PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Establishment of Board of Health — See Ch.
6, Art. I.
Certificates, licenses and permits — See Ch.
157.
Heating of buildings — See Ch. 466.
Board of Health penalties — See Ch. 450, Art.
II.
203. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 450, General Provisions,
Board of Health, Art. I)
204. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 450, General Provisions, Board
of Health, Art. I)
§ 512-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 512-13
1:917

ARTICLE I
Furnishing of Hot Water
[Adopted 12-11-1961 (Ch. 306 of the 1975 Code)]
§ 523-1. Maintenance of hot water temperature required.205
Every person or persons, firm or corporation who or which has agreed or
has become bound to furnish hot water to tenants or occupants of buildings
designed to be occupied or occupied by two or more families as residences
in the Borough of Edgewater, in the County of Bergen, shall furnish to such
tenants or occupants, during a twenty-four-hour period daily, an adequate
supply of hot water of a minimum temperature of 110° F. and a maximum
temperature of 160° F.
§ 523-2. Responsibility of owner.
Whenever a dwelling designated to be occupied or occupied by two or more
families as residences is supplied with hot water from a plant or system
operated under the control of the owner, his lessee or his agent, as landlord,
in the absence of an express agreement to the contrary, such owner, his
lessee or agent shall be deemed to have agreed or become bound to furnish
hot water in accordance with the provisions of this article. The presence of
such hot water plant or system in any such dwelling designed to be occupied
or occupied by two or more families as residences shall be prima facie
evidence of such agreement or obligation.
§ 523-3. Violations and penalties.206
Violations of this article are punishable as set forth in Chapter 450, Article
II, General Penalty.
205. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 450, General Provisions,
Board of Health, Art. I)
206. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 450, General Provisions, Board
of Health, Art. I)
§ 523-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 523-3
1:919
Chapter 529
SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Establishment of Board of Health — See Ch.
6, Art. I.
Department of Public Works — See Ch. 87.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 368.
Sewers — See Ch. 347.
Board of Health penalties — See Ch. 450, Art.
II.
§ 523-3 EDGEWATER CODE § 523-3
1:920
ARTICLE I
Solid Waste Code
[Adopted 3-3-1969 by Ord. No. 15 (§§ 294-1 to 294-3 of the 1975
Code)]
§ 529-1. Adoption of Code by reference.
A code regulating the manner in which refuse may be stored, collected
and disposed of; declaring and defining certain conditions as nuisances;
fixing the responsibilities and duties of persons storing, collecting and/or
disposing of refuse; and providing for issuance of permits to collect refuse
is hereby established pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 188, P.L. 1950
(N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 et seq.). A copy of said code is annexed hereto and made
a part hereof without the inclusion of the text thereof herein.
§ 529-2. Title of Code adopted.
The Code established and adopted by this article is described and commonly
known as the "Solid Waste Code of New Jersey (1959)."
§ 529-3. Copies on file.
Three copies of the said "Solid Waste Code of New Jersey (1959)" were
placed in file in the office of the Secretary of the Board of Health upon the
introduction of this article and will remain on file there until final action is
taken on this article, for the use and examination of the public.
§ 529-4. Violations and penalties.207
Violations of this article are punishable as set forth in Chapter 450, Article
II, General Penalty.
207. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 450, General Provisions, Board
of Health, Art. I)
§ 529-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 529-4
1:921

ARTICLE II
Refuse Receptacles
[Adopted 7-7-1969 by Ord. No. 15A; 6-8-1992 by Ord. No. 92-1
(§ 294-4 of the 1975 Code)]
§ 529-5. Placement for collection; acceptable receptacles.
Receptacles for refuse shall be placed upon curbs or sidewalks not earlier
than 8:00 p.m. of the evening prior to the days designated for the pickup of
refuse, except receptacles for refuse which do not contain garbage, as said
term is defined by applicable ordinance, statute or other regulation, which
have been placed upon the curb for removal by the Department of Public
Works in accordance with the schedule of that Department. Receptacles
shall be removed from curbs or sidewalks by 9:00 a.m. on the day the refuse
has been collected. As used herein and hereinafter, plastic bags, paper bags
or cardboard boxes shall not constitute a receptacle, and all receptacles
must have a securely fitted lid.
§ 529-6. Responsibility.
§ 529-7. Violations and penalties.208
Violations of this article are punishable as set forth in Chapter 450, Art. II,
General Penalty.
A. In all residential and/or business buildings having fewer than three
tenants, it shall be the responsibility of the landlord to furnish sufficient
and suitable receptacles reasonably required for the storage of refuse.
It shall also be the responsibility of said landlord to remove said
receptacles in accordance with § 529-5 of this article.
B. In all residential and/or business buildings having three or more
tenants, it shall be the responsibility of the owner of the building to
furnish the aforesaid receptacles. It shall also be the responsibility of
the owner to remove said receptacles in accordance with § 529-5 of this
article.
208. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 450, General Provisions, Board
of Health, Art. I)
§ 529-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 529-7
1:923
Chapter 535
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Establishment of Board of Health — See Ch.
6, Art. I.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 293.
Board of Health penalties — See Ch. 450, Art.
II.
§ 535-1. Enforcement of state standards.209
The provisions of N.J.S.A. 8:26-1.1 et seq. (Public Recreational Bathing) are
enforceable in the Borough of Edgewater.210
§ 535-2. License required.
No person shall locate and construct, alter or operate a swimming pool, hot
tub and spa until licenses therefor shall have been issued by the Board of
Health.
§ 535-3. Fee for operation license and plan review.211
The fee and charges are:
§ 535-4. Expiration and renewal of license.
Licenses issued for the operation of a swimming pool, hot tub and/or spa
shall expire on May 31 of each year, and an application for renewal thereof
shall be submitted, together with the required fee, at least one month prior
to the date the license is to become effective.
A. The annual license fee for operation of a swimming pool, hot tub or spa
shall be as set forth in § 479-3.
B. The fee for the review of plans for the location, construction or
alteration of a swimming pool, hot tub or spa shall be as set forth in
§ 479-3.
C. The fee for the issuance of a license to alter a swimming pool, hot tub or
spa shall be as set forth in § 479-3.
209. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 450, General Provisions,
Board of Health, Art. I)
210. Editor's Note: Former § 298-2, Title of adopted code, and § 298-3, Copies on file, which
immediately followed this section, were deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I).
211. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (See Ch. 450, General Provisions,
Board of Health, Art. I).
§ 529-7 EDGEWATER CODE § 535-5
1:924
§ 535-5. Denial or suspension of license; notice; hearing.212
Licenses required by this chapter and the state standards adopted hereby
may be denied or suspended by the Board of Health for failure to comply
with this chapter and the state standards adopted hereby. The Board of
Health shall afford the person whose license or permit to locate and
construct, alter or operate has been denied or suspended an opportunity
to be heard at a public hearing and, following this, to be informed of the
Board's decision as provided by N.J.S.A. 8:26-1.1 et seq., Public Recreational
Bathing.
§ 535-6. Hazards to public health; corrective action.
§ 535-7. Periodic inspections; fees; violations and penalties.
[Amended 11-27-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-2213]
All swimming pools shall be subject to at least one full and complete
inspection during each licensing year thereof, and additional inspections
may be without advance notice to the licensee to determine continued
compliance with the provisions of this Code. The licensees and operators of
all such swimming pools shall cooperate fully in such periodic inspections.
In the event the operator of a swimming pool fails to comply with this
requirement after reasonable notice, the license may be suspended without
further notice. In the event that a swimming pool does not receive a
satisfactory determination upon such periodic inspection, the inspector
shall return to the swimming pool within a reasonable period of time for a
first reinspection to determine whether compliance has been accomplished.
The fee for such reinspection shall be as set forth in § 479-3. In the event
that, upon such first reinspection, it is determined that compliance has still
not been met, the licensee must show cause upon an informal hearing of
A. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this Code, whenever the Health
Officer finds unsanitary or other conditions in the operation of a
swimming pool, hot tub and/or spa which, in the judgment of the Health
Officer, constitute a substantial hazard to the public health, the Health
Officer may, without warning, notice or hearing, issue a written notice
to the license holder or operator citing such condition, specifying the
corrective action to be taken, and specifying a time period within which
such action shall be taken.
B. If the hazard to public health is determined to be grave and immediate,
such order shall state that the license is immediately suspended, and all
swimming pool, hot tub and/or spa operations are to be immediately
discontinued. Any person to whom such an order is issued shall comply
immediately therewith but, upon written petition to the Health Office,
shall be afforded a hearing pursuant to this Code.
212. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 450, General Provisions,
Board of Health, Art. I)
213. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 450, General Provisions,
Board of Health, Art. I)
§ 535-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-7
1:925
the Board of Health as to why such compliance was not met and as to
why the establishment should not receive a second reinspection; the fee
for such second reinspection, should same be required, shall be as set
forth in § 479-3. If, upon the second reinspection, it is again determined
that compliance has not been met, the licensee shall show cause upon an
informal hearing before the Board of Health as to why the license should not
be revoked. In the event that it is determined that compliance has not been
met, a licensee shall be deemed in violation of the provisions of this chapter
and shall be punishable as set forth in Chapter 450, Article II, General
Penalty.
Appendix
Chapter A550
HISTORICAL DOCUMENTS OF THE BOROUGH
§ 535-7 EDGEWATER CODE § 535-7
1:926
ARTICLE I
Incorporation Proceedings
§ A550-1. Incorporation proceedings of the Borough of Edgewater.
To the Honorable James M. Van Valen
Judge of the Court of Common Pleas of the
County of Bergen:
1. Your Petitioners, whose names are hereunto subscribed, respectfully
set forth that it is proposed and this Petition is presented for the
purpose of incorporating a Borough under the provisions of an Act
entitled, “An Act for the formation of Borough Governments,” approved
April 5, 1878, and the supplements thereto, in the Township of
Ridgefield, in the County of Bergen and within the boundaries
hereinafter set forth.
2. That your Petitioners own in the aggregate at least one-tenth of the
value of the taxable real estate within the limits of the proposed
Borough, as the same appears upon the Assessor’s duplicate of the said
Township of Ridgefield.
3. That the territory within the boundaries hereinafter set forth does not
exceed in area four square miles, and that the population contained
therein does not exceed 5,000.
4. That the name of the proposed Borough shall be “The Mayor and
Council of the Borough of Undercliff.”
5. That the boundaries of said proposed borough are as follows, that is to
say:
BEGINNING at the Hudson River in the southerly line of the Dupont
property and in the Northerly line of property of the Fort Lee Park and
Steamboat Company, thence along said northerly line of said property,
Northwesterly and Westerly to the center of a road, which on
Commissioner’s Map of the property of the Estate of Robert Annett,
deceased, on file in the Bergen County Clerk’s Office, is known as Annett
Avenue, thence along the center of Annett Avenue, Northerly to the center
line of the Old Fort Lee and Hackensack Public Road, being the road
leading from Fort Lee to Bull’s Ferry, thence Southerly along said last
named road to a point opposite the center of a road running Westerly,
therefrom, near the house of Alexis Delafolie or Catherine Delafolie, his
wife, thence to and along the center of said road Westerly to the property
now or late of Elizabeth I. Massa, thence to and along the Northerly line
of said Massa property Westerly to the top of Steep Rocks, or edge of the
Bluff, thence Southerly along the edge of the Bluff to the Boundary line
between Bergen and Hudson Counties, thence Easterly and Southeasterly
along the said County line to the Hudson River, thence Northerly along
Hudson River to the place of beginning.
§ A550-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A550-1
1:927
Your Petitioners therefore pray that you will call a special election to be
held at some convenient place within said proposed Borough according to
the provisions of said act to vote for or against the incorporation of the said
proposed borough to the end and that it may be decided by the votes of
the electors of said proposed borough, whether the said borough shall be
formed.
Dated: September 26, 1894.
E. H. Hinners, W. H. Carlock, Edward Fischer.
Hudson River Chemical and Dye Wood Company, Shadyside, New Jersey;
J. M. Goetchius, V. P.
New York Coal Tar Chemical Company, E. H. Kidder, Jr.
James McNerney, William C. Godstrey, John V. Signell, F. W. Winterburn,
Emily Winterburn, John Winterburn.
STATE OF NEW JERSEY
BERGEN COUNTY
SS:
J. FLETCHER BURDETT, being duly sworn according to law on his oath
saith:
That he is the collector of the Township of Ridgefield, in the County of
Bergen, and has in his possession the Assessor’s duplicate of the said
Township for the year 1894; that the taxable value of real estate in the
limits of said proposed Borough of Undercliff, as the same appears on the
said duplicate, is about $350,000.00; and that he has carefully examined
the foregoing petition for incorporation of said borough; and says that
the following named persons and corporations who signed that same were
assessed for lands within the limits of said borough as the same appears on
the said duplicate for the amounts set opposite their respective names, viz:
E.H. Hinners $4,500.00
W.H. Carlock 400.00
Edward Fischer 4,200.00
Hudson River Chem. & Dye Wood Co. 40,000.00
Fort Lee Park and Steamboat Co. 30,000.00
N.Y. Coal Tar Chem. Co. 15,000.00
James McNerney 400.00
William C. Godstrey 400.00
John V. Signell 400.00
F.W. Winterburn 1,000.00
Emily Winterburn 4,750.00
John Winterburn 2,750.00
Sworn and Subscribed to before me this 10th day of November, 1894.
§ A550-1 EDGEWATER CODE § A550-1
1:928
Edw. F. Hinners J. Fletcher Burdett
COMM. of DEEDS Collector
NOTICE OF ELECTION
For Incorporation of the Borough of Undercliff
Before Honorable James M. Van Valen, President Judge of the Court of
Common Pleas for the County of Bergen and State of New Jersey.
In the Matter of a Petition for the
Formation of a
Borough Government in the Township of
Ridgefield
to be known as “The Mayor and Council
of the
Borough of Undercliff.”
ORDER & c
A duly signed and verified Petition praying that a special election to be held
at some convenient place within the territorial limits hereinafter described,
in conformity with the provisions of an Act of the Legislature of the State of
New Jersey, entitled, “An Act for the Formation of Borough Governments,”
approved April 5, 1878, and the supplements thereto, to the end that
the legal voters within said territorial limits may vote for or against the
formation of a proposed borough to be known as “The Mayor and Council of
the Borough of Undercliff,” having been presented to me, in which petition
the proposed Borough is bounded and described as follows:
BEGINNING at the Hudson River in the Southerly line of the Dupont
property and in the Northerly line of property of the Fort Lee Park and
Steamboat Company, thence along said northerly line of said property,
Northwesterly and Westerly to the center of a road, which on
Commissioner’s map of the property of the Estate of Robert Annett,
deceased, on file in the Bergen County Clerk’s Office, is known as Annett
Avenue, thence along the center of Annett Avenue, Northerly to the center
line of Old Fort Lee and Hackensack Public Road, being the road leading
from Fort Lee to Bulls Ferry thence Southerly along said last named road
to a point opposite the center of a road running Westerly therefrom, near
the house of Alexis Delafolie or Catherine Delafolie, his wife, thence to
and along the center of said road Westerly to the property now or late of
Elizabeth I. Massa, thence to and along the Northerly line of said Massa
property Westerly to the top of Steep Rocks, or the edge of the Bluff, thence
Southerly along the edge of the Bluff to the boundary line between Bergen
and Hudson Counties, thence Easterly and Southeasterly along the said
County Line to the Hudson River, thence Northerly along the Hudson River
to the place of Beginning.
§ A550-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A550-1
1:929
Now Therefore, I, James M. Van Valen, President Judge of the Court of
Common Pleas of the County of Bergen aforesaid, having examined the
foregoing Petition and the Affidavits annexed, by which it appears to my
satisfaction that all the requirements of said Act have been complied with,
do hereby order that a special election be held, in conformity with the
provisions of said Act and the supplements thereto, at the School House
under the Hill at Edgewater, being a convenient place within the proposed
borough, on Wednesday, the 5th day of December A.D., 1894, to the end
that the persons qualified to vote at such election, may vote for or against
the incorporation of a borough within the said prescribed territory to be
known as “The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Undercliff”, in order
that it may be decided by the votes of the said electors whether the
Borough shall be formed; and I do hereby appoint F. W. Winterburn, Clerk
of said election, and J. Fletcher Burdett and William H. Carlock, Inspectors
thereof, said persons being legal voters and freeholders within the limits of
said proposed borough.
Dated: November 19, 1894
JAMES M. VAN VALEN
President Judge of Bergen County
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN, pursuant to statute, that the original Order,
of which the foregoing is a true copy, was filed in the office of the Clerk of
Bergen County at Hackensack on the 19th day of November, 1894.
NOTICE IS FURTHER GIVEN, that pursuant to said order, the said election
will be held at the School House under the Hill at Edgewater, on
Wednesday, the 5th day of December, 1894 and that the polls will be open
at six o’clock in the forenoon and close at seven o’clock in the afternoon.
F.W. Winterburn, Clerk William H. Carlock
J. Fletcher Burdett, Inspectors
In the matter of a Petition for the formation
of a
borough government in the Township of
Ridgefield
to be known as “The Mayor and Council of
the
Borough of Undercliff”
Certificate of Election
To the Clerk of the County of Bergen:
§ A550-1 EDGEWATER CODE § A550-1
1:930
We, F.W. Winterburn, Clerk, and J. Fletcher Burdett and William H. Carlock,
Inspectors of a special election held at the School House under the Hill, at
Edgewater, on Wednesday, the 5th day of December, 1894, by virtue of the
provisions of an Act of the Legislature of this State, entitled, “An Act for the
formation of Borough Governments”, approved April 5, 1878 and the acts
supplementary thereto, pursuant to an order of James M. Van Valen, Judge
of the Court of Common Pleas of said County, dated November 19, 1894, a
true copy thereof is hereto annexed, do hereby certify that copies of said
order were set up and published as required by said Act to which was
annexed a statement of the day and place when and where said original
Order was filed, and due notice of time and place of said election was
given according to law, all of which appears by affidavits hereto annexed,
and that said election was held this day at the Place designated in said
Order and conducted by us; we having first taken and subscribed an oath
honestly and impartially to hold and conduct said election, and the ballots
cast at said election having been by us canvassed, we do hereby certify that
the following is a true statement of the result of said election: the whole
number of ballots was 181, of which 164 votes were for incorporation and
16 votes were cast against incorporation giving a majority of 149 votes for
incorporation.
Dated: December 5, 1894
F.W. Winterburn, Clerk J. Fletcher Burdett
W.H. Carlock, Inspectors
§ A550-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A550-1
1:931

ARTICLE II
Change of Name
§ A550-2. Change of name of Borough.
BOROUGH OF UNDERCLIFF
Office of the Borough Clerk
Edgewater, New Jersey
November 14, 1899
Mr. John R. Ramsey,
County Clerk.
Dear Sir:
The following is a copy of a Resolution passed by the Council of the
Borough of Undercliff at a meeting held November 8, 1899:
Be it Resolved by the Council of the Borough now known as “The Mayor
and Council of the Borough of Undercliff” in the County of Bergen, that
in accordance with the provisions of the first section of the Act of the
Legislature entitled “A General Act Relating to Boroughs” (Revision of
1897), approved April 24, 1897, the said Council does hereby adopt as the
corporate name of said Borough “The Borough of Edgewater in the County
of Bergen”.
I hereby certify that this is a true
copy.
E.H. Speer
Borough Clerk
(SEAL)
§ A550-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A550-2
1:933
Chapter A551
BYLAWS OF MAYOR AND COUNCIL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Claims approval — See Ch. 14. Mayor and Council — See Ch. 65.
§ A550-2 EDGEWATER CODE § A550-2
1:934
ARTICLE I
Quorum
§ A551-1. Size of required quorum. [Amended 12-15-2003 by Ord.
No. 1292-2003]
Three Council members and the Mayor, and in the absence of the Mayor,
four Council members, shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business. A smaller number of members may meet and adjourn from time to
time to address issues or problems and report their findings back to the full
body. No official action will be taken at any meeting when a quorum is not
present.
§ A551-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A551-1
1:935

ARTICLE II
Agenda
[Amended 12-15-2003 by Ord. No. 1292-2003]
§ A551-2. Filing of matters prior to meetings.
All matters requiring the attention of the Mayor and Council at any regular
meeting thereof shall be filed with the Borough Clerk not later than 12:00
noon on the Thursday preceding a regular Council meeting.
§ A551-3. Preparation of agenda; submission to Council
members.214
The Mayor shall direct the Borough Clerk to prepare an agenda of all
such matters to be brought before said meeting, including a list of all bills
presented for payment. A copy of the agenda shall be caused to be delivered
by said Borough Clerk to each member of the governing body 96 hours prior
to the Council meeting except in the case of special meetings.
§ A551-4. Introduction of business not on agenda.
No item of business shall be introduced at a Council meeting which does
not appear on the agenda, except by the unanimous consent of the members
of the Council present, and no vote shall be taken except by unanimous
consent; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be deemed to restrict
the right of a citizen to bring a matter before the Council at a meeting of
the Committee of the whole or a Council meeting.
214. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ A551-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A551-4
1:937

ARTICLE III
Meetings
[Amended 11-17-1997 by Ord. No. 1113-97; 12-15-2003 by Ord. No.
1292-2003]
§ A551-5. Annual, regular and special meetings.
The Mayor and Council shall hold an annual meeting on the first Monday
after January 1 at 7:00 p.m. and such other meetings, or adjourned
meetings, at such time and place as they may by resolution direct, but all
regular meetings shall be held within the Borough. The Mayor shall, when
necessary, call special meetings of the Council; in case of his/her neglect
or refusal, any four members of the Council may call such meeting at such
time and place in the Borough as they may direct, and in all cases of special
meetings, notice shall be given to all members of the Council or left at their
place of residence.
§ A551-6. Order of business.215
The order of business for regular meetings shall be as follows:
A. Roll call.
B. Open Public Meetings Act (N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.) statement.
C. Moment of silence.
D. Salute to flag.
E. Conference.
F. Open meeting to public.
G. Approval of minutes.
H. Receipt of bids.
I. Adoption/public hearing of ordinances.
J. Communications/petitions.
K. Introduction of ordinances.
L. Committee reports.
M. Resolutions.
N. Old/unfinished business.
O. New business.
P. Attorney reports.
215. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ A551-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A551-6
1:939
§ A551-7. Rules of order.
Q. Administrator reports.
R. Borough Clerk.
S. Closed session items.
T. Adjournment.
A. Meetings of the Mayor and Council shall be governed by Robert's Rules
of Order, Revised Edition.
B. The Mayor shall preside at all meetings. In the absence of the Mayor,
the Council President shall preside at the meeting. In the absence of the
Council President, the most senior Council member shall preside at the
meeting, unless a specific Council member was appointed to chair the
meeting.
C. While the meeting is in session, each member of the governing body
shall cooperate with the presiding officer to preserve order and
decorum, and no member shall, by conversation, by leaving their seat
without advising the presiding officer, or otherwise delay or interrupt
the proceedings of the governing body, nor shall they disturb any
member while that member is speaking, or fail to abide by the orders of
the presiding officer, except as otherwise provided for in Robert's Rules
of Order.
D. The presiding officer shall:
(1) Recognize members of the governing body that wish to comment
on a subject or address the members of the governing body;
(2) Rule on all questions of order with advice from the Attorney and
Borough Clerk;
(3) Set time limits for discussion on an issue by the governing body
and/or the public;
(4) Change the order of business with consent of the Council in order
to expedite the completion of business on the agenda;
(5) Move an issue for further discussion, information or additional data
to a committee of the members to investigate and report back to
the full governing body; and
(6) Have all questions and comments from the public addressed to the
chair, and the presiding officer will respond to the public or
authorize a response to be provided.
E. While citizens are addressing the chair during the period the meeting is
open to the public, members of the governing body shall be attentive
and courteous and hold their comments until the close of the public
session or until authorized to respond by the presiding officer.
§ A551-6 EDGEWATER CODE § A551-7
1:940
F. Members of the public wishing to address the governing body must be
recognized by the presiding officer. All questions, comments or remarks
are to be addressed to the presiding officer. Members of the public who
shall disturb the peace of the meeting, make offensive or abusive
remarks or conduct his or herself in a boisterous manner while
addressing the governing body shall be forthwith barred by the
presiding officer from further audience before the governing body,
except that if the speaker shall submit to proper order under these
rules.
G. Meetings of the governing body shall be conducted in a courteous
manner. Citizens and members of the governing body will be allowed to
state their positions in an atmosphere free of slander and threats of
violence.
(1) In order that all citizens have a reasonable opportunity to speak, all
speakers will limit their remarks to a five-minute duration.
(2) Only one member of the public shall be allowed to speak at one
time. All statements shall be addressed to the chair and not to any
one Council member.
§ A551-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A551-7
1:941

ARTICLE IV
Committees
§ A551-8. Appointment. [Amended 11-17-1997 by Ord. No.
1113-97216]
The Mayor shall appoint all committees with advice and consent of the
Council.
§ A551-9. Enumeration of standing committees. [Amended
11-17-1997 by Ord. No. 1113-97]
The following Committees, composed of one member each, shall be
appointed at the organization meeting of the Council each year, viz.,
Committees on Finance, Police, Fire, First Aid, Public Works, Buildings
and Grounds, Health and Welfare, Recreation, Senior Citizens, Building
Department, Municipal Court and Tax Collection and Assessment.
§ A551-10. Duties of standing committees.
A. The Committee on Finance shall examine and report upon all bills or
demands referred to it and from time to time shall report on the
financial condition of the Borough. This Committee shall also report
upon all transactions in connection with the disposal of Borough-owned
real estate.
B. The Committee on Police shall recommend applicants for appointment
to the police force and shall report on matters connected with the Police
Department and the preservation of the peace and good order.
C. The Committee on Fire shall recommend applicants for appointment to
the Fire Department and shall report upon the condition of the local
Fire Department and all matters pertaining to said Department.
D. The Committee on Public Works shall report to the Council upon the
condition of the streets and sidewalks, recycling and any and all other
matters pertaining to the Department of Public Works. [Amended
11-17-1997 by Ord. No. 1113-97]
E. The Committee on Buildings and Grounds shall report on the conditions
of all municipal buildings and the condition of playgrounds.
F. The Committee on Health and Welfare shall report on all activities of
the Board of Health and Welfare Department.
G. The Committee on Recreation shall report on all activities of the
Recreation Department.
H. The Committee on Senior Citizens shall report on all activities of the
senior citizens. [Amended 11-17-1997 by Ord. No. 1113-97]
216. Editor's Note: This ordinance was vetoed by the Mayor December 16, 1997, and was
overridden by resolution of the Borough Council December 22, 1997.
§ A551-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A551-10
1:943
§ A551-11. Special committees.
Special committees may be appointed for purposes other than those
embraced in the duties of the standing committees.
§ A551-12. Reports.
All committees, both standing and special, shall make oral reports of their
activities at regular meetings during the year and an annual report in
writing at the end of the year.
I. The Committee on the Building Department shall report on all activities
of the Building Department. [Added 11-17-1997 by Ord. No.
1113-97]
J. The Committee on Tax Collection and Assessment shall report on all
activities of the Tax Collection and Assessment Departments. [Added
11-17-1997 by Ord. No. 1113-97]
K. The Committee on the Municipal Court shall report on all activities of
the Municipal Court. [Added 11-17-1997 by Ord. No. 1113-97]
L. The Committee on the Volunteer First Aid Squad shall report on all
activities of the Volunteer First Aid Squad. [Added 11-17-1997 by
Ord. No. 1113-97]
M. The standing committees shall consider and act upon all matters
specifically referred to them by order of the Council. [Added
11-17-1997 by Ord. No. 1113-97]
§ A551-10 EDGEWATER CODE § A551-12
1:944
ARTICLE V
Ordinances
§ A551-13. Introduction. [Amended 11-17-1997 by Ord. No.
1113-97217]
All proposed ordinances shall be introduced by any Council member.
§ A551-14. Procedure for approval.
The Clerk shall endorse on said ordinance the date of passage thereof and
present said ordinance to the Mayor for his approval within five days from
the passage thereof.
§ A551-15. Recording procedure.
After the passage of an ordinance, it shall be properly numbered and
recorded at length by the Borough Council in the ordinance book, and the
proof of publication of the same shall be attached to the original ordinance.
§ A551-16. Reference to be included in minutes.
The title of the ordinance and reference to amendments and parts amended
only shall be entered in the minutes.
§ A551-17. Designation of placement in codification.
The Borough Attorney shall designate by a marginal notation the
appropriate section number where such section shall appear in the
codification of ordinances.
217. Editor's Note: This ordinance was vetoed by the Mayor December 16, 1997, and was
overridden by resolution of the Borough Council December 22, 1997.
§ A551-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A551-17
1:945

ARTICLE VI
Purchases
§ A551-18. Presentation of proposal for purchase of replacement
equipment. [Amended 11-17-1997 by Ord. No. 1113-97218]
All proposals for the purchase or replacement of equipment may be
presented to the Council for approval by the chairman of the committee of
the Council having authority over the subject matter of the proposal or by
any Council member before a final commitment is made for the purchase of
the same.
§ A551-19. Applicability of article. [Amended 9-3-1975 by Ord. No.
581-75]
The provisions of § A551-18 of this article shall not apply to materials,
supplies or equipment purchased under a contract awarded on bid, after
public advertising or as may be otherwise provided for by the Local Public
Contracts Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:11.1 et seq.).
§ A551-20. Requisition required.
Prior to the making of a final commitment for the purchase of any materials,
supplies or equipment, a requisition, signed by the department head of the
department requiring the same, shall be presented to the Borough Clerk.
218. Editor's Note: This ordinance was vetoed by the Mayor December 16, 1997, and was
overridden by resolution of the Borough Council December 22, 1997.
§ A551-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A551-20
1:947

ARTICLE VII
Votes
§ A551-21. Recording of ayes and nays; voting requirements.
Upon every vote of the Council on resolutions and motions, the ayes and
nays shall be taken and recorded. No member shall be permitted to vote
unless present when his name shall be called in regular order.
§ A551-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A551-21
1:949

ARTICLE VIII
Amendments
§ A551-22. Two-thirds vote required; exception.
These bylaws shall not be altered or amended except at a regular meeting
of the Council by a 2/3 aye and nay vote, but any part may be suspended
temporarily by unanimous consent.219
219. Editor's Note One additional section in this article, enumerating the appointive officers of
the Borough, was repealed 9-3-1975 by Ord. No. 581-75. For statutory regulations
affecting Borough appointive officers, see N.J.S.A. 40A:60-1 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 40A:9-129
to 40A9-175j, inclusive.
§ A551-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A551-22
1:951
Chapter A552
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
§ A552-1. Purpose.
The municipality hereby grants to Vision Cable Television Company, which
name is designated on the amended application and filed with the Board of
Regulatory Commissioners of the State of New Jersey, its consent to place
in, upon, along, across, above, over and under the highways, streets, alleys,
sidewalks, public ways and public places in the municipality, poles, wire,
cables, underground conduits, manhole and other television conductors and
fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation in the municipality of
a cable television system and cable communications system.
§ A552-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. Such meaning
or definition of terms is supplemental to those definitions of the Federal
Communications Commission (47 CFR 76.5) and the Cable Television Act
(N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq.) and shall in no way be construed to broaden, alter
or conflict with the federal or state definitions:
ACT or CABLE TELEVISION ACT — Chapter 186 of the General Laws of
New Jersey, 1972, Section 48:5A-1 et seq., as amended.
COMPANY (or "company") — The grantee of rights under this ordinance and
is known as "Vision Cable Television Company," which name is designated
on the amended application filed with the Board of Regulatory
Commissioners of the State of New Jersey.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Edgewater, County of Bergen, in the
State of New Jersey.
§ A552-3. Statement of findings.
Public hearings concerning the franchise herein granted to the company
were held after proper public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions
of the Act and pursuant to communications with the Board of Regulatory
Commissioners and on dates meeting the approval of representatives of all
applicants. The hearings have been held as above stated and have been fully
open to the public, and the municipality having received at these hearings
all comments regarding the qualifications of the company to receive this
franchise, the municipality hereby finds that the company possesses the
necessary legal, technical, character, financial and other qualifications and
that the company's operating and construction arrangements are adequate
and feasible.
§ A551-22 EDGEWATER CODE § A552-4
1:952
§ A552-4. Duration.
The consent herein granted shall expire 15 years from the date of the
expiration of the original certificate of approval as issued by the Board of
Public Utilities. This term shall be automatically renewed for a period of 10
years unless either the municipality or the company shall, not later than 60
days before the expiration of the initial term, serve upon the party notice
of its intention not to accept such automatic renewal as set forth in N.J.S.A.
48:5A-25.
§ A552-5. Expiration and renewal.
If the company seeks a successive consent, it shall, prior to the expiration
of this consent, apply for a municipal consent and certificate of approval in
accordance with the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-11 and 48:5A-16
and applicable state and federal rules and regulations. The company shall
also petition the Board for a certificate of approval authorizing continued
operation during the period following expiration of the consent granted
herein, and until such a time that a decision is made by the municipal
governing body relative to the renewal of said consent.
§ A552-6. Fees.
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act, the company shall, during
each year of operation under the consent granted herein, pay to the
municipality 2% of the gross revenues from all recurring charges in the
nature of subscription fees paid from subscribers to its cable television
reception service in the municipality, or any amount permitted by the New
Jersey Cable Television Act or otherwise allowed by law.
§ A552-7. Territory.
The consent granted herein to the company shall apply to the entirety of
the municipality of the Borough of Edgewater and any property hereafter
annexed by the municipality by law.
§ A552-8. Construction timetable.
The company shall be required to complete any proposed construction
within the service area described in the application. The timetable as
presented in the application incorporated herein has been determined to be
reasonable by Edgewater.
§ A552-9. Extension of service.
The company shall be required to proffer service along any public rightof-
way to any person's residence or business located in those areas of the
franchise territory described herein, in accordance with the proposal for
the provision of services as described in the application. Any additional
extension of the system will be made in accordance with the proposal in the
application.
§ A552-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A552-10
1:953
§ A552-10. Construction requirements.
§ A552-11. Local office.
During the term of this franchise and any renewal thereof, the company
shall maintain a local business office or agent for the purpose of receiving,
investigating and resolving all complaints regarding the quality of service,
equipment, malfunctions and similar matters. The present address of the
company for such purpose is 200 Roosevelt Avenue, Palisades Park, New
Jersey. Such local business office shall be open during normal business
hours, but in no event less than 9:00 a.m. through 5:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday.
§ A552-12. Municipal Complaint Officer.
The Cable Television Advisory Committee formed by the Mayor and Council
of the municipality, or any designated persons or entity which may be
appointed from time to time by the Mayor and Council of the municipality,
shall be empowered to receive any complaints and to process these
complaints to the Office of Cable Television, which is hereby designated as
the Complaint Officer for the municipality pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26(b).
All complaints shall be received and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C.
14:17-7.1.
A. Restoration. In the event that the company or its agents shall disturb
any pavement, street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways or other surfaces
in the natural topography, the company shall, at its sole expense,
restore and replace such places or things so disturbed in as good
condition as existed prior to the commencement of said work.
B. Relocation. If at any time during the period of this consent the
municipality shall alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other
way or place, the company, upon reasonable notice by the municipality,
shall remove, re-lay and relocate its equipment at the expense of the
company.
C. Temporary removal of cables. The company shall temporarily move or
remove appropriate parts of its facilities to allow moving of buildings or
machinery or in other similar circumstances. The expense shall be
borne by the party requesting such action except when requested by
the municipality, in which case the company shall bear the cost.
D. Removal or trimming of trees. During the exercise of its rights and
privileges under this franchise, the company shall have the authority to
trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks and public
places of the municipality so as to prevent the branches of such trees
from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the company. Such
trimming shall be only to the extent necessary to maintain proper
clearance for the company's facilities.
§ A552-10 EDGEWATER CODE § A552-13
1:954
§ A552-13. Performance bond.
During the life of the franchise, the company shall post a performance bond
to the municipality of Edgewater in the sum of $25,000. Such bond shall be
to ensure the faithful performance of all undertakings of the company as
represented in its application for municipal consent incorporated herein.
§ A552-14. Rates for CATV reception service.
The municipality, having determined that the rates proposed in the
application for cable television receipt service are reasonable, approves
them as presented, subject to review and regulation by the Board, if
permitted by law.
§ A552-15. Basic service.
The basic service includes those channels which the company is required to
carry by FCC rules and any channel which the company carries without a
separate or additional charge.
§ A552-16. Liability insurance.
The company agrees to maintain and keep in full force and effect at its
sole expense at all times during the term of this consent, sufficient liability
insurance naming the Borough of Edgewater as an additional insured and
insuring against loss by any such claim, suit, judgment, execution or
demand in the minimum amounts of $150,000 for bodily injury or death
to any one person, within the limit, however, of $500,000 for bodily injury
or death resulting from any one accident; $100,000 for property damage
resulting from any one accident; $50,000 for all other types of liability; or
for any other amounts statutorily mandated.
§ A552-17. Municipal liability.
The company shall hold the municipality harmless for any liability arising
out of the company's operation and construction of its CATV system.
§ A552-18. Separability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court
or federal or state agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding
shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
§ A552-19. Consistency with future federal and state rules,
regulations and orders.
It is understood that should any state or federal agency or body modify,
change or alter any of its provisions with respect to cable television
generally, such modifications, changes or alterations shall be incorporated
§ A552-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A552-19
1:955
into this consent consistent with the application dates specified in the
change.
§ A552-20. When effective.
This municipal consent shall become effective as of the date upon which
the municipality received written notification that the company accepts the
terms and conditions herein.
Chapter A553
OPEN VIDEO SERVICE AGREEMENT
§ A553-1. Title.
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "RCN Telecom
Services of New Jersey, Inc., Open Video Systems Service Agreement."
§ A553-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words in the plural include the singular, and words in the singular
include the plural.
AFFILIATE — Shall have the same meaning as set forth in the Rules and
Regulations of the FCC which govern the provision of OVS services as set
forth in 47 CFR 76.1500(g).
BOROUGH — The Borough of Edgewater, County of Bergen, State of New
Jersey.
COMPANY or RCN — RCN Telecom Services of New Jersey, Inc.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
FEDERAL LAW — The federal statute relating to open video systems, known
as 47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq., or as the statute may be amended.
FEDERAL REGULATIONS — Those federal regulations relating to open
video systems, 47 CFR 76.1500 et seq., and, to the extent applicable, any
other federal rules and regulations.
HIGHWAY — Includes every street, road, alley, thoroughfare, way or place
of any kind used by the public or open to use by the public.
OPEN VIDEO SERVICE OPERATOR or OVS OPERATOR — Any person or
group of persons who provides cable television service over an open video
system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant
interest in such open video system, or otherwise controls or is responsible
for the management and operation of such an open video system.
OPEN VIDEO SYSTEM — A facility consisting of transmission paths and
associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is to
§ A552-19 EDGEWATER CODE § A553-2
1:956
provide cable television service which includes video programming to
multiple subscribers within the Borough and which has received a
certificate from the FCC pursuant to 47 CFR 76.1502.
OVS SERVICE — Shall include the video programming services distributed
by an OVS operator or its affiliate directly to its subscribers in the Borough
by use of the OVS operator's facilities.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
TECHNOLOGY ACCESS FUND — Those revenues paid by the company to
the Borough pursuant to § A553-5 of this agreement to be used by the
Borough to promote access to advanced technologies.
VIDEO REVENUES — Those revenues derived from the provision of video
programming services as part of the open video systems services.
§ A553-3. Qualifications of grantee and grant of authority.
Pursuant to applicable law, at a public meeting, upon appropriate notice,
the Borough has considered the qualifications of the company to provide
OVS service and hereby finds that the company possesses the necessary
legal, technical, character, financial and other qualifications, and that the
company's operating and construction arrangements are adequate and
feasible, and that, therefore, the Borough hereby grants the company a
nonexclusive right and privilege to construct, erect, operate, modify and
maintain, in, upon, along, across, above, over and under the highways,
streets, alleys, sidewalks, public ways and public places now laid out or
dedicated and all extensions thereof, and additions thereto, in the Borough
such poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other
communications conductors and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and
operation in the Borough of an open video system and to provide OVS
service and other electronic impulses in order to furnish television and
radio programs, and various communications and other electronic services
to the public. The right so granted includes the right to use and occupy said
highways, streets, alleys, public ways and public places, and all manner of
easements for the purposes herein set forth and as provided by federal and
state law.
§ A553-4. Term of agreement.
The authority granted to the company shall be for a term of 10 years from
the date that notice of final passage of this ordinance is published in a
newspaper of general circulation in Edgewater.
§ A553-5. Payments to Borough.
The company shall, during each year of operation under this agreement, pay
to the Borough 2% of the revenues received from the company's basic level
of video programming services and an additional 3% of gross revenues from
§ A553-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A553-5
1:957
the company's OVS service, which shall be applied as a technology access
fund.
§ A553-6. Local office; complaint procedures.
§ A553-7. Liability and indemnification.
A. During the term of this authority, the company shall maintain a local
business office or agent for the purpose of receiving and resolving all
complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions
and similar matters.
B. The company shall comply with all federal regulations and state
regulations pertaining to customer service, including, but not limited
to, those pertaining to office hours and telephone availability,
installations, outages and service interruptions, service calls, billing,
billing disputes, service-related complaints and notices of changes in
rates, programming and channel positions.
C. With respect to service-related complaints and other complaints, the
company shall inform the complainant that he may request review of
the complaint by the complaint officer, and shall provide the subscriber
with the name and address of the complaint officer.
D. With respect to service-related complaints and other complaints, when
such complaints are made in writing, the company shall retain an actual
copy of such written complaints in its files. The company shall provide
the Borough with notice of its intent to dispose of any records kept
pursuant to this section in a manner similar to N.J.A.C. 14:18-6.2(b), or
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 14:18-6.5, at least 120 days prior to such disposal,
in order to permit the Borough adequate time to request that such
records be available for the Borough's inspection and copying as
permitted by law.
E. The company shall provide written notice to its subscribers on a
quarterly basis of the procedures by which a subscriber may obtain
credits for outages and interruptions of service.
F. The company will meet with the Borough on an annual basis, at the
Borough's request, to review and discuss billing, service-related and
other complaints of Edgewater subscribers, and other issues of concern
to the Borough.
G. The company will make trained company representatives available to
respond to telephone inquiries from Edgewater customers between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. on Saturday, and between the hours
of 12:00 p.m. and 12:00 a.m. on Sunday.
H. The Borough Clerk is hereby designated as the complaint officer for the
Borough.
§ A553-5 EDGEWATER CODE § A553-7
1:958
§ A553-8. System construction, maintenance and procedures.
A. The company expressly agrees that it will indemnify and hold harmless
the Borough and its officials, agents and employees and pay all
damages and penalties which the Borough may legally be required to
pay as a result of the company's negligence in the installation,
operation or maintenance of the open video system authorized herein.
The Borough shall notify the company's manager within 90 days after
the presentation of any claim or demand to the Borough, either by suit
or otherwise, made against the Borough on account of any negligence
or contract as aforesaid on the part of the company.
B. Furthermore, the company shall maintain and keep in full force and
effect liability insurance naming the Borough and the company as
insureds and insuring against loss by any claim, suit, judgment,
execution or demand in the minimum amounts as follows:
(1) For bodily injury or death resulting from any one accident:
$1,000,000.
(2) For property damage resulting from any one accident: $3,000,000.
(3) For all other types of liability, including property damage, and an
umbrella policy: minimum amount of $15,000,000.
C. Upon the effective date of this authority, the company shall secure a
performance bond in the amount of $100,000. Upon completion of
construction of the system and during the life of this authority, the
company may reduce the amount to $25,000. Such bond shall be to
insure the faithful performance of all undertakings of the company.
A. Territory. The authority granted under this ordinance shall apply to the
entirety of the Borough, and any property hereafter annexed thereto.
B. Facilities and equipment. In transmitting its communications signals to
subscribers in the Borough, the company shall provide a quality of
signal that is at least as good as that customarily provided under
prevailing industry standards, and shall comply with any requirements
imposed by the federal regulations, any federal pronouncements and
(to the extent not preempted by federal law) any state pronouncements
relating to technical standards for the transmission of communication
signals, transmission quality or facilities and equipment. The company
shall notify the Borough prior to commencement of any work or
construction activities which would materially impact the condition or
use of Borough property or the public streets and rights-of-way.
C. Extension of service. The company shall be required to provide service
to any person's residence or business located in the Borough along
public streets and rights-of-way, except where access to such residence
or business is denied.
§ A553-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A553-8
1:959
§ A553-9. Company rules and regulations.
The company shall have the authority to promulgate such reasonable rules,
regulations, terms and conditions governing the conduct of its business
as shall be reasonably necessary to enable the company to exercise its
rights and perform its obligations under this authority, and to assure an
uninterrupted service to each and all of its customers; provided, however,
that such rules, regulations, terms and conditions shall not be in conflict
with federal and/or state laws.
D. Relocation of poles. In the event that, at any time during the term of this
ordinance, the Borough shall lawfully elect to alter or change the grade
of any street, alley or other public way, the company, upon reasonable
notice by the Borough, shall promptly remove, relay and relocate its
poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other
fixtures at the company's own expense.
E. Temporary wire changes. The company shall, on the request of any
person holding a valid building moving permit issued by the Borough,
temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings,
machinery or in other similar circumstances. The expense of such
temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the
person requesting same, unless the request is on behalf of the Borough,
in which case there shall be no charge. The company shall have the
authority to require any such payment in advance. The company shall
be given not less than 30 days' advance notice to arrange for temporary
wire changes.
F. Tree trimming. The company shall have the authority, upon written
approval of the Borough Administrator, to trim trees upon and
overhanging streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks and public places
within the Borough so as to prevent the branches of such trees from
coming into contact with the wires and cables of the company.
G. Compliance with standards. All facilities and equipment of the company
shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the
requirements and specifications of the applicable ordinance and
regulations set forth by the Borough and/or any other local, state or
federal agencies. The company shall maintain its facilities and
equipment within the Borough in good and reasonable operating
condition at all times during the term of the authority granted herein.
H. Coordination of initial construction. During the initial construction of
the open video system, the company will coordinate construction
activities with the Borough to minimize disruption to residents of the
Borough. The vehicles of the company, and those of any contractors,
shall be suitably marked and all employees and contractors shall
display appropriate identification.
§ A553-8 EDGEWATER CODE § A553-10
1:960
§ A553-10. Approval of transfer.
The company shall not sell or transfer its open video system to another
entity, nor transfer any rights under this ordinance to another, without
the consent of the Borough, which shall not be unreasonably withheld.
The company shall notify the Borough at least 60 days in advance of any
transfer. Such transfer shall be deemed approved by the Borough if the
Borough has not raised any questions or objections within 60 days of
receipts of such notice. The company, may, however, upon 60 days' written
notice to the Borough, and without reasonable objection by the Borough,
transfer any rights or privileges to an affiliate of the company without prior
approval and may pledge its property in the ordinary course of business.
§ A553-11. Compliance with law.
This ordinance and agreement is subject to all provisions of the state and
federal law applicable to OVS service providers and to all lawful rules and
regulations pursuant thereto.
§ A553-12. Activities prohibited.
The company shall not allow its OVS service or other operations to interfere
with television reception of persons not served by the company, nor shall
the system interfere with, obstruct or hinder in any manner the operation of
the various utilities serving the residents of the Borough.
§ A553-13. Free services.
The company shall provide installation and at least one outlet of free
monthly basic service in all schools and public libraries in the Borough, as
well as Borough Hall.
§ A553-14. Senior citizen and disabled citizen discount.
The company shall offer a discount of $2 on its basic level of video
programming service, exclusive of any other package or discounts, to any
senior citizen 62 years of age or older who does not share the company's
service with more than one person who is less than 62 years of age and any
disabled persons or any disabled individual. In order to receive the discount,
the senior citizens or disabled citizen must have an annual household
income of $30,000 or less.
§ A553-15. Access.
A. After the construction is complete, the company will provide a minimum
of one governmental access channel, one educational access channel
and one public access channel on the Edgewater system. The
educational access channels, governmental access channels and public
access channels (hereinafter referred to collectively as the "PEG
channels") will be provided at no cost to the Borough as part of the
entry-level service for the duration of the agreement.
§ A553-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A553-15
1:961
§ A553-16. Access training.
§ A553-17. Internet access and institutional network.
B. In the event that any of the access channels are relocated to another
channel number during the term of this agreement, the company shall
comply with the provisions of the federal regulations and any applicable
state regulations pertaining to changes in channel positions or channel
allocation, including but not limited to 47 CFR 76.309(c)(3).
Additionally, in such event, the company shall publish notice of any
change in an access channel position in a newspaper of general
circulation in Edgewater at least 15 days prior to the effective date of
such change. Furthermore, contemporaneous with its written notice
provided to subscribers, the company shall provide written notice to the
Borough of any change in the channel position of either the municipal
or educational access channel.
C. The company shall take any steps that are necessary to ensure that the
signals originated on the PEG channels are carried without material
degradation, and that the quality of the signal transmitted to
subscribers over the PEG channels meets prevailing industry standards
and is equal to the quality of the signals transmitted by RCN on its other
channels.
A. The company will provide, free of charge, such technical assistance,
advice and support as is reasonably requested by the Borough. Such
technical assistance, advice and support will be available to:
(1) Governmental officials, representatives, and employees;
(2) Educational system officials, representatives and employees;
(3) Community leaders and interest groups;
(4) Students; and
(5) Individuals.
B. Upon reasonable notice to the company by the Borough, the company
shall provide annual training workshops, free of charge, to municipal
and educational persons or groups on the use of access facilities and
equipment, including production techniques. Equipment for public
access courses will be provided by the company.
A. The company shall provide Internet access services for use by the
Borough. Internet access shall include the hosting of an Internet web
site for the Borough and Internet addresses for Borough Hall officials.
The company shall also provide one outlet of a basic level of Internet
access to each school and library in the Borough.
B. Upon completion of construction of the open video system, the company
shall dedicate two fiber-optic cables to permit an interconnection of
§ A553-15 EDGEWATER CODE § A553-17
1:962
§ A553-18. Emergency alert system.
The open video system shall have the capability to have an emergency alert
throughout the Borough by an audio or video override of all channels in the
event of a public emergency. The company shall coordinate the use of the
emergency alert system with appropriate national, state and local officials.
§ A553-19. Separability.
It any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
ordinance is for any reason held invalid, preempted or unconstitutional by
any court or federal or state agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion
shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision of this
ordinance, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions hereof.
§ A553-20. Enforcement, consistency with future federal and state
statutes, regulations, rules and orders.
§ A553-21. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon its final passage and publication
according to law.
§ A553-22. Nonexclusive agreement.
The rights granted herein are nonexclusive, and the Borough may, in
accordance with the requirements of federal or state law, award another
like authority to a separate company in addition to the company.
municipal building and schools. These fiber-optic cables would permit
two-way video capability and point-to-point data capability. The two
fiber-optic cables would be owned and maintained by the company, but
would be dedicated to the Borough's use. End-user equipment will be
the responsibility of the Borough to purchase and maintain.
A. This agreement is subject to the Laws of the State of New Jersey, and
any actions hereto shall be maintained in the State of New Jersey.
B. Should any of the federal or state acts, regulations or pronouncements
applicable to the regulation of OVS service or cable television service
be modified in any way, such modification, to the extent it embodies
required terms and conditions and meaningfully can be incorporated
into this ordinance, shall be so incorporated, consistent with any
applicable effective dates specified in such modification. To the extent
that any such modification places limits on permissible terms and
conditions, and any provision of this ordinance becomes invalid by
virtue of such modification, the preceding § A553-19 shall apply.
§ A553-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A553-23
1:963
§ A553-23. Notices.
All notices shall be sent via certified mail, return receipt requested, and
regular mail to the following addresses:
For the Borough:
Borough Clerk
Municipal Building
916 River Road
Edgewater, NJ 07020
For the Company:
RCN Telecom Services of New
Jersey, Inc.
Vice President, Franchising and
Development
105 Carnegie Center
Princeton, NJ 08540
§ A553-24. Change in conditions.
This agreement may be amended or modified in accordance with law if,
during the term of this agreement, the parties determine that such
amendment or modification is necessary or desirable due to changes in
circumstances or applicable law.
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of 1975 Code to 2010 Code
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in nature).
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. I.
NI = Not included in Code but saved from repeal.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
Chapter/Title From 1975 Code Location in 2010 Code
Incorporation Proceedings Ch. A550, Art. I
Change of Name of Borough Ch. A550, Art. II
Part I, Administrative Legislation
Ch. 1, General Provisions
Art. I, Adoption of Code by Mayor and
Council
NLP; see Ch. 1, Art. I
Art. II, Ordinances Adopted During
Codification
Omitted
Ch. 4, Clerk/Typist Ch. 71, Art. XII
§ A553-23 EDGEWATER CODE § DT-1
1:964
Chapter/Title From 1975 Code Location in 2010 Code
Ch. 5, Clerk-Stenographer REP
Ch. 6, Administrative Assistant REP
Ch. 7, Administrator, Borough Ch. 71, Art. XIV
Ch. 9, Attorney, Borough Ch. 71, Art. II
Ch. 11, Baby-Keep-Well Station Ch. 134
Ch. 12, Borough Code Enforcement
Officer and Trainee
Ch. 71, Art. X
Ch. 14, Building Inspector Ch. 71, Art. I
Ch. 15, Building Maintenance Worker Ch. 71, Art. XVII
Ch. 16, Building Maintenance Worker,
Senior
REP
Ch. 18, Building Service Worker REP
Ch. 20, Charitable Donation Bins Ch. 161
Ch. 21, Civil Defense and Disaster
Control
Ch. 23, Civil Service Ch. 10
Ch. 25, Claims Approval Ch. 14
Ch. 27, Clerk, Borough Ch. 71, Art. III
Ch. 28, Clerk, Deputy Borough Ch. 71, Art. VIII
Ch. 29, Construction Codes, Uniform Ch. 166
Ch. 30, Court, Municipal Ch. 20
Ch. 31, Defense and Indemnification of
Officers and Employees
Ch. 37, Art. III
Ch. 32, Dispatchers Ch. 71, Art. IX
Ch. 33, Elevator Inspector REP
Ch. 33A, Eminent Domain Ch. 31
Ch. 33B, Emergency Medical Technician Ch. 71, Art. XXII
Ch. 34, Engineer, Borough Ch. 71, Art. VII
Ch. 35, Environmental Commission REP
Ch. 37, Ethics, Code of Ch. 41
Ch. 39, Fees for Public Records Ch. 318
Ch. 41, Fire Department
Art. I, Organization of Department REP
Art. II, Department Regulations REP
Art. III, Salaries REP
Art. IV, Hours of Employment REP
Art. V, Volunteer Fire Department Ch. 45, Art. I
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:965
Chapter/Title From 1975 Code Location in 2010 Code
Art. VA, Reimbursement Program for
Volunteer Fire Department and
Volunteer First-Aid Squad
Ch. 45, Art. II
Art. VI, Junior Fire fighters Auxiliary Ch. 45, Art. III
Art. VII, Participation in East Bergen
Mutual Aid System
Ch. 45, Art. IV
Art. VIII, Credit for Health Benefits Ch. 45, Art. V
Art. IX, Length of Service Awards
Program for Volunteer Fire fighter
and First Aid Squad Members
Ch. 45, Art. VI
Ch. 43, First-Aid Certification
Requirements for Employees
Ch. 37, Art. II
Ch. 44, First-Aid Squad Ch. 49
Ch. 45, Health, Board of Ch. 6, Art. I
Ch. 48, Housing Authority Ch. 55
Ch. 50, Interlocal Agreements REP
Ch. 51, Land Use Administrator Ch. 71, Art. XV
Ch. 52, Library, Free Public Ch. 244
Ch. 53, Licenses and Permits
Art. I, Payment of Taxes and
Assessments
Ch. 157, Art. II
Ch. 54, Local Assistance Board Ch. 6, Art. II
Ch. 56, Mayor and Council Ch. 65
Ch. 57, Municipal Housing Liaison Ch. 71, Art. XXIII
Ch. 59, Ordinance Review Commission REP
Ch. 61, Personnel Policies and Procedures
Art. I, Personnel Manual Ch. 77, Art. I
Art. II, Adoption Procedures for
Personnel Practices
Ch. 77, Art. II
Ch. 62, Physician, Borough REP
Ch. 66, Police Department
Art. I, Organization of Department Ch. 81, Art. I
Art. II, Department Regulations Ch. 81, Art. II
Art. III, Salaries Ch. 81, Art. III
Art. IV, Hours of Employment Ch. 81, Art. IV
Art. V, Special Law Enforcement
Officers
Ch. 81, Art. V
Art. VI, Police Guard Ch. 81, Art. VI
§ DT-1 EDGEWATER CODE § DT-1
1:966
Chapter/Title From 1975 Code Location in 2010 Code
Art. VII, Administrative Clerk Ch. 81, Art. VII
Ch. 67, Privacy Officer Ch. 71, Art. XXI
Ch. 68, Public Safety Coordinator Ch. 71, Art. XIII
Ch. 70, Public Works, Department of Ch. 87
Ch. 72, Purchasing Agent
Art. I, Purchasing Agent, Assistant
Purchasing Agent and Purchasing
Assistant
Ch. 71, Art. XX
Ch. 74, Recreation Advisory Council Ch. 6, Art. IV
Ch. 75, Recreation Department
Art. I, Establishment; Employees Ch. 92
Art. II, Superintendent of Recreation REP
Ch. 76, Recreation Secretary REP
Ch. 76A, Recycling Coordinator, Assistant
Municipal
Ch. 71, Art. XIX
Ch. 77, Residency Requirements for
Employees
Ch. 37, Art. I
Ch. 79, Retirement
Art. I, Eligibility for Defined
Contribution Retirement Program
Ch. 77, Art. III
Ch. 81, Salaries and Compensation Ch. 96
Ch. 82, School Crossing Guard, Adult Ch. 71, Art. XVI
Ch. 83, Sewage Disposal Department REP
Ch. 89, Shade Tree Board Ch. 6, Art. III
Ch. 93, Tax Assessor Ch. 71, Art. IV
Ch. 94, Tax Clerk/ Payroll Clerk Ch. 71, Art. XVIII
Ch. 95, Tax Collector Ch. 71, Art. V
Ch. 96, Tax Collector, Deputy Ch. 71, Art. XI
Ch. 97, Tax Searcher Ch. 71, Art. VI
Part II, General Legislation
Ch. 108, Advertising Matter Ch. 305
Ch. 110, Alarm Devices Ch. 117
Ch. 112, Alcoholic Beverages
Art. I, Business Regulations Ch. 121, Art. I
Art. II, Consumption Regulations Ch. 121, Art. II
Art. III, Minors Ch. 121, Art. III
Ch. 114, Amusement Devices Ch. 125
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:967
Chapter/Title From 1975 Code Location in 2010 Code
Ch. 116, Animals
Art. I, Disposal of Pet Waste Ch. 129, Art. II
Art. II, Feeding of Wildlife Ch. 129, Art. III
Ch. 119, Blasting REP
Ch. 122, Bottles and Other Containers REP
Ch. 125, Building and Development
Permits
Art. I, Condominiums and
Cooperatives
Ch. 157, Art. I
Ch. 127, Buildings, Dangerous Ch. 147
Ch. 134, Certificates of Continuing
Occupancy
Ch. 157, Art. III
Ch. 135, Certificates of Necessity Ch. 157, Art. IV
Ch. 138, Curfew REP
Ch. 139, Demolition Ch. 179
Ch. 140, Dogs Ch. 129, Art. I
Ch. 143, Refrigerators, Storage of REP
Ch. 145, Electrical Standards REP
Ch. 147, Exhibitions, Indecent Ch. 107, Art. I
Ch. 149, Fire Detection Systems REP
Ch. 149A, Fire Insurance Proceeds Ch. 196
Ch. 150, Fire Lanes Ch. 200
Ch. 152, Fire Prevention
Art. I, Adoption of Standards REP
Art. II, Enforcement of Uniform Fire
Safety Act
Ch. 204, Art. II
Art. III, Truss-Type Construction Ch. 204, Art. I
Ch. 153, Flood Damage Prevention Ch. 210
Ch. 154, Fuel Oil: Emergency Delivery of Ch. 335, Art. I
Ch. 156, Games of Chance REP
Ch. 158, Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse
Art. I, Garbage Receptacles Ch. 368, Art. I
Art. II, Construction Debris Ch. 368, Art. II
Art. III, Bulk Items REP
Art. IV, Separation for Recycling REP
Ch. 159, Graffiti Ch. 221
Ch. 160, Hazardous Materials
§ DT-1 EDGEWATER CODE § DT-1
1:968
Chapter/Title From 1975 Code Location in 2010 Code
Art. I, Reimbursement for Expendable
Items
Ch. 226
Ch. 162, Hotels and Multiple Dwellings
Art. I, Standards; Administration;
Prohibited Acts
Ch. 335, Art. III
Art. II, Illegal Apartment Units Ch. 335, Art. IV
Ch. 165, Landfill or Surcharge Operations Ch. 235
Ch. 167, Licensing
Art. I, Contractors REP
Ch. 167A, Littering Ch. 248
Ch. 168, Loitering REP
Ch. 170, Massage Parlors REP
Ch. 172, Minibikes and Go-Carts Ch. 264
Ch. 176, Noise Ch. 271
Ch. 179, Numbering of Buildings Ch. 151
Ch. 182, Obscenity and Pornography
Art. I, Obscene Films REP
Ch. 183, Oil- and Gas-Burning Equipment REP
Ch. 185, Parking During Emergencies Ch. 287, Art. II
Ch. 186, Parental Responsibility REP
Ch. 186A, Parking Lots
Art. I, Certain Properties of Blocks 53
and 54
Ch. 282, Art. I
Art. II, Certain Properties of Blocks
85.01 and 91
Ch. 282, Art. II
Art. III, Municipal Meter Parking Area Ch. 282, Art. III
Art. IV, Municipal Parking Permits Ch. 287, Art. V
Ch. 186B, Parking on Public Property Ch. 287, Art. I
Ch. 186C, Parking for Handicapped Ch. 287, Art. III
Ch. 187, Parks and Recreation Areas
Art. I, Municipal Recreation Area
§§ 187-1 through 187-25 Ch. 293, Art. I
§§ 187-25.1 through 187-25.3 Ch. 293, Art. IV
§ 187-25.4 Ch. 293, Art. V
Art. II, Borough Hall Playground Area Ch. 293, Art. II
Art. III, Park of the Palisades Ch. 293, Art. III
Ch. 189, Peace and Good Order
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:969
Chapter/Title From 1975 Code Location in 2010 Code
Art. I, Disorderly Conduct REP
§ 189-1, Use of certain weapons
prohibited
Ch. 192
§ 189-2, Discharge of guns without
permit
Ch. 192
§ 189-3, Vandalism prohibited REP
Art. II, Bathing in Hudson River REP
Art. III, Smoking on Waterfront REP
Ch. 191, Peddling and Soliciting Ch. 305
Ch. 193, Penalties Ch. 1, Art. II
Ch. 194, Permits
Art. I, Permit Required for Certain
Uses
Ch. 157, Art. V
Ch. 195, Portable Cooking Units Ch. 310
Ch. 197, Posted Lands, Parking on REP
Ch. 198, Public Safety Radio
Amplification
Ch. 322
Ch. 199, Property Maintenance Ch. 314
Ch. 200, Public Utilities
Art. I, Placement of Fixtures Below
Ground
Ch. 326
Ch. 201, Recycling
Art. I, Composting of Leaves REP
Art. II, Used Oil Ch. 368, Art. III
Art. III, Recyclable Materials Ch. 368, Art. IV
Ch. 203, Rent Control
Art. I, Regulations for Substandard
Dwellings
Ch. 339, Art. I
Art. I, Rent Control Board and
Stabilization of Rents
Ch. 339, Art. II
Ch. 207, Residential Parking Permits Ch. 287, Art. IV
Ch. 210, Secondhand Jewelry and
Precious Metals
Ch. 344
Ch. 212, Sewers
Art. I, Construction of Sewers and
Drains
Ch. 347, Art. I
Art. II, Use of Public and Private
Sewers and Drains
Ch. 347, Art. II
§ DT-1 EDGEWATER CODE § DT-1
1:970
Chapter/Title From 1975 Code Location in 2010 Code
Art. III, Charge for New Connections Ch. 347, Art. III
Art. IV, Sump Pumps, Storm Drains,
Etc.
REP
Art. V, Spilling, Dumping or Disposal
of Materials
REP
Art. VI, Illicit Connections REP
Ch. 214, Shopping Carts Ch. 353
Ch. 218, Soil Removal Ch. 362
Ch. 220, Stormwater Management Ch. 374
Ch. 221, Streets and Sidewalks
Art. I, Street Regulations Ch. 380, Art. I
Art. II, Ice and Snow Removal Ch. 380, Art. II
Art. III, Street Openings and
Excavations
Ch. 380, Art. III
Art. IV, Curbs and Sidewalks Ch. 380, Art. IV
Ch. 224A, Swimming Pools Ch. 386
Ch. 225, Tattooing REP
Ch. 226, Taxation
Art. I, Exemption for Improvements to
Existing Dwelling
Ch. 397, Art. I
Art. II, Hotel and Motel Occupancy
Tax
Ch. 397, Art. II
Ch. 227, Taxicabs and Liveries Ch. 402
Ch. 228, Towers and Wreckers Ch. 410
Ch. 229, Trailers
Art. I, Parking Prohibitions Ch. 416, Art. I
Art. II, House, Business and
Commercial Trailers
Ch. 416, Art. II
Ch. 231, Trees Ch. 421
Ch. 233, Utility Bills: Payment by Borough Ch. 335, Art. II
Ch. 234, Vehicles, Abandoned Ch. 427
Ch. 236, Vehicles and Traffic
Art. I, General Provisions Ch. 432, Art. I
Art. II, Manual on Uniform Control
Devices
Ch. 432, Art. II
Art. III, Use of Mobile Telephone
While Operating Motor Vehicle
REP
Art. IV, Valet Parking Ch. 432, Art. III
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:971
Chapter/Title From 1975 Code Location in 2010 Code
Art. V, Developer Agreements Ch. 432, Art. IV
Art. VI, Speed Limits Ch. 432, Art. V
Ch. 240, Vending Machines
Art. I, Newspaper and Magazine Ch. 438, Art. I
Ch. 244, Vessels, Nautical Ch. 444, Art. I
Ch. 246, Waterfront Drift and Debris,
Control of
Ch. 444, Art. II
Ch. 249, Land Use and Development Ch. 240
Ch. 250, Land Use and Development
(continued)
Ch. 240
Part III, Board of Health Legislation
Ch. 251, General Provisions, Board of
Health
Art. I, Adoption of Code by Board of
Health
NLP; see Ch. 450, Art. I
Ch. 253, Barbershops, Beauty Parlors,
Tanning Salons and Nail Salons
Ch. 460
Ch. 255, Buildings, Heating of
Art. I, Residential Buildings Ch. 466, Art. I
Art. II, Nonresidential Buildings Ch. 466, Art. II
Ch. 259, Drug Paraphernalia REP
Ch. 261, Fees Ch. 479
Ch. 263, Food and Beverage Vending
Machines
Ch. 483, Art. II
Ch. 265, Food Handling Establishments Ch. 483, Art. I
Ch. 267, Animals Ch. 454, Art. I
Ch. 268, Cat Licensing Ch. 454, Art. II
Ch. 271, Health Officer Ch. 507, Art. I
Ch. 274, Laundries, Laundromats,
Launderettes, Laundromats and Dry
Cleaners
Ch. 490
Ch. 275, Massage Operators Ch. 494
Ch. 276, Milk and Milk Products REP
Ch. 279, Nuisances Ch. 503
Ch. 280, Nurse Ch. 507, Art. III
Ch. 282, Penalties, Board of Health Ch. 450, Art. II
Ch. 283, Pet Shops, Kennels, Shelters and
Pounds
Ch. 512
§ DT-1 EDGEWATER CODE § DT-1
1:972
Chapter/Title From 1975 Code Location in 2010 Code
Ch. 284, Plumbing REP
Ch. 285, Plumbing Inspector REP
Ch. 287, Portable or Chemical Toilets REP
Ch. 290, Secretary, Board of Health Ch. 507, Art. II
Ch. 294, Solid Waste Disposal
§§ 294-1 to 294-3 Ch. 529, Art. I
§ 294-3 Ch. 529, Art. II
Ch. 298, Swimming Pools Ch. 535
Ch. 302, Vehicles, Used to Handle Foods Ch. 483, Art. III
Ch. 306, Water Ch. 523, Art. I
Appendix
Ch. A311, Bylaws of Mayor and Council Ch. A551
Ch. A312, Fees for Licenses and Permits REP
Ch. A313, Cable Television Franchise Ch. A552
Ch. A314, Open Video Service Franchise Ch. A553
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1420-2009 Saved from
repeal; see Ch. 1,
Art. I
1421-2009 8-10-2009 Fiscal year Ch. 52
1422-2009 NCM
1423-2009 8-10-2009 Bond NCM
1424-2009 8-10-2009 Bond NCM
1425-2009 11-9-2009 Fire prevention: fire watch Ch. 204, Art. III
1426-2009 Saved from
repeal; see Ch. 1,
Art. I
1427-2010 Saved from
repeal; see Ch. 1,
Art. I
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:973
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1428-2010 3-15-2010 Sewers amendment Ch. 347
1429-2010 4-19-2010 Filming Ch. 188
1430-2010 3-15-2010 Vehicles and traffic: general
provisions amendment
Ch. 432, Art. I
1431-2010 Authorization to exceed cap
bank
NCM
1432-2010 6-14-2010 Emergency appropriation NCM
1433-2010 Not introduced
1434-2010 8-16-2010 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 200
1435-2010 Tabled; replaced
with Ord. No.
1438-2010
1436-2010 7-12-2010 Appropriation NCM
1437-2010 7-12-2010 Sewers amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 1444-2010
1438-2010 9-20-2010 Appropriation NCM
1439-2010 9-20-2010 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
1440-2010 9-20-2010 Officers and employees:
Recycling Coordinator
Ch. 71, Art. XXIV
1441-2010 Tabled
1442-2010 9-20-2010 Salaries and compensation
amendment
See Ch. 96
1443-2010 9-20-2010 Appropriation NCM
1444-2010 9-20-2010 Sewers amendment Ch. 347
1445-2010 9-20-2010 First-aid squad: billing and
payment of EMS services
Ch. 49, Art. II
BOH
2010–1
9-27-2010 Adoption of Code by Board of
Health
Ch. 450, Art. I
1446-2010 10-18-2010 Capital ordinance NCM
1447-2010 11-8-2010 Volunteer Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 45, Art. I
1448-2010 Emergency appropriation NCM
1449-2010 Bond NCM
1450-2011 2-22-2011 Appropriation NCM
1451-2011 3-21-2011 Towers and wreckers
amendment
Ch. 410
§ DL-1 EDGEWATER CODE § DL-1
1:974
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1452-2011 4-18-2011 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 240
1453-2011 4-18-2011 Salaries and compensation
amendment
See Ch. 96
1454-2011 4-18-2011 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
1455-2011 5-16-2011 Volunteer Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 45, Art. I
1456-2011 5-16-2011 Enforcement of the Uniform
Fire Safety Act amendment
Ch. 204, Art. II
1457-2011 Appropriation NCM
1458-2011 9-19-2011 Sale of property NCM
1459-2011 Not adopted
1460-2011 10-17-2011 Appropriation NCM
1461-2011 10-17-2011 Vehicles and traffic: traffic
control signal monitoring
systems
Ch. 432, Art. VI
1462-2011 11-14-2011 Bond NCM
1463-2011 11-14-2011 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 380
1464-2011 Bond NCM
1465-2011 Bond NCM
BOH
2012-1
2-27-2012 Heating of buildings:
residential buildings
amendment
Ch. 466, Art. I
1466-2012 3-5-2012 Bond NCM
1467-2012 3-5-2012 Appropriation NCM
1468-2012 Tabled
1469-2012 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
1470-2012 5-21-2012 Participation in East Bergen
Firefighters Mutual Aid
Association
Ch. 45, Art. IV
1471-2012 5-21-2012 Massage establishments Ch. 494
1472-2012 6-18-2012 Vehicles and traffic: traffic
control signal monitoring
systems
Ch. 432, Art. VI
1473-2012 6-18-2012 Sewers amendment Ch. 347
1474-2012 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:975
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
BOH
2012-2
6-25-2012 Fees amendment Ch. 479
1475-2012 7-16-2012 Fire lanes amendment;
vehicles and traffic: general
provisions amendment
Chs. 200; 432,
Art. I
1476-2012 8-13-2012 Alcoholic beverages: public
urination
Ch. 121, Art. IV
1477-2012 8-13-2012 Reappropriation NCM
1478-2012 10-15-2012 Public property Ch. 320
1479-2012 9-17-2012 Bond NCM
1480-2012 11-19-2012 Certificates of continued
occupancy amendment
Ch. 157, Art. III
1481-2012 11-19-2012 Municipal Building Parking
Lot
Ch. 282, Art. IV
1482-2012 11-19-2012 Bond NCM
1483-2012 11-19-2012 Fire lanes amendment Ch. 200
1484-2012 11-19-2012 Appropriation NCM
1485-2012 12-17-2012 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 240
1486-2012 12-17-2012 Massage establishments
amendment
Ch. 494
1487-2013 2-19-2013 Bond NCM
1488-2013 2-19-2013 Bond NCM
1489-2013 2-19-2013 Bond NCM
1490-2013 4-15-2013 Public records Ch. 318
1491-2013 4-15-2013 Police Department fees Ch. 81, Art. VIII
1492-2013 5-20-2013 Recreation Department:
criminal history background
checks
Ch. 92, Art. II
1493-2013 5-20-2013 Salaries and compensation
amendment
See Ch. 96
1494-2013 5-20-2013 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
BOH
2013-7
5-28-2013 Fees amendment Ch. 479
1495-2013 6-17-2013 Salaries and compensation
amendment
See Ch. 96
1496-2013 6-17-2013 Bond NCM
1497-2013 6-17-2013 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 EDGEWATER CODE § DL-1
1:976
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1498-2013 7-15-2013 Bond NCM
1499-2013 8-12-2013 Bond NCM
1500-2013 9-16-2013 Salaries and compensation
amendment
See Ch. 96
1501-2013 11-12-2013 Emergency appropriation NCM
1502-2013 11-12-2013 Bond NCM
1503-2014 4-21-2014 Redevelopment plan
amendment
NCM
1504-2014 3-18-2014 Historic Borough Hall
Parking Lot; parks and
recreation areas: parking of
vehicles amendment
Chs. 282, Art. VI;
293, Art. V
1505-2014 5-19-2014 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
1506-2014 6-16-2014 Vehicles and traffic: general
provisions amendment
Ch. 432, Art. I
1507-2014 7-14-2014 Employment benefits and
requirements: direct deposit
Ch. 37, Art. IV
1508-2014 7-14-2014 Officers and employees:
Police Communications
Clerks
Ch. 71, Art. IX
1509-2014 Tabled
1510-2014 7-14-2014 Bond NCM
1511-2014 Grant NCM
1512-2014 9-15-2014 Land use development
amendment
Ch. 240
1513-2014 Tabled
1514-2014 Bond NCM
BOH
2014-1
10-27-2014 Fees amendment Ch. 479
BOH
2014-2
10-27-2014 Body art establishments Ch. 461
1515-2014 11-10-2014 Parking lots: Shadyside
amendment
Ch. 282, Art. II
1516-2015 Salaries and compensation
amendment
See Ch. 96
1517-2015 4-24-2015 Appropriation NCM
1518-2015 6-15-2015 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
1519-2015 5-18-2015 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:977
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1520-2015 6-15-2015 Fire watch amendment Ch. 204, Art. III
1521-2015 6-15-2015 Fire Department: emergency
standby services
Ch. 45, Art. VII
1522-2015 10-19-2015 Salaries and compensation
amendment
See Ch. 96
1523-2015 8-17-2015 Noise amendment Ch. 271
1524-2015 Tabled
1525-2015 9-14-2015 Appropriation NCM
1526-2015 11-9-2015 Appropriation NCM
1527-2015 12-21-2015 Salaries and compensation
amendment
See Ch. 96
1528-2015 Salaries and compensation
amendment
See Ch. 96
1529-2016 2-16-2016 Salaries and compensation
amendment
See Ch. 96
1530-2016
1531-2016 4-18-2016 Uniform construction codes
amendment
Ch. 166
1532-2016 5-16-2016 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
1533-2016 4-18-2016 Land use development
amendment
Ch. 240
BOH
2017-1
3-27-2017 Fees amendment Ch. 479
1534-2016 Bond NCM
1535-2016 Bond NCM
1536-2016 8-15-2016 Parking lots: Shadyside
amendment
Ch. 282, Art. II
1537-2016 11-14-2016 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 240
1538-2016 Bond NCM
1539-2016 10-17-2016 Animals: pet shop sales Ch. 129, Art. IV
1540 Salaries and compensation
amendment
See Ch. 96
§ DL-1 EDGEWATER CODE § DL-1
1:978
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1541-2017 3-20-2017 Police department:
organization amendment;
Department regulations
amendment; special law
enforcement officers
amendment
Ch. 81, Art. I; Ch.
81, Art. II; Ch.
81, Art. V;
nomenclature
change only: Ch.
20; Ch. 71, Art.
XVI; Ch. 71, Art.
XXII; Ch. 92, Art.
II; Ch. 147; Ch.
240; Ch. 271; Ch.
282, Art. I; Ch.
282, Art. II; Ch.
287, Art. II; Ch.
305; Ch. 344; Ch.
368, Art. II; Ch.
380, Art. III; Ch.
402; Ch. 410; Ch.
427; Ch. 432, Art.
I
1542-2017 3-20-2017 Parks and Recreation Areas:
Use of Baseball Diamonds
Amendment
Ch. 293, Art. IV
1543-2017 4-17-2017 Credit Card Payments Ch. 22
1544-2017 Bond NCM
1545-2017 Exceed Budget; Cap Bank NCM
1546-2017 10-16-2017 Rental Property: Short Term
Rental of Property
Ch. 335, Art. V
1547-2017 Bond NCM
1548-2017 9-18-2017 Acquisition of Land NCM
1549-2017 Acquisition of Land NCM
1550-2017 Bond NCM
1551-2017 Bond NCM
1552-2017 9-18-2017 Public Property Amendment Ch. 320
1553-2017 10-2-2017 Land Use and Development
Amendment
Ch. 240
1554-2017 10-2-2017 Land Use and Development
Amendment
Ch. 240
1555-2017 10-16-2017 Fire Prevention:
Enforcement of Uniform Fire
Safety Act Amendment
Ch. 204, Art. II
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:979
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1556-2017 Replaced by Ord.
No. 1559-2017
1557-2017 Tabled
1558-2017 Tabled
1559-2017 11-13-2017 Police Department:
Organization Amendment
Ch. 81, Art. I
1560-2017 11-13-2017 Salaries and Compensation
Amendment
See Ch. 96
1561-2017 Appropriation NCM
1562-2017 12-18-2017 Vehicles and Traffic: General
Provisions Amendment
Ch. 432, Art. I
1563-2017 12-18-2017 Vehicles and Traffic: General
Provisions Amendment
Ch. 432, Art. I
2018-001 Salaries and Compensation
Amendment
See Ch. 96
2018-002 3-19-2018 Fire Department: Emergency
Standby Services
Amendment
Ch. 45, Art. VII
BOH
2018-1
3-26-2018 Fees amendment Ch. 479
BOH
2018-2
3-26-2018 Food and beverage handling:
farmers' market; temporary
food event
Ch. 483, Art. IV;
Ch. 483, Art. V
2018-003 Bond NCM
2018-004 Bond NCM
2018-005 Exceed Budget; Cap Bank NCM
2018-006 Salaries and Compensation
Amendment
See Ch. 96
2018-007 6-11-2018 Public Safety Radio
Coverage
Ch. 322
2018-008 6-11-2018 Parks and Recreation Areas:
Municipal Recreation Area
Amendment; Parks and
Recreation Areas: Borough
Hall Playground Area
Amendment
Ch. 293, Art. I;
Ch. 293, Art. II
2018-009 6-11-2018 Streets and Sidewalks:
Street Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 380, Art. I
§ DL-1 EDGEWATER CODE § DL-1
1:980
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2018-010 6-11-2018 Vehicles and Traffic: General
Provisions Amendment
Ch. 432, Art. I
2018-011 7-16-2018 Parking Restrictions:
Residential Parking Permits
Amendment
Ch. 287, Art. IV
2018-012 7-16-2018 Land Use and Development
Amendment
Ch. 240
2018-013 7-16-2018 Land Use and Development
Amendment
Ch. 240
2018-014 Bond NCM
2018-015 Bond NCM
2018-016
2018-017 12-17-2018 Towers and Wreckers
Amendment
Ch. 410
2018-018 12-17-2018 First-Aid Squad: Volunteer
First-Aid Squad Amendment
Ch. 49, Art. I
2018-019 12-17-2018 Fire Department:
Reimbursement Program for
Volunteer Fire Department
and Volunteer First-Aid
Squad Amendment
Ch. 45, Art. II
2018-020 12-17-2018 Vehicles and Traffic: General
Provisions Amendment
Ch. 432, Art. I
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp No.
2019-001 3-18-2019 Land Use and
Development
Amendment
Ch. 240 27
2019-002 4-22-2019 Parks and
Recreation Areas
Amendment
Ch. 293 27
2019-003 5-20-2019 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM 27
2019-004 7-15-2019 Police Department:
Department
Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 81, Art.
II
27
2019-005 7-15-2019 Towing Ch. 410 27
2019-006 7-17-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 432 27
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:981
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp No.
2019-007 8-19-2019 Police Department:
Key Lock Box
Emergency Access
System
Ch. 81, Art.
IX
27
2019-008 8-19-2019 Fire Department:
Key Lock Box
Emergency Access
System
Ch. 45, Art.
VIII
27
2019-009 8-19-2019 Flood Damage
Prevention
Amendment
Ch. 210 27
2019-010 10-21-2019 Appropriation NCM 27
§ DL-1 EDGEWATER CODE § DL-1
1:982